Tue TraGepie ofr CorioLaNus 


t Archive | 


A NEW VARIORUM EDITION 


OF 


SBUAKESPEARE 


LHe TRACERS 


OF 


CORIOLANUS 


EDITED BY 
HORACE HOWARD FURNESS, Jr., A. B.; Lirr. D. 


PHILADELPHIA & LONDON 
J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 
1928 


Copyright, 1928, by H. H. Furness, Jr. 


PRINTED BY J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 
AT THE WASHINGTON SQUARE PRESS — 
PHILADELPHIA, U. S. A. 


oO 


To 
EDWARD HUGH anp JULIA MARLOWE SOTHERN 
in Recognition of their Scholarship 
and in Appreciation of their loving Service 
in the Cause of Shakespeare on the Stage 
and in the Study. 


PREFACE 


THE Tragedy of Coriolanus appeared for the first time in the 
Folio of 1623; the text, like others that therein made their 
first appearance, has not, therefore, that pride of ancestry 
which naturally belongs to those other plays which can claim 
a noble line of descent through three, four, or even five quartos. 
Thus all faults or blemishes have their origin in the Folio, and 
may not be ascribed to an ancestral quarto. It is quite need- 
less to enter here upon the advantages or disadvantages of this 
complete lack of knowledge of origin. Have not many individ- 
uals made themselves known and famous in spite of unknown 
birth and obscure descent? One thing is, however, sure: the 
absence of any Quarto has necessarily eliminated a large amount 
of textual discussion, that particular department of editorial 
work on SHAKESPEARE’S plays which, since no one but the writer 
himself is convinced by his conclusions, is so rarely profitable. 
The Latin dictum, ‘Qui haeret in literis, haeret in cortice,’ is 
too often apparent. As to the state of the text of the present 
play it may be said that many passages have been fruitful of 
discussion and the source of controversial emendation. If it be 
not the most corrupt of the Folio texts, it certainly occupies a 
high station in that bad eminence. On the other hand, the 
Tragedy comprises over three thousand eight hundred lines in 
the Folio, and, as will be seen from the list of emendations ac- 
cepted by the Cambridge Editors, there are but thirty passages 
wherein a reading other than that of the Folio is followed. 
F. A. LEo has compiled a list of cruces (Jahrbuch, xx.) in the 
text of the Folio; those in the present play number thirty-one; 
in each list the corrupt passages amount to a'little over three- 
tenths of one per cent., which cannot be said to be excessive. 

Some explanation is, I think, here in order as to the reprint- 
ing in the Appendix of certain passages from J. P. COLLIER’S 
Trilogy. A short account of that work will be found as Intro- 


duction to the excerpts. The volume was intended by the 
Vv 


vi PREFACE 


author merely for circulation among his private friends; he 
accordingly spoke out freely as regards his two opponents, 
SINGER and Dyce, and naturally was loath to have the work 
fall within their notice; but all concerned are now long since 
dead and gone and their editorial and personal quarrels utterly 
forgotten; therefore there need no longer be maintained a silence 
as regards this entertaining discussion of the MS. corrections in 
CoLLiER’s Folio of 1632. The volume is a rarity; I do not 
remember encountering a copy for sale in the last twenty-five 
years. There is thus an added interest in reproducing this 
portion relating to the present play. 

For the material of his Tragedy SHAKESPEARE again turned to 
Sir THomas Nortn’s translation of Amyort’s rendering of 
PLutTarcn’s Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans. To any 
but one endowed with a keen sense of dramatic effectiveness the 
Life of Coriolanus as there told would seem to offer the meagrest 
plot for a drama. It is one of the least interesting of the Lives, 
and even Nortn’s virile English at times fails to sustain and 
connect the diverse incidents in the career of the protagonist. 
What there was in this story of a proud, haughty patrician 
which attracted SHAKESPEARE it is useless to enquire. There 
are those who see in the composition a political motive; that 
SHAKESPEARE desired to portray the struggles of the parliament 
and people at the beginning of the reign of the new king; again, 
that SHAKESPEARE is once more demonstrating the dangers of 
a democracy, and using the material found in his source, 
PLUTARCH, to voice anew his dislike of the common people. 
That SHAKESPEARE in any one of the plays took advantage of 
the occasion to set forth his own opinions, either political, re- 
ligious, or social, is difficult of belief. But it is quite believable 
that, understanding human nature as he did, he should make an 
intensely arrogant patrician such as Coriolanus give utterance 
to sentiments as regards his inferiors with all the insolence and 
haughty disregard of their feelings consistent with his nature, 
while at the same time SHAKESPEARE himself was far from main- 
taining any such opinions. Again, that SHAKESPEARE should 
make use of the stage to point a political satire or, as a warning 
to the people, to show what might result if too much power 
were given to the nobles, is hardly conceivable. It is well to 
remember in this connection that short shrift was given to the 
too daring playwright, or his mouthpiece the player, as SHAKE- 


PREFACE vil 


SPEARE’S fellows had good cause to remember. The impersona- 
tion of King James in a play dealing with the Gowrie con- 
spiracy had been attended with dire consequences to them but 
a short time after the king’s accession. Was it then likely that 
SHAKESPEARE would turn his waning talent to constructing a 
drama which, if too easily recognised as dealing with the 
strained relations between King and parliament, would again 
render liable to penalty all those concerned? If the allegory 
were so hidden under veiled hints and complicated allusions 
that its subtleties could be discerned by the knowing ones 
only, of what value was the whole performance as a warning 
to dull ears of groundlings in the public theatre? Much has 
been said on the subject of SHAKESPEARE’S use of NortTu’s 
translation of PLUTARCH; in fact, in the discussions of those 
plays founded on Roman history this question seems to have 
been given a prominence it does not entirely deserve. It was 
but natural that SHAKESPEARE should make the fullest use of 
Nortu’s language—it was his own every-day speech—whereas 
the style and words of HOLINSHED and HALL, the English 
chroniclers, are moulded on the antiquated quasi-classical form; 
even PHILEMON HOLLAND is pedantic in style. The last was 
one of the foremost scholars of his day, as NorTu was not. 
Read a page of his Livy’s Roman History, and then turn to 
Nortn’s Plutarch, and it will be at once apparent why SHAKE- 
SPEARE did not even consult HOLLAND’s work for an account of 
the career of Caius Marcius. It is dull and lifeless. 

By common consent The Tragedy of Coriolanus is classed 
among the late plays, following close upon Antony and Cleopatra, 
and preceding Timon and The Tempest. The versification; the 
elliptical and involved form of expression—marked characteris- 
tics of late composition—justify this position in the chronological 
order of the plays much better than the external evidence, 
which is of the slightest. A similarity between a phrase in the 
present play (II, ii, 113) and a speech in The Silent Woman 
by Jonson, first noticed by STEEVENS, and amplified by MALONE, 
is thus used to furnish a date, as JONSON’s play first appeared 
in 1609. Volumnia’s reference to the mulberry in III, ii, 98 
caused MALONE to ascribe this to a reference to the introduction 
of mulberry trees by King James in the early years of his reign, 
but, on finding other references to this fruit, this was withdrawn; 
and Chalmers found in the complaints of the Citizens a refer- 


Vill PREFACE 


ence to the great dearth which existed in the years 1608 and 
1609. This is, however, an integral part of the story as in 
Plutarch. Again, there has been detected a possible allusion to 
the Great Frost of 1608 in the comparison of the people’s favour 
to ‘a coal of fire upon the ice,’ I, i, 185. The reiterated allu- 
sions to the plague and its signs have not, I think, been noticed 
in this connection. In 1609 the visitation of the plague was 
the heaviest since the accession of King James, the total deaths 
amounting to over four thousand. What more natural then 
that a writer should be influenced in his similes and phrases by 
the horror of sickness surrounding him; but, as has been said, 
these evidences are all of slight import, and the whole question 
as to the exact year of even less. We may well rest content 
with placing the date of composition somewhere between 1607 
and 1609. The prominent position allotted to the turbulent 
mob and those scenes wherein the people and their Tribunes 
take leading parts have largely contributed to make this play 
the subject for discussion as to SHAKESPEARE’S attitude toward 
the common people, and how far he may be considered as one 
truckling to the aristocrats, with an ill-disguised contempt for 
the multitude. But the devil, we know, can cite Scripture to 
his purpose, and to take a line or phrase here and there in proof 
either one way or the other is as easy as unfair when the con- 
text and the nature of the character speaking are not taken into 
account. 

Platitudinous discussion of SHAKESPEARE’S personality and his 
adaptability to any and all natures seems to have a fatal attrac- 
tion for some minds, until the subject has become wearisome by 
sameness of illustration and similarity of presentation. The 
discussion of SHAKESPEARE’S treatment of situation under vary- 
ing conditions is, however, in quite a different class; and the 
question of his presentation of the mob is one that deserves 
notice. The rabble in Julius Cesar is spoken of in almost the 
same terms as in the present play, and is quite as dangerous 
when roused. The comments of the First, Second, or Third 
Citizens are almost identical in tone and manner; the evil na- 
tures of all the gathering are as easily swayed by Antony as 
by the Tribunes. When we turn to the Jack Cade scenes in 
2 Henry VI. (Act IV, scs. ii. to viii.) the same general character- 
istics are apparent, but the rabble here act more on their own 
impulses, with very few hints from their leader. Cade is pur- 


PREFACE ix 


posely made weak and self-seeking to make credible his in- 
glorious ending at the hands of Iden. Antony kindles a mighty 
fire and survives to see it result in the flight and ultimate de- 
struction of Ceesar’s assassins; the Tribunes likewise gain their 
end by inciting the people to banish their common enemy, and 
are only saved from destruction by the withdrawal of Coriolanus 
from the sack of Rome. 

W. R. CHAMBERS has made interesting use of these scenes in 
a comparison of their general tone and expression with the in- 
surrection scenes in the fragment of the play, Sir Thomas More, 
in order to trace in this the hand of SHAKESPEARE. I must 
admit that CHAMBERS has made some very palpable hits. Not 
as regards the repetition of single words and phrases in both 
Cortolanus and Sir Thomas More, striking though this be, these 
might easily be the work of a mere copyist; but by a plain 
demonstration of a general similarity of treatment and ex- 
pression of ideas, with particular reference to those of political 
trend. (See Shakespeare's Hand in Sir Thomas More, chap. v, 
Pp. 142, passim.) The opinions of various other commentators 
on this subject will be found in the Appendix to this volume 
under the title Shakespeare and the Masses, and I would in par- 
ticular call attention to an admirable article on The Shakespearean 
Mob, by Frederick Tupper, Jr., in the Publications of the Mod- 
ern Language Association of America, No. xxvii, pp. 486-523. 
The writer shows that the portrayal of the mob as both ruth- 
less and ignorant was not a creation of SHAKESPEARE, but was 
the traditional delineation of the many-headed multitude, 
handed down by earlier writers and chroniclers. The work of 
other writers is forgotten and SHAKESPEARE’S survives, thus he 
is credited with sentiments as regards the people which were 
really general and not peculiar to him. That Coriolanus has 
been relegated to a position among the less popular plays of 
SHAKESPEARE both by readers and in the Theatre—'’tis true 
’tis pity, and pity ’tis, ’tis true.’ Various are the reasons that 
have been put forward to account for this: it has been urged 
that the whole play is uneven in its action—slow in getting 
under way, and halting in presentation of the catastrophe; that 
the story is only told through an expositon of the character of 
its central figure; that that central figure is of so disagreeable 
a nature that we care little what becomes of him, and thus 
lose interest in his fate. This last is perhaps as near the true 


x PREFACE 

/ 
reason as we can hope to attain in any question of a drama’s 
success or failure. 

SHAKESPEARE himself, I fear, grew somewhat weary of his 
task toward the close of the play. In the early scenes the stir 
and bustle of fight and skirmish; the courageous exploits of 
Marcius with his exhilarating incitements to fresh deeds of brav- 
ery, all show a power of inventiveness on the part of the author 
which trusted but little to the adventitious aid of his guide, 
Plutarch. So likewise in the turbulent scenes of the Third 
Act the rapid-fire dialogue with its question and answer swiftly 
reaching a climax show that the hand and brain had not lost 
their cunning, and required only a hint here and there for a 
phrase or suggestion. But with the Fourth Act we find SHAKE- 
SPEARE leaning more heavily upon the arm of his guide. The 
speech of Marcius to Aufidius, over forty lines in length, is 
taken almost completely from Nortu’s Plutarch with but a 
change here and there to suit it to metrical form. Still more 
marked is this reliance on NorTH in the Fifth Act. The decisive 
scene of the whole tragedy is, perforce, that wherein Volumnia 
breaks down the determination of Coriolanus and saves Rome. 
It is what is termed in the French theatre the scene @ faire, 
but here, instead of relying on his power of invention, SHAKE- 
SPEARE was content again to entrust the entire wording of this 
moving appeal to Plutarch in Norru’s simple, virile phrases. 
It is truly touching thus to note a conscious decline of power, 
and a feeling of growing mistrust in that fertility of language 
when thus forced to meet a critical situation. 

An attempt to resuscitate SHAKESPEARE’S Tragedy was made 
by Nahum Tate in 1682; his desecrating hands had already 
been laid upon The Merry Wives and King Lear—but where 
SHAKESPEARE had had but a doubtful success, it is only natural 
that an adapter should have had a complete failure. Tate 
rewrote the entire catastrophe, but with Coriolanus, instead of 
mitigating the tragic ending, as he had done with Lear, he 
piled horror on horror. Forty years later JOHN DENNIS, in an 
attempt to bring SHAKESPEARE’S play into a form quite con- 
sistent with that of classic tragedy, practically recast the entire 
composition, altering the language; omitting scenes or adding 
others of his own composition. It was no more successful than 
its predecessors, which fact called forth from its author, when 
the play was printed, a long diatribe against the managers of 


PREFACE Xi 


the Theatre for their treatment of what he considered a dramatic 
work of art, and one which was likewise particularly appropriate 
to the political situation of the times. In 1741 the poet JAMES 
THOMSON composed a tragedy on the subject of Coriolanus, 
using as the basis for his plot the story as told by Livy. It 
therefore bears but a very slight relation to SHAKESPEARE’S 
play, but a very close one to the turgid, verbose, and dull 
tragedies of its period. THOMSON was no playwright, and knew 
nothing of, and apparently cared less for, the stage. He never 
saw a representation of his Tragedy as it was produced posthu- 
mously. In 1785 THOMAS SHERIDAN, father of Richard Brinsley, 
made an alteration of Coriolanus for the Dublin Theatre; for this 
he patched together passages from SHAKESPEARE’S and from 
THomson’s work. This was the adaptation that was used by 
JouHN PuHitip KEMBLE when he first acted the part, which at 
once became one of his great impersonations; later KEMBLE 
himself revised this SHAKESPEARE-THOMSON version, and after 
making some changes produced another adaptation still re- 
taining too much of THomson’s fustian. It was unfortunate 
that the actors and adapters of that time were apparently 
blind to the fact that SHAKESPEARE was a master of stage- 
craft in a much higher degree than these same busy improvers. 

Few, I think, realize how wide a gap, in point of time, divides 
this play from that on the subject of Julius Cesar. Coriolanus 
really belongs to the legendary history of Rome, and by NIEBUHR 
and MomMMSEN is classed as almost as shadowy a character as 
Romulus or Remus, with a very doubtful date of 490 B. C. 
Thus the life and struggles of Coriolanus, compared to the days 
of Julius Cesar, are almost in the same relation as our present 
day to the period in English history when Henry and Edward 
were fighting out York and Lancaster’s long jars, and America 
but a wilderness peopled with savages. 

Let it be admitted that The Tragedy of Coriolanus is not one 
of the great achievements of SHAKESPEARE, and that the work 
shows signs in places of lessening strength, there yet remain about 
the whole those unmistakable, indefinable indications of the 
Master of his Craft; even as the Cask in the Fable, though empty, 
gave evidence by its delicate aroma how fine and choice had been 


the Wine which it had once contained. 
Pie es Re 


January, 1928. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


BONE ee eet ee ou ats hee et RIN Votan AV aahE Lies daises Vv 
item RAGEDIE OF CORIOLANUS 05 ids cach nis sewn a I 
CS SWE sa Pe eae aad Oo ee Sey EET, oa ER 587 
CATS ae Aes ae ee Aare peas Cet OE oy ean Ow Vlg Sone Br 587 
GGL CAPS OEN or Cael ees ee ne Ue 589 
terol COMPOSI: oui en Geka dn ao oak ae 595 
PAMPER ee TOL rons scli ka ei Re ema eo tate aks ee 613 
LESCED RET go ede te Geo ee a Pets on tc, allie ad ee 621 

Pane ot peuy and” Members (208.0 23.00 e ot eee. as 645 

CP USTSICS Ie OF 1724 FC) FR Oe ca reir gv a ea 649 

- Pte ier oe RAO OE 669 

ei seacteL ol COMOANNIG, fo) cole oe nace sea tt ae 675 
araCLeteOr WV OMUITONIAs 15 Vx ats ee Mee ae 688 
SHanespeare. and the Masses]... cial) fies 701 
Parga UIC Wy CESHOGS oct: ose inca ree aa aaa Eels 716 
EAC TITRE 9. 3 lb 2 eae eee RE nae eer 726 
Preers WATIMLETNTOTATIONS,. 200 acide clei a ewig ves 730 
Mine ANA 61S 85. eer boat Beri esa ace 738 

PA OIE I WOLi CIN hee sl ioe sa oon nena 739 

UNS 6) a Ore Peg ee Se ea a a a A Pe 741 
ee Ter Reece armies diode Anke Wel we Vannes 749 


Dramatis Perfonz 


Caius Marcius, afterwards Carus MARCIUS CoRIOLANUS. 2 


Titus Lartius 
‘Cominius 


} generals against the Volscians. 


Menenius Agrippa, friend to Coriolanus. 5 


1. Dramatis Persone] As in Cam. 
First given imperfectly by Rowe. 

2. Catus...] CAIUS MARTIUS CORIO- 
LANUS, a Noble Roman, hated by the 
Common People. Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Cap. CAIUS MARCIUS 
CORIOLANUS, a noble Roman. Johns. 
eLrceE. 


3, 4. Titus...Cominius,] Cominius, 
Titus... Beeching. 

3. generals...Volscians] Johns. gen- 
erals...Volscians, and Friends to Corio- 
lanus. Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Cap. 

5. (Following Menenius Agrippa Sta. 
inserts Nicanor.) 


2. Marcius] In reference to this mode of spelling this name see note on J, i, 11. 

3. Titus Lartius] MAcCaLivum (p. 398): Titus Lartius is sketched very slightly 
in Shakespeare, but a good deal more visually than in Plutarch, who says of him 
in two sentences that he was ‘one of the valliantest the Romaines had at that 
time,’ and that, having entered Corioli with Marcius, he, ‘when he was gotten 
out, had some leysure to bring the Romaines with more safetie into the cittie.’ 

4. Cominius] Pace (Introd., p. 24): The little we read of Cominius gives us 
a life-like portrait of him, and leaves a pleasing impression on us. He is evi- 
dently of a frank and generous nature. As Coriolanus’ superior officer he has 
under his command a soldier more famous than himself, so that he may acquire 
blame, but can hardly gain credit from the expedition against the Volsces. Such 
a trying position would have made most commanders morose and jealous, some 
would have found it intolerable. Cominius, however, accepts it with the utmost 
frankness, and the generals work together with hearty good fellowship and satis- 
factory result. Cominius generously attributes all the success to his brave col- 
league. He will not allow Coriolanus to conceal his great deeds, but proclaims 
them openly and emphatically before the Senate and people, and dwells on the 
disinterestedness of Coriolanus’ conduct. Thus, instead of looking upon his 
second in command as a dangerous rival and endeavoring to extenuate and dis- 
parage his success in the field, he acknowledges his superiority to himself and 
extols his deeds of heroism on every occasion. Nor is all this done in a forced or 
perfunctory manner, as though he were straining to hide real mortification and 
jealousy by outward demonstrations of goodwill. 

5. Menenius Agrippa] DENnis (Letters, ii, 385): If Shakespear was so conver- 
sant with the Ancients, how comes he to have introduc’d some Characters into 
his Plays so unlike what they are to be found in History? In the Character of 
Menenius he has doubly offended against that Historical Resemblance: For first 
whereas Menenius was an eloquent person, Shakespear has made him a downright 
Buffoon. And how is it possible for any man to conceive a Ciceronian Jack 

ur 


2 DRAMATIS PERSONZ 


[5. Menenius Agrippa] 
Pudding? Never was any Buffoon eloquent, or wise, or witty, or virtuous. All 
the good and ill qualities of a Buffoon are summed up in one word, and that is a 
Buffoon. And secondly, whereas Shakespear has made him a Hater and Contemner 
and Villifier of the People, we are assur’d by the Roman Historian that Menenius 
was extremely popular. He was so very far from opposing the Institution of the 
Tribunes, as he is represented in Shakespear, that he was chiefly instrumental in 
it. After the People had deserted the City, and sat down upon the sacred Moun- 
tain, he was the chief of the Delegates whom the Senate deputed to them, as 
being look’d upon to be the Person who would be most agreeable to them. In 
short, this very Menenius both liv’d and dy’d so very much their Favourite that, 
dying poor, he had pompous Funerals at the Expence of the Roman People.— 
Vienorr (Jahrbuch, iv, 48): Among the subordinate characters Menenius 
serves, on the one hand, in the highest way possible as a factor in the course of the | 
action and as a foil to the protagonist; on the other hand, though like to a figure 
cast in a mould, he is full of individual life. From the historic materials for 
Menenius the poet could have created quite a different personality; since he worked 
upon the people advising and composing them it would have been easy to repre- 
sent him as an earnest man overawing the rabble by his wisdom and worth. But 
how much greater advantage did the poet gain for his drama by the original 
coloring which he gave to this character! The Shakespearean Menenius is a good- 
natured man about town of sanguine temperament and lively fancy, an irascible 
old man, whose temper turns easily and quickly, a babbler, given to the cracking 
of jokes, and likewise commonly to exaggeration and bragging, a friend to a good 
cup of warm wine and a well spread table, to which he ascribes significant effects 
on the inner man, gallant towards women, a spirited praiser of Coriolanus, a 
friend of peace, and though outwardly patrician, a man who yet has a heart for 
the people and desires their proper well-being. Through this mixture of char- 
acteristics he becomes qualified for the many functions which he exercises in the 
drama. His effect on the course of the action is not only through the mollifi- 
cation of the people by means of his fable, he serves also repeatedly as mediator to 
make the first impression on the stiff will of his young favorite. At the same 
time he is in his cheerful, easy-going nature an effective foil to the earnest, nar- 
row-minded friend; if perchance one would think that a man so firm, so laconically 
given, such a despiser of outward show as Coriolanus should feel himself drawn to 
an old man whose moods are so evanescent, so talkative, and loving exaggeration, 
it is actually no less psychologically correct than that a man so heroic should 
have chosen as his wife a woman of so tender a nature as Virgilia. Furthermore, 
Menenius by his enthusiastic admiration for Coriolanus, sets up a glass wherein 
is reflected a picture of the latter, if also many times magnified as in a concave 
mirror. In conclusion the poet makes use of this character, with its ludicrous 
coloring, to lighten the tension which predominates in this drama and to reduce 
to artistic proportions its deep and powerful keynote.—GERVINUS (p. 765): The 
most striking personage next to Coriolanus is Menenius Agrippa. Except the well- 
known fable of the belly and the members, Shakespeare found nothing further con- 
cerning him in his English Plutarch than the remark that he was the pleasantest 
old man in the Senate. From this hint he has formed the lively character, to whom 
he awards the benevolent office, beside the ragged demi-god, of being contented 
to be a man amongst men. In all his individual qualities this contrast is carried 


DRAMATIS PERSON : 3 


[5. Menenius Agrippa] 
out, although it seems as if unintentional. He has none of Coriolanus’ thirst for 
fame; he rather rejoices in the fame of his friend; he idolises him, and it gives him 
an estate of seven years’ health when Coriolanus condescends to write to him... . 
Even with the will to speak the truth of his hero he involuntarily oversteps its 
bounds. It is easy to him to be his unselfish admirer because his own talents lie 
in quite another direction. Age has broken his warlike strength, though his brave 
mind still looks out here and there, when in extremity he calls the nobles to help 
Coriolanus, and says he could himself ‘take up a brace of the best of the plebeians.’ 
But his true strength lies rather in mental superiority; his excellence is that of a 
clever orator. . . . He manages the furious Coriolanus according to his nature, 
sparing while he blames him, cursing his unkindness, and excusing and praising 
him in a breath. With Coriolanus he takes the part of the people, on account of 
their placability, and with the people, that of Coriolanus. . . . When Coriolanus 
is banished he is civil and pliant towards the tribunes; when the exile advances 
towards Rome he is maliciously cheerful, and in return for this he has to suffer 
the malice of the Volscian guards when his eloquence has failed to persuade Corio- 
lanus. In these last scenes the weaknesses of old age show themselves more plainly, 
and in the midst of them his nobler nature appears more distinctly. This is excel- 
lently depicted and will give the actor enough to do. The struggle in Coriolanus 
between proud indifference and a heart breaking under the effect of his friends’ 
first entreaties; in Menenius between confidence and renewed disappointment, and, 
beneath the cloak of playfulness, the inward struggle between friend and country, 
and the resolve of the cheerful old man to end like a Roman—these are contra- 
dictions which it requires the utmost art to reconcile—Kreyssic (i, 477): We are 
not, on the whole, prepared to accord such good taste to this senatorial joker as 
has been brought forward by many commentators and admirers of Shakespeare. 
With his narrow aristocratic perception, his unrestrained explosions of contempt 
for the people he owes his popularity principally to a negative peculiarity, to which 
we can only give a measurable admiration. He himself best gives us the secret of 
his art of a statesman. He thinks what he says and expends his wickedness by 
his tongue. The larger part of his strength consists in his weakness. It is open- 
heartedness and his merry man-of-the-world manner that takes the sting from his 
pride of nobility. He is known, indeed, as a Patrician, but as a merry one; his 
small, lovable failings take the sting from his malice. We need not weigh the 
words of a man who cares more for a glass of heated wine than for one of Tiber 
water; and who has more to do with the posteriors of the night than the forehead of 
the morning. Thus his plebeian manners in part fill up the cleft which his fun- 
damental aristocratic disposition created between him and the people.—DELius 
(Jahrbuch, xix, p. 37) points out that in nearly all the cases of friendship as por- 
trayed by Shakespeare the friends are of nearly the same age; that there is thusa 
certain agreement in views and characteristics since the friends are on a like foot- 
ing. ‘But quite otherwise,’ he continues, ‘must the connection be between an 
older man and a young one, and just such a relationship has Shakespeare set forth 
in that between Coriolanus and Menenius, one might say created, for Plutarch 
afforded him nothing in this direction. In Plutarch Menenius Agrippa appears 
as the well-meaning, pacifying senator, who quiets the people with his well-known 
fable, but otherwise has nothing to do with the younger Marcius. It remained 
for our poet to represent these two, of opposing personalities, firmly knit together 


4 DRAMATIS PERSONA 


[5. Menenius Agrippa] 
in closest friendship. First of all Shakespeare shows them to us as friends on ac- 
count of like political views, as patrician opponents of the plebeians, and the 
plebeian fickleness; only that Menenius clothes his opposition to them with the 
cloak of friendliness to the people, while Coriolanus in his passionate manner gives 
the roughest expression possible to his disgust for these innovators. Later in the 
course of the drama the personal connection between them is brought to light. 
Menenius defends his young friend from the charges of pride and spite which the 
Tribunes pronounce against him when returning from the field, and hardly knows 
how to act for admiration when he receives the joyful message of the victory and 
near approach of his beloved Marcius. When he hears only of the letter which 
Marcius has written to him and which awaits him at his house, he declares himself 
rejuvenated by seven years. Even the wounds which Marcius brings back are to 
his old friend quite in keeping, that is, if they be not too large, because wounds 
proclaim the hero, and with righteous pride he enumerates all those which his 
darling had up to this time borne.’—[The remaining portion of these remarks on 
the friendship of Menenius and Coriolanus is, for the most part, a discursive and 
somewhat verbose account of the scenes wherein they appear together; ending with 
the scene at the Volscian outposts which, as Delius says, is the final rupture of their 
friendship and a complete severance of all ties between them; they never met again. 
—Ep.]—Ltovp (ap. SINGER, ii, p. 489): The pleasant old Senator has a contempt for 
the ‘beastly plebeians’ and the Tribunes their ‘herdsmen’ as hearty as Coriolanus, 
and even expresses it as plainly and as coarsely, and yet he remains acceptable to 
both, and has the character of having always loved the people, on the strength 
of the hearty joviality of his temperament, his tendency to ridicule rather than 
to revile, and it must be said, at bottom, so much esteem for the people that he 
does not consider his own individual dignity a counterbalance for the lives of the 
whole of them. We may note how his apologue [of the belly and the members] 
appears, from the character of his subsequent speech, to be the natural form 
into which his expressions of practical wisdom overflow; the spiritual world 
reveals itself to him in an incarnation of physical and material analogies, and his 
ideas willingly come abroad clothed in trope and metaphor of which homeliness 
seems to be a prime recommendation. The discussion in Rome is a rent that 
‘must be patched with cloth of any color’; for the unpopular Marcius—‘The 
service of the foot (one of the members we before heard of) Being once gangrened, 
is not then respected For what it was before.’ The relentless Coriolanus is figured 
by ‘yond’ coign of the capitol, yond’ corner-stone’; ‘there is a difference between 
a grub and a butterfly, yet your butterfly was a grub’—‘he no more remembers 
his mother now than an eight year old horse’;—‘Mark what mercy his mother 
shall bring from him: there is no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male 
tiger..—C. C. CLARKE (Sh. Characters, p. 479): Among the secondary characters in 
this play the most estimable, as well as the most interesting, is old Menenius, the 
Patrician and Senator. He forms an amiable link between the two orders; he is 
precisely the character a nobleman should be; wearing the insignia of his rank 
with a bland and easy dignity; gracefully condescending, and even familiar with 
the commonalty, sympathising with their wants, difficulties, and privations; and 
this gives him the privilege to speak to them with the authority of his longer 
experience, with better education and knowledge. This same sympathy, too, 
which they all recognise, gives him the warrant to visit their misconduct and their 


DRAMATIS PERSON 5 


eee re eS ee 
[5. Menenius Agrippa] 
senseless waverings, their vacillations, irrational turbulence, and revolt, with an 
asperity they would ill bear from another who cared less for them and their desti- 
tute condition. It is observable that throughout all his displeasure and petulance 
against the mob Menenius never makes use of a cruel or even unkind speech: 
in his spleen he is sufficiently and humorously contemptuous; but we hear no such 
expression as the scoundrelly exultation of Coriolanus at the approaching war with 
the Volscians, when he says: ‘I am glad on’t; then we shall have means to vent 
Our musty superfluity’; a speech admirably in character with one who considered 
the masses below him in the commonwealth only as so much material to build 
up his own pomp and ambition. Menenius has described his own nature and 
temper in that sparring scene between himself and the Tribunes of the People, 
Brutus and Sicinius. It is a happy display of a testy, wayward, and humorous 
old man, with a rich vein of kind-heartedness running through his testy temper. 
—STAPFER (p. 446): We might expect to find in Menenius Agrippa, as he plays 
the part of mediator between the Patricians and the Plebeians, a wise and mod- 
erate politician, equally removed from the extreme opinions of either party, a 
perfect man, in fact, like the Aristes and Cléantes in Moliére, who are always softly 
and gravely insisting upon moderation in all things, and complain sadly of the 
unreasonableness of men. But Shakespeare is not wont to introduce these well- 
balanced moralists into his scenes, whose whole knowledge consists in striking a 
balance between the false and the true. They are certainly not very entertaining 
personages; what interest they may possess is not of a dramatic kind, but belongs 
to them as monuments of Moliére’s courageous good sense, as the expression of a 
particular state of society, and of a particular period, in which reason was held 
in higher esteem than any other of the poetic faculties. . . . Shakespeare had a 
horror of the frightfully tiresome person of the reasonable and ratiocinative type. 
The laughter-moving diversity of the innumerable fools who play a part in the 
great human tragi-comedy is the stuff whereof he makes his plays; we need not, 
therefore, expect to meet with a sage philosopher in Menenius Agrippa. . . . Being 
what he is, it is easy to divine that he plays the part of mediator out of no feelings 
of calm conviction, or elevated sense of justice, and, in fact, the only reason of his 
setting his wits to work to reconcile the hostile parties is that he is a fat old fellow, 
who likes to be comfortable and able to empty his bottle in peace and quiet; and 
civil dissensions spoil a cup of hot wine even more than many drops of Tiber 
water. In the quarrel of the other members with the stomach it was greatly to 
his interest, as part and parcel of the stomach, to re-establish order as soon as pos- 
sible, and it may be fairly conjectured that the idea of his fable was suggested 
to him by the hindrances thrown in the way of his ease and good living. . . . But 
his character is shown most clearly, with his vanity, his fund of good humour, 
his lively inconsequent sallies, and his fussy airs as a hard worked patriot, after the 
blow has fallen and Coriolanus has turned traitor to Rome. Half a dozen times 
he repeats to the Tribunes: ‘You have made good work’; in the midst of the 
general consternation he takes a satirical pleasure in their political humiliation, 
and though it is not a time for laughter, he still, like an incorrigible jester, continues 
to pour out his jokes. . . . Shakespeare’s Menenius Agrippa is a good-hearted man 
in the main, but of no real worth morally or even intellectually, in spite of his 
celebrated fable-—C. Taytor (Shakespeare Gallery, p. 68): To analyse the character 
of Menenius we should advert to his Courage, which never once forsakes him, even 


6 DRAMATIS PERSONE 


[5. Menenius Agrippa] 
amid dangers whose termination is utterly unforeseen: many men can boldly face 
an enemy in the field, who would shrink before an armed and tumultuous popu- 
lace; many can risque dangers in concert with others, who when alone consult and 
obey timidity under the spacious name of prudence. . . . Courage, in such persons, 
appears a varying quality, a flashing flame, rather than a steady light; but the 
courage of Menenius is uniform: he speaks plainly to the people and plainly to 
Coriolanus, neither dreads the headstrong rashness of the former nor the fierce 
sallies of the latter; his judgment sees the path proper to be pursued, and his 
courage prompts him clearly to deliver his opinion in advising it. But his courage 
is not of that cast which repulses the union of other Virtues; his Prudence and 
Management no less merit observation than his courage: he makes free with him- 
self when about to make free with others; qualifies, by a general oddity of remark 
and expression, the severity of those sarcasms which he has in reserve; humorously 
descants on his own private character, and by his eccentric and jocose treatment 
of himself induces us to admit with less scrutiny his reflections on others... . 
We see no starts of passion in Menenius, no sudden hurricane transports him to 
excess, but one even tenor of mind and sentiment accompanies him: ruffled 
only as accidents ruffle it, but never outrageous or turbulent. Sensible of injuries 
in his own person or in that of his friend, but seeking no illicit mode of gratifying 
revenge. Ever desirous of seeing the most cheerful side of things, and rather 
yielding to the impulse of joy than to the melancholy of dejection, he preserves 
that moderation which readily finds opportunities in circumstances around it, 
and equally readily improves them.—PAGE (Introd., p. 22): Menenius is perhaps 
the most complicated, the most difficult to analyse, in some respects the most 
Shakspearian of all the characters in the play. He sometimes reminds us of 
Coriolanus. He has the same contempt for the ‘rabble,’ the same indignation 
and impatience at the thought of their interfering in the government of the state, 
he often tells them his mind in pretty plain language, but his objurations are 
milder, less frequent, and less insulting; he stoops to reason with them, and 
endeavors to enlighten their understanding by parables. To gain certain ends he 
sees no harm in flattering and cajoling the common people according to ‘the cus- 
tom’ of the country. He shows considerable diplomatic skill in his efforts to recon- 
cile Coriolanus and the plebeians, or at least to prevent their discordant natures 
from breaking out into open rupture; but this almost impossible task is beyond his 
powers, and he fails, as perhaps every one else would have done. He tries his 
hand again in the attempt to negotiate between the terrified Romans and Corio- 
lanus in the camp of the Volsces. Though he has great confidence of obtaining at 
least a favourable reception, and explains Cominius’ brusque dismissal to want of 
tact, his mission, from the very nature of the case, results in an immediate and 
ignominious failure. His undertaking was one in which success was possible to 
only one person in the whole world—Volumnia. His language is pithy and sen- 
tentious; he possesses a vein of dry humour which reminds us of Jacques in As You 
Like It. His fable of the Belly and the Members is one of the most striking features 
in the play; it is apt in substance and couched in quaint and characteristic language. 
Almost every speech of Menenius illustrates this point. He possesses a warm and 
faithful heart. He loves and admires Coriolanus, who calls him ‘father’ and ‘old 
and true Menenius.’ . . . Coriolanus loves him in return. ‘You know the very 
road into his kindness,’ says Brutus, and Coriolanus’ own language shows us that 


DRAMATIS PERSON i 


[5. Menenius Agrippa] 

Menenius was dear to him—BRrookeE (p. 227): Menenius is the old and jovial 
aristocrat who loves a cup of hot wine and adores a hero like Coriolanus; hasty 
in temper, but keeping no malice, and in politics eager for moderate counsels; bluff 
of speech because he is old and because of his class-contempt for the people, which 
contempt he generally modifies into good-humoured attacks on their follies. He 
is endured, but seen through, by the tribunes of the people—‘Come, sir, come, we 
know you well enough.’ A thorough patrician, who yet desires to be hail-fellow- 
well-met with the people; who has among them the fame of caring for them, but 
who does not really care for their wrongs in comparison with the smallest right 
the patricians claim; the prosperous conservative, quite ready to help the people 
provided the people are kept down. The possibility of any democratic change 
never enters his mind. The world of Rome will always go on as it is now. You 
may as well, he says to the citizens, ‘Strike at the heavens with your staves as lift 
them Against the Roman state.’ The patricians, the senate, are the centre of 
Rome; if the centre be weakened the people will perish—and he tells his story of 
the belly and the rebellious members of the body. ‘But we are perishing now,’ 
they say, ‘and the nobility are the cause.’ ‘Wait, keep quiet, don’t disturb the 
state, all will soon be quite comfortable. The one thing needful is no change. 
All your good comes from the patricians.? When change has been wrought, and 
he hears that Tribunes have been granted, he does not understand it. ‘This is 
strange,’ he says. Then when further change is wrought, and Coriolanus is ban- 
ished, Menenius accepts the Tribunes and the change; and then, when Rome turns 
against the Tribunes, throws himself back into the old position. His conservatism 
is permanent opportunism. However, at this early point of the play (in his belief 
in the everlasting continuance of the state as it is) the blindness of this Roman 
Polonius is clear though he seems so wise. Coriolanus sees twice as far just 
because his hatred of the people opens his eyes. He knows, when the Tribunes 
are given to the people, that the predominance of his class is doomed. Hatred, 
often blind, is sometimes keen-eyed. There are many instances of the blindness 
of Menenius, of the clear sight of Coriolanus. Here is one. Menenius is the 
slave of custom; Coriolanus is not. One of the touches of the play nearest to 
his character is where his pride, and in this case his intelligence, overcomes his 
conservatism, and he throws precedent overboard, 


‘Custom calls me to ’t: 

What custom wills, in all things should we do ’t, 
The dust on antique time would lie unswept, 
And mountainous error be too highly heap’d 
For truth to o’er-peer.’ 


That is not the conservative position. Menenius cannot agree with him; Corio- 
lanus must follow all the precedents of the past. Again and again he implores 
him for temperate conduct, and the battle in his mind between love and admira- 
tion for Coriolanus and disapproval of his uncontrolled choler is excellently drawn 
by Shakespeare. Yet, while he disapproves and is even weary of the furious 
temper of his friend, he hates the people the more because they attack his friend. 
From the moment the battle is set in array till the banishment of Coriolanus 
no one is harder on the people than Menenius. No Philippe Egalité is to be 
trusted. The traditions of their class are stronger than their popular good nature. 


4397 


8 wDRAMATIS PERSONA 


Sicinius Velutus 


Fone Bruen | wribunes of the People. 


6. tribunes...People] Johns. tribunes...People, and Enemies to Coriolanus. Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. 


—Verity (Student’s Sh.): Menenius illustrates, more than any other character 
in Shakespeare that occurs to me, how a seed of suggestion will fructify in Shake- 
speare’s imagination. All that Plutarch says about Menenius is that he was 
‘chief man’ of the embassy of ‘the pleasantest old men and the most acceptable 
to the people’ who were sent by the Senate to remonstrate with them after their 
secession to the Mons Sacer outside Rome; that he used successfully ‘many good 
persuasions and gentle requests to the people’; and ended with his ‘notable tale’ 
of the belly and the other members of the body.—MacCatium (p. 498): In the 
drama Menenius is undoubtedly the chief of the young man’s [Coriolanus] friends 
as well as one of the most prominent persons; and what has Plutarch to say about 
him? He is introduced only in connection with the fable which he tells the seceders 
to the Holy Hill, and, apart from the fable, all that we hear of him is confined 
to a few sentences. ... Even the few particulars given Shakespeare alters or 
neglects. It is not to the secessionists on the Mons Sacer, but to a street mob 
in Rome, that the fable is told. It not merely serves to lubricate in advance the 
negotiations that result in the Tribunate, but effectually discomfits the murmurers, 
and Menenius learns only subsequently and to his surprise that the Senate has 
meanwhile conceded the political innovation. There is no hint in Plutarch of his 
being himself one of the Patricians, and if Shakespeare glanced at Holland’s Livy 
he would see that, in point of fact, tradition assigned to him a plebeian origin. 
Above all, he has no dealings whatever with Marcius, and, according to Livy, died 
a year before his banishment. Plutarch thus furnishes hardly anything for the 
portrait of the man, and nothing at all for his relations with the hero. 

6, 7. Sicinius Velutus, . .. Junius Brutus] GeRvinus (p. 765): The Tribunes, 
in their mean, intolerant, strutting pride of office, are striking contrasts to Corio- 
lanus’s grand pride of action. As upstarts they set up as high pretensions as 
Coriolanus without his capacity; they show themselves in the settling of small 
matters as impatient and violent as he does in great things and from great motives; 
they place their petty ambition on the obeisance of the populace, whilst their eyes 
could not even reach to the height of his ambitious projects; opposed to his valour 
is their unwarlike disposition; opposed to his openness and straightforwardness 
are théir desperate intrigues, and their lying in wait for the expression of his pride 
and fury, which will be his ruin; opposed to his bold abuse of the people is the 
aptness with which they lead the populace as they please, and know how to keep 
themselves free from blame.—C. C. CLARKE (Sh. Characters, p. 483): Sicinius 
and Brutus are thorough specimens of a brace of vulgar demagogues. In their 
very first scene they manifest the grudging envy, the malignant spirit which act- 
uates them against Marcius; and their vile nature exposes itself in the low motives 
they attribute to him. They are constantly on the watch for opposition and vex- 
atious objection. They meanly incite the people and prompt them into animosity 
against him. They take advantage of his defects of temper—his irascible and 
tornado disposition—to urge him into self-destruction. They do this with the 
cunning of little minds and the unscrupulousness of base politicians. It is princi- 


DRAMATIS PERSONZ 9 


[6, 7. Sicinius Velutus, . . . Junius Brutus] 

pally their venting their splenetic remarks behind his back which gives so hateful 
an effect to their comments; had they urged their objections to his face they might, 
and they ought to, have commanded attention, for there is truth in what they 
adduce of his overweening pride. It is their hole-and-corner plotting and scheming, 
as well as animadverting surreptitiously, which imparts so dastardly a character 
to their movements, by not daring to impeach him openly, betraying their sense 
that they cannot do so with strict justice. The unfairness with which these faction- 
mongers proceed is indicated in strong colours where they order the man, who brings 
the unwelcome news that the Volsces are marching upon Rome, ‘to be whipped,’ 
accusing him of having raised the report for mere party purpose. One exclaims: 
‘Nothing but his report!’ and the other, on hearing the addition that Marcius is 
said to lead the Volscian power, rejoins 


‘Rais’d only that the weaker sort may wish 
God Marcius home again. 
Sicin. The very trick on’t!’ 


Ay, precisely the kind of trick that these gentry were well versed in; the trick of 
spreading false reports to stir popular excitement. No wonder they suspected it to 
be a hatched rumour, and ordered the fellow who promulgated it to be forthwith 
scourged. No one better than they could estimate his desert —OECHELHAUSER 
(Einfiihrungen, i, 292): As individuals Brutus and Sicinius cannot be distinguished 
one from the other. Only once before has Shakespeare with his abundant wealth 
of character invention portrayed with evident design two similar parallel figures, 
that is to say, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, although these two perhaps stand in 
the moral scale a little higher than our two Tribunes. Both these pairs of villains 
likewise have this in common: they are characterised for the most part as types, 
not as individuals, which is somewhat unusual in Shakespeare. Taken together 
Brutus and Sicinius are one and the same man; the poet was obliged to separate 
them only that he might create and bring out their train of thought in the form 
of dialogue. The closest investigation fails in deciding which of the two, Brutus or 
Sicinius, bears away the palm for baseness. If we examine critically who par- 
ticularly of all the characters in the tragedy for the most part misprise and abuse 
the people, it will be found that not Coriolanus or the other patricians, but the 
Tribunes of the People are directly to blame. In them is united every criterion 
of human underhandedness: hatred and malice towards everything great and noble, 
ingratitude, hypocrisy, and cowardice, resorting to the basest means to attain their 
own selfish ends. With diabolical calculation on his weakness they hound Corio- 
lanus to his death, and while denouncing him as a traitor they push him into the 
arms of treason itself. His aristocratic pride and his measureless impetuosity are 
no mitigating circumstances for these two, who, reckoning on these weaknesses, 
instigate him to treason. Coriolanus’s lack of restraint will excuse the hostile 
attitude of the people—to a certain extent justify it—but it will not excuse that 
of the Tribunes. The parts of these two are generally represented on the 
stage as too harmless; in both these Tribunes there glows a spark of devilish vil- 
lainy. Their representation cannot be entrusted to secondary talent, since the réles 
demand a large versatility, and the individuality must be finely wrought out if the 
poet’s design is to be clearly brought to light. In the first place, a base ambition 
and measureless vanity dominate their bearing. To the people they are the most 


fe) DRAMATIS PERSON 


Young Marcius, son of Coriolanus. 8 
A Roman Herald. 

8. Young...of...] Boy, son to... Cap. 9. A...Herald] First in Mal. (After 
(After this Cap. inserts: Senators, ]. ro Cap. inserts: Senators of Corioli, 
two; Officers of the Senate, two; Citi- two; of Antium, three; Servants of 
zens, six; Soldiers, three; a Patrician, Aufidius, three; Friends of the same, 
A&édile, Herald, Officer, Spy, and eight Conspirators against Marcius, three; a 
Messengers, Romans.) ° Citizen of Antium, Officer, Soldier, Spy, 


and two guards, Volcians.) 


humane friends, the superzealous servants of their wishes, smiles and hand shakes 
are common to them. In the presence of Coriolanus they seek to demonstrate 
the value of their office, act the parts of acknowledgers and well-wishers, but 
therewith goad him with pin-pricks until he lays himself more and more open to 
attack, which thus gives countenance to their charges against him.—CHOLMELEY 
(Introd., xiii.): The Tribunes, though legendary persons, bear names well known 
in Rome, and Brutus is supposed to be a descendant of the husband of Lucretia 
and overthrower of Tarquin.—MacCattvum (p. 500): [In Plutarch’s account of the 
Tribunate] Brutus is only once named, and nothing is said of his disposition or 
ways. Even of Sicinius, who is more conspicuous, we only read that he was ‘the 
cruellest and stowtest’ of the two. But it is less their character than their policy 
that occupies Plutarch, and even their policy is presented in an ambiguous light. 
They are described as the only authors of the rising which culminated in the exodus 
from the city; but with that exodus Plutarch, on the whole, seems to sympathise. 
They are described as ‘seditious tribunes’ when they oppose the colonisation of 
Velitree and the renewal of the war; but Plutarch shows they had good grounds for 
doing so. Even their action against Coriolanus for opposing the grant of corn and 
advocating the abolition of their office was, from their own point of view and per- 
haps from any point of view, perfectly legitimate. We can only say that in the 
measures they took they were violent and unscrupulous. Yet when we consider 
the bitterness of party feeling and the exigencies of public life, they seem no 
worse than many statesmen who have been accounted great. Even their overt 
policy then is more respectable than that of Shakespeare’s pair of demagogues, 
and, of course, it is Shakespeare who has created, or all but created, for them 
their vulgar but life-like characters. 

8. Young Marcius] Tatumet (Jahrbuch, x, 14): In an exposition dealing with 
Shakespeare’s Feminine Ideals this young Marcius has been singled out for affec- 
tionaté mention, and extolled not only as a child drawn from the very marrow of 
Rome but also in himself the ideal child among the Shakespearian children. I 
am heartily sorry that I am not able to share in this great admiration for the boy. 
Valeria, the family friend, finds in him all that is most lovable, according to the 
wont of all chattering gossips, and what she praises as a mark of his determination 
seems to me but a savour of the wickedness of a little destroyer of animals [I, 
iii, 64-68]. The praise of his grandmother, who knows nothing in the world 
greater than her son Coriolanus, the arch-warrior, characterises the little urchin 
as the portrait of his father, especially as a warrior in miniature, and if he speaks 
to his father in the Volscian camp of his future heroic deeds—concerning which 
the history is for us quite silent—it only sounds more like the bluster of a stripling 
who has not had enough of the rod. 


DRAMATIS PERSONE II 


Tullus Aufidius, general of the Volscians. 10 


10. Tullus Aufidius] Taytor (Sh. Gallery, p. 246): In a general view Tullus 
serves as a foil to Coriolanus, and being in many degrees his rival, yet on the 
whole his inferior, being also covert instead of open, ambiguous instead of plain, 
and rather choosing to wear the mask of conspiracy than the genuine countenance 
of enmity, he contrasts, with great effect, the conspicuous failings of the hero of 
the piece, and produces a regret at the success of his machinations; since, if sucha 
punishment was properly due, justice, not malevolence, ought to have inflicted 
it, it should not have been the office of Tullus Aufidius—C. C. CLarkEe (Sh. 
Characters, p. 480): The character of Tullus Aufidius is well placed in opposition 
with that of Coriolanus. It is no vulgar foil, no bald contrast, but it is superficially 
bright only. Beneath a show of martial eminence, which fits him to be the hero’s 
antagonist, he possesses a low soul, which places him intrinsically beneath the great 
Roman. Where Coriolanus is proud, Aufidius is ambitious; where Coriolanus is 
loftily self-conscious, Aufidius is aspiring by self-seeking. Exteriorly Tullus forms 
no unworthy rival in arms with Caius Marcius, but interiorly, morally, he is 
immeasurably below him. With his usual delicacy, but vigour of delineation, the 
poet has depicted this from first to last. At the very outset we behold Tullus 
burning with desire to cope with Marcius, and to win some share of that warlike 
renown for which he is famous. He has a fever of military jealousy upon him 
which has its hot and its cold fits. He is seized with one of the latter on finding 
that Coriolanus is under his own roof, a poor and banished man; finding his great 
rival thus within his power, it allays his thirst of competition, and substitutes in 
its place a complacent feeling of patronage, which takes the appearance of chivalrous 
sentiment. But this impulse soon passes, and his old professional jealousy is re- 
kindled at the first view of Coriolanus’s reinstation in command. His vulgar nature 
cannot bear the sight of the other’s pre-eminence; and this perpetual consciousness 
of inferiority goads him with ever sharper desire to attain superior rank. It makes 
him basely rejoice when he beholds Coriolanus give way to the pleading of his 
mother and his wife; it impels him to the villainy of working his downfall; it urges 
him to treachery and murder—crime. As an instance of Shakespeare’s subtlety 
in drawing these moral portraitures it is to be observed that Aufidius, even at the 
best of his behaviour towards his noble rival, when he receives him with kindliness 
at his house at Antium, always addresses him as ‘Caius Marcius’; and the secret 
rankling which prompted the name is betrayed in open avowal where he subse- 
quently calls him so, and the other exclaiming ‘Marcius!’ he retorts: ‘Ay, Marcius, 
Caius Marcius; dost thou think I’ll grace thee with that robbery, thy stolen name 
Coriolanus in Corioli?’ It is in the moral inferiority of Tullus Aufidius, thus subtly 
drawn, that Shakespeare has presented him as an effective opposite to the principal 
character.—GERVINUS (p. 765): The prevailing difference, which raises Coriolanus 
high above Tullus, is that he is of nobler nature, that in his bitterness of feeling he 
is seized by an unnatural enmity against his country, but he returns to his better 
nature; whereas Tullus is naturally malicious, and is flattered by the need of his 
enemy thus fleeing to him for protection; he forms an unnatural friendship with 
him, and then returns to his deceitful spite in the conspiracy against Coriolanus. 
—Virnorr (Jahrbuch, iv, p. 50): The basic foundations of such a character as 
Aufidius must lie either in similarity to those of the protagonist or must be con- 
trasted with them, since not mere dissimilarity but similarity and contrast incite 


12 DRAMATIS PERSONAE 


[ro. Tullus Aufidius] 
eye and imagination to comparative observation of such figures. According to 
this formula Shakespeare has created the character of Aufidius. He is the pride 
of the Volscians as Coriolanus is the celebrated hero of the Romans. As Aufidius is 
the enemy most dreaded by the Romans, Coriolanus is the one most feared by the 
Volscians. Virgilia implores heaven to protect her husband in the presence of the 
ruthless Aufidius. Volumnia thinks of him as the man from whom, before all 
others, her son may win renown. Coriolanus himself pays him the highest praise 
and even maintains that were he not himself he would wish to be Aufidius. He is 
of the same heroic mould as Coriolanus, and in him likewise patriotism outweighs 
both love of deeds and love of fame; he says: ‘I would I were a Roman, for I 
cannot, Being a Volsce, be that I am’ (I, x, 6, 7). But even as Homer is careful 
that the excellent Hector shall not grow above the greatness of Achilles, in like 
manner Shakespeare represents the heroic mood and strength of Aufidius related, 
indeed, to that of Coriolanus, but in secondary rank. The fight between the two 
heroes serves to this end to the smallest details; and just as Aufidius admits the 
superiority of Coriolanus, his own servants express the same view without any 
subterfuge. More than this, since these related characteristics bring out the 
contrasts in both characters, they assure to Coriolanus the major interest of the 
onlookers.—Hupson (Sh’s Life, Art, etc., ii, 487): Tullus Aufidius makes a very 
effective foil to Coriolanus, the contrast between them being pressed forward in just 
the right way to show off the vein of true nobleness which there is in the latter. 
He has all the pride and passionateness of the hero without any of his gratitude 
and magnanimity. In Coriolanus the spirit of rivalry and emulation never passes 
the bounds of honour; in the other it turns to downright personal envy and hate. 
The hero glories in him as an antagonist, and loves to whip him in fair fight, but 
is far above all thought of ruining him or stabbing him in the dark. The shocking 
speech of Aufidius, in the first scene where he appears after the taking of Corioli, 
is a skilful forecast and premonition of his transport of baseness at the close.— 
OECHELHAUSER (i, 294): What I have said in regard to the frequent unsatis- 
factory casting of the parts of the Tribunes will apply in greater degree to that 
of Aufidius, which is customarily entrusted to the juvenile leading man or the 
lover. This is utterly wrong. Aufidius is a character-part which must be as- 
signed with great carefulness. There is, moreover, no motive to represent Aufidius 
as actually younger than Coriolanus; such, on the contrary, places in the way of 
the representation of the réle extraordinary difficulties. Generally speaking, all 
the réles in Cortolanus are so clearly drawn that the actor can hardly go wrong 
in the proper conception of each one; but that of Aufidius is not so clear. His 
treacherous nature is first made manifest at the end of the tragedy; his reception 
of Coriolanus bears the marks of genuine pleasure and heartiness. The fault of 
such a misconception of the actor or the public can only be ascribed to the omission, 
by the majority of adapters, of the last scene of Act I, which Shakespeare, as I 
firmly believe, has added solely for the characteristic speech of Aufidius. So little 
doubtful is it that this was the design of the poet is shown by his not finding in 
Plutarch at this point of the action any indication of Aufidius’s treacherous thrusts 
at Coriolanus. Here is set forth the innermost designs of Aufidius, to which he 
remains unbrokenly true to the very end, that is, by every means, honourable or 
dishonourable, to destroy Coriolanus; at the altar, even under the protection of 
the host’s hearth, he would murder him. Were this outburst of treacherous, 


DRAMATIS PERSONZ 13 


{10. Tullus Aufidius] 


ignoble rage but directed against his great vanquisher, then the scene in the house 
of Aufidius could most assuredly be shown as a real heartfelt welcome, especially 
as there is not sufficient means given to the actor to make clear to the audience 
the complete hypocrisy and artificiality of this reception by means of tone of 
voice and exaggerated evidences of amity. So, and not otherwise, is this reception 
of Coriolanus to be understood and represented. In Aufidius is personified by the 
poet the craft and treachery which, for the most part, characterise the conduct of 
war and politics of the Volscians. He is false through and through. He accepts 
Coriolanus as a friend not altogether from good nature—one with whom he later 
by chance falls out—but with the preconceived traitorous design to make use of 
him in his own interest against Rome and then insidiously, as he had sworn, to 
cast him aside. His whole behaviour towards Coriolanus is a subtle dissimulation, 
until in the final scene he throws aside the mask and the hero falls under the daggers 
of those incited by Aufidius. Only the final words of Aufidius addressed to the 
corpse of Coriolanus should be conceived as the expression of remorse, the moral 
reaction, and accordingly so uttered. In the fourth and fifth Acts Aufidius must 
make effective use of by-play in order that his falseness to Coriolanus may con- 
stantly be kept in evidence; in the last Act the captain attending him may be used 
effectively to this end—PacrE (Introd., p. 23): Tullus Aufidius is a rash, hasty, 
impetuous man, completely under the guidance of impulse. This view of his 
character accounts for more of his actions and his speeches. He is a brave and 
able general, but his ardent desire to vie with Coriolanus makes him think more 
of a personal combat with his rival than of the prudent management of the war 
as a whole. His language is usually violent and hyperbolical. His hatred for 
Coriolanus is expressed in unmeasured terms. When worsted by him as a general 
he uses the most frightful imprecations against him, vowing vengeance in highly 
inflated sentences. . . . Aufidius is as impulsive in his friendship as in his hate. 
When Coriolanus comes to him at Antium after his banishment from Rome, Aufidius 
receives his great rival with open arms and ‘a thousand welcomes,’ and declares 
him more a friend than ever an enemy. Nor have we any reason to consider 
these protestations as insincere; Aufidius’ friendship is thoroughly genuine, but short 
lived.—Moncu (Jahrbuch, xlii, p. 146): Both Coriolanus and Aufidius appear alike 
in the passionate incitement of their natures, boiling over in the effort to predom- 
inate or to be of great account, impatient of every opposition to self-advancement. 
With each the devotion to the welfare of his country is alloyed with a large amount 
of egotism. But the Roman will rise through external opposition; the Volscian, 
through internal prejudice. The former desires before all else his own way; the 
latter, his own individual honour. Their dispositions are, indeed, as far asunder as 
pretentious pride and sensitive ambition. Or if not as far as obstinacy and 
irresolution (which would be saying too much), yet as obstinate steadfastness and 
lax unsteadfastness. Coriolanus likewise does not escape powerful crises and 
overthrows, yet he remains true to his own nature; he is twice unfaithful to the 
cause which he serves, and both times allows himself to be deeply moved by the 
accusation of ‘Traitor’; Aufidius becomes a traitor to his comrade gradually 
through smallness of mind. The former succumbs to his own supermanhood, 
the latter—if only morally—to his own quest for greatness. The contrast is 
certainly plain enough, if it be not so elementary as directness and craft, as the 
honorable man and the rogue, as the hero and the poltroon. The poet has delicate 


14 DRAMATIS PERSONA 


Lieutenant to Aufidius. wee 
Conspirators with Aufidius. 

A Citizen of Antium. 

Two Volscian Guards. 

Volumnia, mother to Coriolanus. 15 
Virgilia, wife to Coriolanus. 


11. (Following Lieutenant to Aufidius canor; Adrian.) 
Sta. inserts Adrian.) 13. A Citizen...) First in Mal. 
12. Conspirators...| First in Theob. 14. Two...Guards] First in Mal. 


(Following this Words. inserts Ni- 


colours on his pallet—MacCattum (p. 502): The chief features of Aufidius’ _ 
character and the story of its development, the emulation that is dislodged by 
generosity, the generosity that is submerged in envy, were already supplied for 
Shakespeare’s use [by Plutarch]. But the darker lines are lacking in the earlier 
picture. There is neither the unscrupulous rancour in his initial relations with 
Marcius that Shakespeare attributes to them nor the hypocritical pretense at the 
close. Plutarch does not bring the contrast with Coriolanus to a head. And in 
connection with this it should be observed that Tullus appears late and intervenes 
only incidentally. Less than a sentence is spared to his earlier antagonism with 
Coriolanus, nor is he present in the march on Rome, or during the siege. And 
this is typical of Plutarch’s treatment of all the subordinate persons. They enter 
for a moment and are dismissed. But in Shakespeare they accompany the action 
throughout, and do this in such a way that they illustrate and influence the career 
of the hero, and have their own characters and careers illustrated and influenced 
by him. They are all, even young Marcius by description, introduced in the first 
four scenes, with an indication of their general peculiarities and functions, and 
with the single exception of Titus Lartius they continue to reappear almost to the 
end. 

15. Volumnia] See Appendix: Volumnia. 

16. Virgilia] Ruskin (Sesame and Lilies, II, § 56) declares that Shakespeare 
has no heroes, only heroines. There is scarcely a play that has not a perfect woman 
init. ‘Virgilia is perhaps loveliest of all.’ Again in Proserpina, II, i (5), he speaks 
of Virgilia as the ‘perfect type of wife and mother, but without definiteness of 
character, nor quite strength of intellect enough entirely to hold her husband’s 
heart. Else she had saved him: he would have left Rome in his wrath—but not 
her. Therefore it is his mother only that bends him: but she cannot save him.’ 
[See also note by Ruskin, II, i, 187..—Vrenorr (Jahrbuch, iv, p. 53): As a foil to 
the dominating womanly figure of Volumnia and likewise to Coriolanus, the poet 
has placed beside them Virgilia. The towering figure of the heroic mother-in-law 
and that of the stormy, unbending husband raise themselves in the presence of this 
womanly tender, silent, sensitive being so much the more strikingly. But tender 
as Virgilia seems, her character is yet rooted in firm soil, and holds her ground in 
what she judges fitting for herself, unmoved by the will of her dominant mother- 
in-law, just as she quietly but firmly opposes her Roman feminine will to the 
obstinacy of her husband in the great scene of the fifth Act—OrCHELHAUSER 
(Einfiihrungen, i, 297): Virgilia should be young and fair, pale and mild, thoroughly 


DRAMATIS PERSONE 15 


(16. Virgilia] 
maidenly in bearing, speech and behaviour, all of ‘those dove’s eyes That can 
make gods forsworn.’ But with all this her yielding nature must not seem unstable 
weakness. In the first Act she shows herself quite as determined to withstand the 
appeals of her mother-in-law and her friend, as she shows herself a Roman woman 
in the last Act. Virgilia’s by-play must be wrought out with highest skill and, 
especially in the scene of welcome, the farewell scene, and the great persuasion scene 
of the last act, this last demands a very skilful interplay with that of Coriolanus. 
—BRookeE (p. 244): Virgilia is as quiet as a forest lake. She will not leave the 
house while Coriolanus is away. The streets or shows of Rome shall not see her 
till he returns, and she is firm as a rock in this. A steadfast resolvedness attends 
on her quietness. Silence is her chief speech. All through the play she scarcely 
speaks. Yet she is alive before us. Only the greatest artist could, with a few 
touches here and there, placed exactly where they should be, and in fitness to 
their place, paint a whole character with such force and livingness that she remains 
forever clear, forever interesting. Shakespeare had done this for Cordelia; he 
does it again for Virgilia. When Volumnia praises the battle-rage of Coriolanus, 
and extols his blood and wounds, Virgilia cries: ‘His bloody brow! Oh, Jupiter, 
no blood! . . . Heaven bless my lord from fell Aufidius!’? And we know her heart 
from that moment. When Coriolanus meets her on his triumphant return from 
Corioli, he meets her with this word: ‘My gracious silence, hail!’ And we seem 
to see in the tender words, and in the admiration of ‘My gracious silence,’ the 
secret married life and love of Virgilia and her stormy husband. All through the 
long talk of Volumnia with the senators and Coriolanus about the consulship 
Virgilia does not say one word. The only time she breaks out into speech is 
against the Tribunes after the banishment of her husband, and her strong words 
then are sufficiently motived by the occasion. Twice only does she speak in that 
great scene when with his mother she comes to plead for Rome, and the secret 
depths and even fierceness of her Roman nature are shown in the force and tender- 
ness with which she urges her right as wife and mother on her husband. ‘Thou 
shalt tread,’ says Volumnia, ‘if thou march to Rome, upon thy mother’s womb.’ 
‘Virgilia. Ay, and mine, that brought you forth this boy.’ (The words of Volum- 
nia are Plutarch’s; Virgilia’s, Shakespeare’s.) Only long silence can concentrate 
so much into a few words! And we hear of her no more——MacCatwvo (p. 566): 
Virgilia takes comparatively little pleasure in the brilliance of Coriolanus’s career 
and is more concerned for his life than for his glory. When Volumnia recalls how 
she sent him forth as a lad to win honour, Virgilia’s heart pictures his possible 
death, and would that have been compensated? For she loves in the first place 
not the hero but the husband, and her love makes her timorous. She has none 
of her mother-in-law’s assurance that his prowess is without match and beyond 
comparison. When ‘wondrous things’ are told of him how characteristic are their 
respective comments: ‘Virgilia. The gods grant them true! Volumnia. True! 
pow, wow!’ How differently they feel about his contest with his rival: ‘ Virgilia. 
Heaven bless my lord from fell Aufidius! Volumnia. He’ll beat Aufidius’ head 
below his knee And tread upon his neck.’ So she shrinks from the thoughts of 
blood and wounds over which Volumnia gloats, and trembles at the dangers of 
the campaign. Devoured by suspense, she is in no mood to meet the ordinary 
social claims on her rank and sex, but shuts herself up within her four walls, and 
wears out the time over household tasks. Her seclusion and the attempts to 


16 DRAMATIS PERSONA 


[16. Virgilia] 

draw her from it must not be misunderstood. They have sometimes been taken 
as pictures of domestic narrow-mindedness, on the one hand, and callous frivolity 
on the other. But frivolity is unthinkable in Volumnia; we may be sure she 
would never advise or do anything unbefitting the Roman matron. And it is quite 
opposed to the impression Valeria produces; we may be sure she would never sug- 
gest it. In Plutarch’s story it is she who proposes and urges the deputation of 
women to Coriolanus, and though Shakespeare, to suit his own purpose, transfers 
by implication the credit of this to Volumnia, Plutarch’s statement was enough to 
prevent him from transforming the true authoress of the idea into the fashionable 
gadabout that some critics have alleged her to be. On the contrary, with him 
she calls forth the most purely poetical passage in the whole play, and she does 
so by the vestal dignity and severity of her character. Coriolanus greets her in 
the camp: 

“The noble sister of Publicola, 

The moon of Rome; chaste as the icicle 

That’s curdied by the frost from purest snow, 

And hangs on Dian’s temple: dear Valeria!’ 


The woman to whom this splendid compliment is paid by one who never speaks 
otherwise than he thinks is assuredly no more obnoxious than Volumnia herself 
to the charge of levity. They are both great high-hearted Roman ladies who do 
not let their private or public solicitudes interfere with their customary social 
routine, and Valeria visits her friend to cheer her in her anxiety, as she would 
have her, in turn, visit and comfort their common acquaintance. But Virgilia 
is cast in a gentler mould, though neither is she lacking in character, spirit, and 
magnanimity. Of course, she is not an aggressive woman, and she feels that 
the home is the place for her. She speaks seldom, and when she does her words 
are few. It is typical that she greets her husband when he returns a victor with 
no articulate welcome, but with her more eloquent tears. He addresses her in 
half humorous, half tender reproach, ‘My gracious silence, hail!’ A wonderful 
touch that comes from a wonderful insight. It may well be asked, as it has been 
asked, how Shakespeare knew that Virgilia’s heart was too full for words. But 
with all this, she shows abundant resolution, readiness, and patriotism. She is 
adamant to the commands of her imperious mother-in-law and the entreaties 
of her insistent friend when they urge her to break her self-imposed retirement. 
She too has her rebuke for the insolent Tribunes. Above all, she, too, plays her 
part in turning Coriolanus from his revenge. In that scene, after her wont, she 
does not say much, less than two lines in all, that serve to contain the simple 
greeting and the quick answer to her husband’s warning that he no longer sees 
things as he did: ‘The sorrow that delivers us thus changed Makes you think so.’ 
But who shall say that ‘those dove’s eyes Which can make gods forsworn’ did 
not shed their influence on his mother’s demand, and help him to break his vin- 
dictive vow. Remember, too, that the sacrifice this implied would mean more 
to her than to Volumnia, for though she likewise can dedicate what she holds 
dearest on the altar of her country, her affections, her home, Marcius as an indi- 
vidual, bulk more largely in her life. And if she loves him, we see how fondly 
he loves her. More than once or twice he alludes to his happiness as bridegroom, 
husband, and father. When she appears before him, his ejaculations and the 


DRAMATIS PERSONE 17 


[16. Virgilia] 
tenderness of his appeal, ‘Best of my flesh, forgive my tyranny,’ speak volumes, 
in a mouth like his, for the keenness of his affection. To express the bliss that 
he feels in the salute of re-union this hero-lover can find analogues only in his 
banishment and his vengeance: 
‘O! a kiss 

Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge! 

Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss 

I carried from thee, dear, and my true lip 

Hath virgin’d it e’er since.’ 


This woman then with her love and sweetness, that strike such responsive chords 
in the rude breast of her lord, is apparently well fitted to smooth the harshness of 
his dealings with his fellow-men; and this would seem all the more likely since 
her gentleness is not of that flabby kind that cannot hold or bind, but is strength- 
ened by firmness of will and largeness of feeling. All the same, she exerts no influ- 
ence whatever before the very end on her husband’s public life or even on his gen- 
eral character, because she has no interest in or aptitude for concerns of his busy 
practical career. She has chosen her own orbit in her home, and her love has no 
desire to step beyond.—A. C. BRapLEy (Coriolanus, p. 18): Ruskin, whose terms 
of praise and blame were never overcautious, wrote of Virgilia as ‘perhaps the love- 
liest of Shakespeare’s characters.’ Others have described her as a shrinking sub- 
missive being, afraid of the very name of a wound, and much given to tears. This 
description is true; and, I may remark in passing, it is pleasant to remember that 
the hero’s letter to his mother contained a full account of his wounds, while his 
letter to his wife did not mention them at all. But the description of these critics 
can hardly be the whole truth about a woman who inflexibly rejects the repeated 
invitations of her formidable mother-in-law and her charming friend to leave her 
house; who later does what she can to rival Volumnia in rating the Tribunes; and 
who at last quietly seconds her assurance that Coriolanus shall only enter Rome 
over her body. Still these added traits do not account for the indefinable 
impression which Ruskin received (if he did not rightly interpret it) and which 
thousands of readers share. It comes in part from that kind of muteness in which 
Virgilia resembles Cordelia, and which is made to suggest a world of feeling in 
reserve. And in part it comes from the words of her husband. His greeting when 
he returns from the war and she stands speechless before him, and his exclamation 
when he sees her approaching at their last meeting and speaks first of her and not 
of Volumnia.—J. M. Murry (London Mercury, Feb., 1922, p. 388): Of all 
the characters in Coriolanus one alone can be said to be truly congenial; and 
she is the least substantial of them all. Virgilia, Coriolanus’s wife, though she 
is present throughout the whole of four scenes, speaks about a hundred words. 
But a sudden, direct light is cast upon her by a phrase which takes our breath 
with beauty when Coriolanus welcomes her on his triumphant return as ‘My 
gracious silence!’ Magical words! They give a miraculous substance to our 
fleeting, fading glimpses of a lovely vision which seems to tremble away from the 
clash of arms and pride that reverberates through the play. Behind the dis- 
dainful warrior and his Amazonian mother, behind the vehement speech of this 
double Lucifer, the exquisite, timid spirit of Virgilia shrinks out of sight into the 
haven of her quiet home. One can almost hear the faint click of the door behind 
2 


18 DRAMATIS PERSON 


Valeria, friend to Virgilia. 


17 


Gentlewoman attending on Virgilia. 

Roman and Volscian Senators, Patricians, Aidtles, 
Lictors, Soldiers, Citizens, Messengers, Servants to 20 
Aufidius, and other Attendants. 


ScENE: Rome and the neighborhood; Corioli and the 


neighborhood; Antium. 


18. Gentlewoman...] First in Cap. 
on Virgilia.| on Volumnia. 
Beeching. 

19-21. Roman...Attendants] Roman 
Ladies, Patricians, Atdiles, Lictors, 
&c. Senators and Citizens, Officers, 
Soldiers, &c., Roman and Volscian. 
Cap. 

20. Citizens, Messengers] Common 


23 


People, Rowe,+. 

22, 23. SCENE...Antium.] The Scene 
is partly in Rome and partly in the Ter- 
ritory of the Volscians. Rowe, Pope. 
Scene dispers’d: in Rome, Antium, 
and Corioli; and in the Roman and 
Volscian Territories. Cap. The Scene 
...the Volscians, and Antiates. Theob. 
et cet. 


her as it shuts her from the noise of brawling tongues. Yet in her presence, and 
in the memory of her presence, Coriolanus becomes another and a different being. 
It is true we may listen in vain for other words so tender as ‘My gracious silence!’ 
from his lips. A man who has one love alone finds only one such phrase in a life- 
time. But in the heat of victorious battle, when Coriolanus would clasp Com- 
inius in his arms for joy, he discovers in himself another splendid phrase to remem- 
ber his happiness with Virgilia: 


‘Oh! let me clip ye 

In arms as sound as when I woo’d, in heart 
As merry, as when our nuptial day was done 
And tapers burned to bedward.’ 


And even in the anguish of the final struggle between his honour and his heart, 
when his wife comes with his mother to intercede for Rome, it is in the very accents 
of passionate devotion that he cries to Virgilia: 


“Best of my flesh! 
Forgive my tyranny; but do not say 
For that, ‘Forgive our Romans,” O! a kiss 
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge! 
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss 
I carried from thee, dear, and my true lip 
Hath virgin’d it e’er since.’ 


In the proud, unrelenting man of arms these sudden softenings are wonderful. 
They conjure up the picture of a more reticent and self-suppressed Othello, and 
we feel that to strike to the heart through Coriolanus’s coat of mail it needed an 
unfamiliar beauty of soul, a woman whose delicate nature stood untouched apart 
from the broils and furies of her lord’s incessant battling with the Roman people 
or the enemies of Rome. 


The Tragedy of Coriolanus. 


eA&tus Primus. Scena ‘Prima. 


Enter a Company of Mutinous Citizens, jwith Staues, 2 
Clubs, and other weapons. 


1. Citizen. 5 


All. Speake, {peake. 
1.Cit. You are all refolu’d rather to dy then 


to famifh ? 9 

2. Actus Primus. Sccena Prima] 6. further] farther Theob. ii, Warb. 
Act I. Scene 1, Rowe. Cap. Coll. Wh. i. 

A Street in Rome. Pope,+, Var. 7. All...] Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. Var. ’78, 

78, ’85. Rome. A Street. Cap. et 85.  Cit....[several speaking at once. 

cet. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Ktly, Hal. 


Citizens... Dyce et cet. 


1. The Tragedy of Coriolanus] Pope: The whole history is exactly followed, 
and many of the principal speeches exactly copied from the life of Coriolanus in 
Plutarch.—MatoneE: This play I conjecture to have been written in the year 1610. 
[See Appendix: Date.| It comprehends a period of about four years, commencing 
with the secession to the Mons Sacer in the year of Rome 262 [492 B. C.], and 
ending with the death of Coriolanus A. U. C. 266 [B. C. 488].—CoLERDGE (iv, 100): 
This play illustrates the wonderful impartiality of Shakespeare’s politics. His own 
country’s history furnished him with no matter but what was too recent to be 
devoted to patriotism. Besides, he knew that the instruction of ancient history 
would seem more dispassionate. In Coriolanus and Jul. Ces. you see Shake- 
speare’s good-natured laugh at mobs. Compare this with Sir Thomas Brown’s 
aristocracy of Spirit. 

2. Actus Primus. Sccena Prima.] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): During 
this act use of the entire stage space available is indicated. During Scena Prima, 
including what Rowe first called ‘scene ii,’ the action passed to and fro upon the 
ample fore-stage, which in the Globe Theatre jutted far out into the pit and gave 
room for the stalking about of the Mutinous Citizens, and later served, during 
what was first marked by Rowe as scene iv, and scenes vi, vii, ix, and x, so first 
marked by Capell, for the frays of Romans and Volscians, simulating warfare. 

2. Scoena Prima] Mrs GriFFiTHs (p. 431): The nature and reasoning of all 
mutinous caballers are fully shown in this short scene. The common people are 
apt to impute all national grievances or calamities to the fault of their rulers, 
tho’ ever so unavoidable from the nature of things, failure of seasons, or other 


19 


20 THE TRAGEDIE OF (AcTre1, Scu1 


[2. Scoena Prima] 


incidental misfortunes whatsoever. If freedom of speech and the liberty of the 
press were not restrained in Turkey, I make no doubt but a Mussulman populace 
would charge the plague to the account of their Sultans or their Viziers. In the 
same scene that abatement of esteem and praise, which is the natural consequence 
of persons appearing to over-rate their own merits, more especially when this is 
betrayed by showing pride or contempt to others, is very justly remarked on.— 
CourTENAY (ii, 212), who cares in general but little for dramatic effect as com- 
pared with historic accuracy, here remarks that the secession of the Plebeians to 
the Mons Sacer was in protest at the actions of the Patricians and that ‘the open- 
ing of the play (though placed in a street in Rome) is evidently meant to represent 
this occurrence. But Shakespeare has not followed Plutarch as to the cause of 
this separation, or mutiny, as he represents it. The dearth of corn of which the 
citizens complain did not occur at this time; the present cause of complaint arose. 
of the severe laws of debtor and creditor, which while all the wealth was in the 
hands of the patricians, enabled them to oppress with cruel severity those plebeians 
who had been compelled to become their debtors, and who were consequently 
liable to be claimed as their slaves. And it was on this occasion that Menenius 
Agrippa related the celebrated fable of the Belly and the Members, and also that 
Tribunes of the people were first appointed. The complaint was not of power 
usurped, or arbitrarily used by an aristocracy privileged by birth so much as of 
“the rich men who had driven them out of the city . . . and that they were hurt 
with continual wars and fighting in defence of the rich man’s goods.”’ It was the 
moneyed aristocracy by which they were oppressed. And though the old man, 
in the moral of his fable, likens the nourishment afforded by the belly to the whole- 
some counsels of the Senate, yet the fable itself rather describes the possessors of 
wealth, who were said “‘to send it out again for the nourishment of other parts.’’’— 
Worpsworts (Hist. Plays, i, 115): Courtenay’s objection [to the locality of this 
scene] is obviated when we consider that Shakespeare has plainly intended to com- 
bine the two causes of insurrection. See the First Citizen’s speech in this scene 
(ll. 81-87). In point of fact, according to Livy, when the second insurrection 
took place (through want of corn) Menenius was dead.—VeERitTy (Student’s Sh.): 
This first scene is a singularly comprehensive introduction. It shows us the political 
conditions at Rome, focuses interest straightway (l. 11) on the protagonist of the 
tragedy, and illuminates his character and motives in a few phrases which prac- 
tically epitomise what ensues. ‘Chief enemy to the people’; ‘he pays himself with 
being proud’; ‘he did it to please his mother, and to be partly proud,’ these are 
key-notes, ‘leading motives,’ introduced in the overture and repeated at intervals 
through the piece. And when Coriolanus himself appears we have an immediate 
example of his pride and enmity to the people, and a foreshadowing of that military 
prowess which accentuates the pitiful tragedy of his end.—E. K. Cuampers: The 
object of the first Act is the glorification of Coriolanus. This is a tragedy; that is, 
essentially, the story of the failure and ruin of a soul which is at least greatly 
planned. In order then that we may be affected tragically the element of greatness 
in Coriolanus must first be established. Coriolanus is, in his way, an idealist; he 
idealizes himself as a man of honour. And in the war with Corioles, which occupies 
scenes iv. to x. of the Act, our attention is directed to those qualities in him which 
justify that ideal, his valour and magnanimity on the field of battle. He is the 
‘flower of warriors.’ His defects are lightly touched, not yet emphasized. 


ACT I, SC. i] CORIOLANUS 21 


3. a Company of Mutinous Citizens] Horn (iv, 28): Let us ask at once how 
it happens that the critics up to now have too frequently taken sides with Corio- 
lanus; it seems to me that the cause for this lies in the very opponent which the 
poet has placed against him. There has never been presented a more pitiably 
wavering and antagonistically clamourous crowd than that which makes up this 
mob. It is a turbulent rabble, too lacking in morals for regular domestic tasks, 
as the cultivation of the fields, it has nothing to lose, and can only gain by revolt 
and discord. In Jul. Ces. at the beginning of the play we might indulge in a 
comfortable laugh at the vacillating, stupid-crafty, crafty-stupid philanderers, 
who, swayed by every wind, thought to find the aim of their life even in that 
philandering; but in Coriolanus the smile comes at first later, and it is not easily 
freed from sharper resentment. This mob is yet base, and however simple and 
weak it may otherwise seem, is bent fast and firmly upon thoughts of revolt, where- 
fore under clever leadership it may be dangerous enough. For it, likewise, coward- 
ice has taken the place of abundance, and thus the staff shall be broken across its 
back. Imagine to ourselves this rabble set opposite to a Coriolanus, and we may 
easily understand that, in such a connection, more than unusual humanness 
(z. ¢., here restraint of rage) would be encountered. He dare not disregard and 
ignore them as unmeaning, since under the leadership of Tribunes they can wreak 
harm enough. And so with all diffidence we must repeat that his behaviour, in 
despising the rabble, is but characteristic. He regards it as utterly corrupt, and 
therefore contributes much to make it actually so.—CouRTENAY (ii, 226) is at 
some pains to show that the populace, as presented by Shakespeare, should not 
be denominated ‘citizens,’ since this term was restricted to the Patricians. He 
quotes various authorities on Roman history in support of the point. ‘Such fine 
distinctions,’ remarks Miss Porter, ‘are interesting as showing the status of 
Shakespeare’s Citizens, but do not really amount to just criticism of a term which 
need not be used in its narrower political sense, but merely as dwellers in the 
city..—RaLEIGcH (p. 192): It has often been said that Shakespeare dislikes and 
distrusts crowds. Certainly the common people in Henry VI. and Jul. Ces. and 
Coriolanus are made ludicrous and foolish. But, after all, a love for crowds and 
a reverence for mob-orators are not so often found among dispassionate thinkers 
as to make Shakespeare’s case strange; and it is always to be remembered that 
he was a dramatist. His point of view was given him by the little group of his 
principal characters, and there was no room for the people save as a fluctuating 
background or a passing street-show. We do not see Cade at home. Where the 
feelings of universal humanity fail to be expressed, caste and station are of no 
account; Macduff, a noble, bereaved of his children, speaks for all mankind. Never- 
theless, the impression persists that here, and here alone, Shakespeare exhibits 
some partiality. It was natural enough that his political opinions should take 
their colour from his courtly companions, whose business was politics; nor was 
his own profession likely to alter his sympathies. Who should know the weak- 
nesses and vanities of the people better than a theatrical manager? ‘There is no 
great political significance in the question; the politics of the plays were never 
challenged till America began to read human history by the light of her own self- 
consciousness. [I must reluctantly admit that I do not understand the sig- 
nificance of this concluding sentence. My respect and admiration for the brilliant 
commentator is, however, so great that I have transcribed his words, leaving to 
others the task of correct interpretation.—Ep.] 


22 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 1, SC. i. 
All. Refolu’d, refolu’d. if) 
1.Cit. Firft you know, Caius Martius is chiefe enemy 

to the people. 

All. We know’t, we know’t. 
1. (it.Let vs kill him,and wee’! haue Corne at our own 

price. Is’t a Verdict ? 15 
eAll.No more talking on’t; Let it be done, away, away 
2.Cit. One word, good Citizens. 
1.Cit. We are accounted poore Citizens, the Patri- 

cians good : what Authority furfets one, would releeue 19 


11. Firft you know,] F.F;. First, you 
know Cornwall, Dyce, Sta. Wh. i, 
Cam.+, Whitelaw, Rlfe, Page, Beech- 
ing, Cholm. Herford, Gordon, Dtn, 
Craig, T. Brooke. First, you know, F, 
et cet. 

Martius] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 


(throughout). 

11. chiefe] the chief Pope,+. ; 

13. We know’t, we know’t] We know’t 
Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

16. Let it] let’t Rowe ii, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. 

19. one] on F3F, et seq. 


(throughout). Marcius Theob. et cet. 


5, 6. 1. Citizen. Before .. . speake] Dreti1us (Jahrbuch, v, 268): The Plebe- 
ians, in their turbulence and among themselves, can only give vent to their lust 
for revolt in a form of prose, which in the mouth of the first Citizen, as spokesman 
of the crowd, has a somewhat euphuistic tinge. Menenius, who as chief humorist 
of the drama in another scene speaks in prose, must here, as intercessor, guard 
his cultured authority when confronting the great rabble and speak in blank verse, 
in which also the spokesman citizen replies in his dispute with Menenius. 

11. Caius Martius] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): The name is so given in 
North’s Plutarch (1579). The deplorable habit of ‘emending’ and modernizing is 
evident in Rowe’s change to Marcius, ever since followed, obscuring Shakespeare’s 
source for this and other forms of spelling. [Reference to the Text. Notes will 
show that Theobald, and not Rowe, is responsible for the change in spelling. 
Theobald’s classical knowledge evidently did not permit the use of the Latin 
adjective Martius (of, or belonging to, Mars) when the name of the Latin gens 
Marcius was required. In a letter to Warburton, dated Feb. 12, 1729-30, he 
says: ‘The succeeding editions will do well, I think, to write Marctus, for the 
family name was Mdpkvos, and not Martius, a Marte’ (Nichols, ii, 478). It is true 
that the name is uniformly spelt Martius by North, and so also by Holland in his 
translation of Livy. Possibly this was due to Italian influence on the English 
spelling of Latin names at that period.—Ep.] 

15. a Verdict] Crarcie (NV. E. D., s. v. 3.): A decision or opinion pronounced 
or expressed upon some matter or subject; a finding, conclusion, or judgment.— 
BEECHING (Henry Irving Sh.): Perhaps a sly hit at trial by jury. 

18, 19. the Patricians good] Farmrr: ‘Good’ is here used in the mercantile 
sense. So, Touchstone in Eastward Hoe: ‘—known good men, well monied.’ 
[MALONE adds, as another example of this use of the word: ‘Antonio’s a good 
man.’—Mer. of Ven., I, iii, 12. According to Scummr (Lex.) the present passage, 
and that quoted by Malone, are the only examples of ‘good’ used in this restricted 
sense.—Eb.] 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 23 


vs. If they would yeelde vs but the fuperfluitie while it 20 
were wholfome, wee might gueffe they releeued vs hu- 
manely : But they thinke we are too deere, the leanneffe 
that afflicts vs, the obiect of our mifery, is as an inuento- 23 


21, 22. humanely] humanly F,, Rowe. 23. obiect] abjectness Coll. iii. (MS.) 


19. one] The Text. Notes show how universal is the agreement that the change 
by the editor of F; of ‘one’ to on was necessary.—W. A. WRIGHT says: ‘On the 
other hand, in III, i, 172, “Where one” is printed in the Folios ‘““Whereon.” That 
on and “one” were pronounced very much alike appears from such printers’ errors. 
as well as from Love’s Labour’s Lost, IV, ii, 85, 86: “Master Parson, quasi pers one 
An if one should be pierced, which is the one?” "—Miss C. Porter, a staunch advo- 
cate for retention of all F, readings, maintains that ‘the text may be explained as 
meaning, what the authority of law surfeits the one side with would relieve us. He 
carries on the argument to this effect. If they would yeelde us but the superfluitie 
of grain before it spoiled they might be supposed not to intend to wrong us; since 
they do not, it must be concluded that they intend to gain by wronging us. It 
is all arranged by law to surfeit the one side with what they take by means of 
law or authority.’ Miss Porter also calls attention to the merging of the two up- 
risings, as in Plutarch, into a single one by Shakespeare. See notes by COURTENAY 
and WorpswortTH, |. 2 ante.—Ep. 

20. yeelde vs but] W. A. Wricut: ‘But’ qualifies not ‘the superfluity,’ but the 
verb ‘yield.’ If they would only yield us the superfluity while it were wholesome, 
and not when it is good for nothing. 

20, 21. while it were] For this construction see ABBorT (§§ 302, 367). 

21. guesse] CASE (Arden Sh.): That is, think. Schmidt gives two other instances 
of ‘guess’-in this sense from r Henry VI: II, i, 29, and Henry VIII: Il, i, 47. 
The WN. E. D. gives several early English (no Elizabethan) examples; it quotes a 
1400 Prymer (Early Eng. Text Soc.), 64: ‘Gessist thou not (Vulg. putasne) that a 
deed man shall live agen?’ 

22. they thinke we are too deere] JoHNSON: That is, they think that the 
charge of maintaining us is more than we are worth. 

23. the obiect of our misery] CoLtiER (Notes and Emend., etc., ed. i, p. 346): 
The earliest manuscript emendation [in Coriolanus] cannot be called a necessary 
one; but still it seems, taking the context into account, a considerable improve- 
ment, and may, perhaps, be admitted on the evidence of the MS. Corrector. It 
occurs in the speech of 1. Cit.: ‘—the abjectness of our misery.’ For abjectness 
the common reading has been ‘object’; that is to say, the sight of our misery; 
but the speaker has talked of the ‘leanness’ of the poor citizens of Rome, and he 
follows it up by the mention of the abjeciness of their misery. This substitution 
could hardly have proceeded from the mere taste or discretion of the old cor- 
rector, but still it is hardly wanted. [Collier nevertheless adopts it in his ed. 
iii Ep.]—Anon. (New Readings, etc., Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p- 319): 
In his first emendation the MS. Corrector betrays his ignorance of the right meaning 
of words. The term ‘object,’ which nowadays is employed rather loosely in several 
acceptations, is used by Shakespeare in this passage in its proper and original 
signification. For ‘object’ we should, nowadays, say spectacle. But the Corrector 
cannot have known that this was the meaning of the word, otherwise he surely 


24 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


ry to particularize their abundance, our fufferance is a 
gaine to them. Let vs reuenge this with our Pikes, ere 25 
we become Rakes. For the Gods know, I fpeake this in 


hunger for Bread, not in thirft for Reuenge. 27 
24, 25. @ gaine] againe F;. 26. Rakes] Raks F,. Racks F3F,. 
25. Pikes] pitchforks Han. wrecks Wray conj. (ap. Cam. ii.). 


never would have been so misguided as to propose the term abjectness in its place. 
‘This substitution,’ says Mr Collier, ‘could hardly have proceeded from the mere 
taste or discretion of the old corrector.’ No, truly; but it proceeded from his 
want of taste, his want of discretion, and his want of knowledge.—SINGER (Sh. 
Vindicated, p. 207): ‘Hardly wanted,’ indeed! How could ‘object’ be mistaken for 
abjectness? Their misery was the object which served by comparison to make the 
Patricians the more satisfied with their own abundance, and thus the sufferings - 
of the Plebs were a gain to them. What should we gain by the adoption of this 
needless piece of pragmatic interference? The correctors never think of the poet, 
but of their own ingenuity in finding faults where none exist—WoRDSWORTH 
(Historical Plays, p. 115) omits the words ‘the object of our misery’ on the ground 
that he ‘suspects the reading.—Lro (Sh. Notes, p. 18) says: ‘If we mentally 
supply which is before “the object” no misunderstanding is possible.’ [A remark 
which clearly indicates that Leo quite misunderstood the passage and its bearing 
on what precedes and follows it—Ep.]—BrEEcuinc (Henry Irving Sh.): ‘Object’ 
in the sense object of sight is quite ordinary modern English. We speak of “object- 
lessons,’ ‘of writing with the eye upon the object,’ &c. The peculiarity here is its 
use in this sense with preposition ‘of.’ The only other instance of this in Shake- 
speare is Tro. & Cress., II, ii, 41: ‘And reason flies the object of all harm.’ 

23, 24. an inuentory to particularize] W. A. WricuHT: That is, to point out in 
detail, and more emphatically. The less we have, the more they have.—DEIGHTON: 
Our suffering serves, by way of contrast, to make them mindful of their own well- 
fed condition; each particular of our want corresponding to some particular of 
their abundance. 

25, 26. Pikes . . . Rakes] WARBURTON: It was Shakespeare’s design to make 
this fellow quibble all the way. But time, who has done greater things, has here 
stifled a miserable joke, which was then the same as if it had been now wrote, 
‘Let us now revenge this with forks, ere we become rakes,’ for pikes then signified 
the same as forks do now. So Jewel, in his translation of his Apology, turns 
‘Christianos ad furcas condemnare’ to ‘To condemn Christians to the pikes.’— 
Jounson: It is plain that, in our author’s time, we had the proverb, ‘as lean as 
a rake.’ Of this proverb the origin is obscure. Rekel, in Islandick, is said to 
mean a cur-dog, and this was probably the first use among us of the word rake; 
‘as lean as a rake’ is, therefore, as lean as a dog too worthless to be fed. [Johnson 
hazards the conjecture that ‘rake,’ as used in the proverb, may be in the sense of 
‘a dissolute man, a man worn out with disease and debauchery.’ His own ob- 
jection, that this sense is later than the proverb, is shown to be well founded, as 
the earliest use of ‘rake,’ a dissolute man, is given by the N. E. D. as 1653.— 
SxEAT (Dict., s. v. (2)) gives its derivation as from M. E. rakel-rash. According 
to Skeat the Icelandic reikall means simply wandering, unsettled, and has not the 
restricted meaning given by Johnson.—Ep.]—STEEVENsS, in reference to Johnson’s 


ACT I, Sc. i.] CORIOLANUS 25 


2.Cit. Would you proceede efpecially againft Caius 28 
Martius. 

All. Againft him firft : He’s a very dog to the Com- 30 
monalty. 

2.Cit. Confider you what Seruices he ha’s done for his 
Country? 

1.Cit. Very well, and could bee content to giue him 
good report for’t, but that hee payes himfelfe with bee- 35 
ing proud. 

All. Nay, but fpeak not malicioufly. 

1.Cit. I fay vnto you, what he hath done Famoulflie, 
he did it to that end : though foft confcienc’d men can be 
content to fay it was for his Countrey, he did it to pleafe 40 
his Mother, and to be partly proud, which he is, euen to 


the altitude of his vertue. 42 
29. Martius.] Martius? F;F,. 40, 41. to pleafe...partly proud] to 
37. All] 2 Cit. Malone et seq. please...partly to be Han. Bell, Words. 


39. Joft confcienc’d] Ff, Rowe, Var. Huds. ii. partly to please...to be proud 
03, ’13, ’21, Sing. soft-conscienc’d Cap. Coll. MS. to please his mother 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Varr. partly and partly to be proud Ran. to 
Mal. Steev. Sta. soft-conscienced Knt please...portly proud Sta. conj. to 
et cet. please...pertly proud Lettsom (ap. 

Dyce ii.). 


application of the proverb to the condition of a cur dog, says: ‘It may be so: and 
yet I believe the proverb owes its origin simply to the thin taper form of the instru- 
ment made use of by hay-makers.’ In support of this he quotes: ‘As lene was 
his hors as is a rake.’-—Chaucer, Canterbury Tales, Prologue, ed. Tyrwhitt, v. 281; 
and also: ‘His body Jean and meagre as a rake.’—Spenser, Faerie Queene, Bk II, 
cant. xi, verse xxii, 1. 2—Dr1cHTon: In ‘rakes’ the comparison is to the bones 
of an animal showing below the skin as distinctly as the teeth of a rake; a com- 
parison made clear by a passage from A Pleasant Dispute between a Coach and a 
Sedan, 1636, quoted by Malone on Lear, III, vi, 78: ‘. . . The dogges are as leane 
as rakes; you may tell all their ribbes lying by the fire.’ [Deighton here, I think, 
but furnishes another example of the phrase. The appearance of the ribs as a 
mark of extreme emaciation need not necessarily be compared to that of the teeth 
of a rake. Launcelot says: ‘I am famished in his service; you may tell every 
finger I have on my ribs.’—WMer. of Ven., II, ii, 114.—En.] 

30. All] Matone: This speech, I believe, ought to be assigned to the First 
Citizen. Dyce (ed. i.): The context seems to favour this alteration. [Dyce in 
his ed. ii. records Malone’s conjecture, but omits his agreement thereto.—ED.] 

30. a very dog] Gorpon: He means pitiless, heartless. Compare: ‘He is a 
stone, a very pebble stone, and has no more pity in him than a dog.’—Two Gentle- 
men, II, iii, 10-12. It is singular how few good words Shakespeare has for the dog. 

38. what] For other examples of ‘what’ =that which, see ABBort (§ 252). 

40, 41. he did it to please his Mother] Miss Lataam (Sh. Soc. Trans., 1887- 


26 THE TRAGEDIE OF faction, sch 


2.Cit. What he cannot helpe in his Nature, you ac- 43 
count a Vice in him : You muft in no way fay he is co- » 
uetous. 45 

1.Cit. JIfI muft not, I neede not be barren of Accufa- 
tions he hath faults (with furplus) to tyre in repetition. 

Showts within. 48 


44. way] ways Han. Warb. 48. within.] without. Sta. 


92, p. 69): This, the first mention of Volumnia, immediately follows that of Corio- 
lanus, as though to link the two characters indissolubly together, and when we 
examine the great tragedy we find them so closely connected that any study 
of the one must needs include the other. Volumnia’s daily thoughts, her joys and — 
sorrows, the whole work of her life are so centred in her only son that she can 
hardly be said to have any existence independent of him, while if he has a sepa- 
rate life of his own, most of his faults, and many of his gifts, are either inherited 
from her, or have been developed under her training, so that his character may 
truly be said to be rooted in hers. 

41. to be partly proud] Capett (I, pt i, p. 80) maintains that the reading of 
F, and of Hanmer (see Text. Notes) are both ‘faulty’; ‘for,’ he continues, ‘waving 
other objections that might be made to them, neither of them agrees with the 
context. The speaker sets out with ascribing all Marcius’ actions to pride; he 
is check’d for it by his mates, but adheres to his text in his answer, with this slight 
difference—that perhaps indeed the pleasing his mother might be some motive 
to Marcius, but his pride was his chief; and then proceeds to set forth the degree 
of his pride—that it was a full balance to all his virtues, however great they 
might be. And this being the Author’s intention in the speeches refer’d to, it 
follows that “partly” must have stood in the place it now occupies [that is, 
preceding “to please’”’] and was mov’d out of it by mistake of the printer’s.’— 
STAUNTON: This may mean, partly to please his mother, and because he was 
proud; but we believe the genuine text would give us ‘and to be portly proud.’ 
{Leo, in his edition published four years after Staunton’s, also makes this same 
conjecture, quoting in corroboration of this use of portly: ‘Rudely thou wrongest 
my deare heart’s desire, In finding fault with her too portly pride.’ Spenser, 
Amoretti, verse v.—Ep.]|—Dycer (ed. ii.): Lettsom conjectures perily; that is, 
openly, clearly.—C. & M. CowpEN Ciarke: We think the sentence is one of those 
clumsily expressed sentences which Shakespeare purposely and characteristically 
places in the mouths of his common speakers: the phrase here meaning, ‘he did 
it chiefly to please his mother and partly for his own pride’s sake.’ The man has 
just before said of Coriolanus, ‘he pays himself with being proud.’-—Assorrt (§ 420) 
gives other examples of a like transposition of the adverb. 

41, 42. to the altitude of his vertue] STEEVENS quotes as a similar metaphor, 
‘He’s traitor to the height.—Henry VIII: I, ii, 214, but this is not, I think, 
quite parallel.—Casr (Arden Sh.) more correctly explains that ‘the speaker, of 
course, means to say, “brave man as he is, he is quite as proud as he 
is brave.”’—Eb. 

44. a Vice] WarsBuRTON: ‘Vice’ is here used inaccurately for crime. For a 
vice, that is, a defect in his nature, it was, by the confession of the speaker. 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 27 


What fhowts are thefe? The other fide a’th City is rifen: 


why ftay we prating heere? To th’Capitoll. 50 
All. Come, come. 
1 Cit. Soft, who comes heere? 52 
49. thefe] thofe Ff, Rowe,+, Bell. Sing. Hal. Soft! Knt, Coll. Dyce, Sta. 
ath\’ath F;. 0’ th’ Fy, Rowe,+. Ktly, Wh. Cam.+, Huds. 
othe Var. ’73 et seq. 52. SCENE 0. Pope, Han. Warb. 


52. Soft,] Soft— Rowe,+. Soft; Cap. Johns. 
Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 


49. other side a’th City] W. A. Wricut: The people had at this time retired 
to the Mons Sacer, which was about three miles from the city along the Via 
Nomentana. The other side of the city would, therefore, be the part beyond the 
Tiber. But in all probability Shakespeare had in his mind the topography of 
London and not of Rome, and the Tower was to him the Capitol. [Is it not pass- 
ing strange that apparently Wright has inadvertently failed to recall his own 
stage-direction at the beginning of this scene—‘ Rome: a Street’—and has changed 
its locality to the Mons Sacer?—Ep.] 

50. To th’Capitoll] BAyFreLp (p. 184): The versification of this play, which 
is not surpassed by any other in delicacy and variety, has suffered perhaps more 
than any as it passed through the hands of those responsible for its present con- 
dition. The misdivisions are extraordinarily numerous. [Bayfield then gives 
‘eight out of 100 examples of th’ before a consonant, practically all of which are 
unpronounceable without introducing the vowel which it is sought to elide. Before 
a vowel we get th’ 27 times, and before the aspirate, which must be dropped, 7 
times.’ On the subject of these elisions in his Introduction, p. vii, he says: ‘Mod- 
ern editors habitually alter th’ to the, th’ art to thowrt, and (naturally not daring 
to leave it) y’are to you’re, retaining the rest; but this is an arbitrary and partial 
method of procedure which does not solve the problem or even touch it, and is 
not justified by any sound principle of criticism. At the same time the retention 
of all the abbreviations except ¢h’ indicates an imperfect recognition of what was 
Shakespeare’s ideal of dramatic verse—the ideal at which he was aiming almost 
from the first, and to which in the end he absolutely attained in the incomparable 
versification of Ant. & Cleo. Yet attention has actually been drawn to “the irreg- 
ular verse of the later plays.” The result is that the most perfect of all dramatic 
verse has been systematically travestied; its native freedom is hampered as by 
fetters. As left by their author, the measures moved with the lightness and ease 
and rhythmic grace of a beautiful and elaborate dance, and they made music 
to the ear. Read as we must read them, they stump about as it were in clogs; 
their grace is gone and the music is “beastly dumb’d.” Consequently, the enjoy- 
ment of a play at home is marred by an irritation which grows in proportion to 
the beauty of the verse that is distorted, and in the theatre the actors are com- 
pelled to vex our ears and their own with halting measures that have no balance, 
and to deliver much of the finest of all drama in a jargon that is unworthy both 
of the author and themselves. This cobbled patch work is given to us for Shake- 
speare’s verse as he was satisfied to leave it, and while it is proclaimed with simple 
truth that he is the world’s greatest poet, it has been found necessary to beg us to 
make allowances—yes, to make allowances for the numerous imperfections of his 
versification!’ 


28 THE TRAGEDIE OF (ACT INSC i 


Enter Menenius Agrippa. 53 
2 Cit. Worthy Menenius Agrippa, one that hath al- 
wayes lou’d the people. 55 


1 Cit.He’s one honeft enough, wold al the reft wer fo. 
Men. What work’s my Countrimen in hand? 
Where go you with Bats and Clubs? The matter 
Speake I pray you. 
2 Cit. Our bufines is not vnknowne to th’Senat, they 60 


53. Enter...] After 1. 56 Dyce, Sta. 58. Bats] your Bats Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Coll. iii, Words. Huds. ii. Han. 
56. wold al...wer] F:. matter] matter, F3F,. matter— 
57-59. Prose in Pope, Han. Two Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
lines verse ending go you...pray you. matter? Johns. et seq. 
Theob et cet. 60. 2 Cit.] Ff, Rowe,+, Var. 78, ’8s5, 
57. work’s] workes F, works F3F,. Knt, Huds. i. (throughout). 1 Cit. 
Countrimen] Country-men F,. Cap. et cet. (throughout). 


Countrymen Rowe et seq. 


53. Menenius Agrippa] S. Lee (Caxton Sh. Introd., p. xxxii.): Shakespeare 
follows Plutarch in assigning to Menenius ‘many good persuasions and gentle 
requests made to the people on the behalf of the senate,’ and puts in his mouth 
the ‘notable tale’ of the belly’s rebellion against the members of the human body 
[sic. ‘Aliquando dormitat,’ etc.—Ep.]. But Menenius disappears from Plutarch’s 
page as soon as he has drawn his moral from this apologue. He retires as soon as 
he has proved in parable that the senate is to the body politic what the belly is 
to the human frame. Shakespeare prolongs Menenius’ history to the end of the 
piece. Throughout the tragedy he is a level-headed observer of events. He 
criticizes their progress with ironical detachment after the manner of a chorus in 
classical tragedy. His place in the dramatic scheme resembles that of Enobarbus 
in Antony & Cleopaira, and the turn of events involves him in almost as melan- 
choly a fate. He is no bitter partisan, and although associated with the patricians 
has the reputation of loving the people. He jests as complacently at what he 
conceives to be his own failings as at those which he detects in others. His iron- 
ical wit sharpens the zest of his sagacious comments until the cruel catastrophe of 
Coriolanus’s repudiation. Then his spirit breaks and despair overwhelms him. 
There is no more pathetic episode in the tragedy than Coriolanus’ dismissal of 
him, practically unheard, from the Volscian camp. Not the newly crowned Prince 
Hal’s rejection of his old associate Falstaff inflicts a deeper wound on the reader’s, 
or the spectator’s, heart. [For various estimates of the character of Menenius 
Agrippa, see Dram. Person., s. v. ante-—En.] 

57-59. What work’s . . . I pray you] BEEcuine (Falcon Sh.): Notice the in- 
troduction of blank verse to mark the dignity of the Patrician. 

60. 2 Cit.] CAPELL (vol. I, pt i, p. 81): A very little reflexion upon the pre- 
ceding speeches of the second and first citizen will shew at once the propriety 
of the change in this line [see Text. Notes]. . . . The same alteration is continu’d 
in this edition as low as the end of this scene, and for the same reasons.—MALONE, 
without referring, however, to Capell’s note, says likewise that the assignment of 
this and the subsequent speeches to 2 Cit. are manifestly erroneous and should be 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 29 


haue had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, w 61 


61. intend] intended Rowe ii. 


given to 1 Cit. ‘The second,’ he adds, ‘is rather friendly to Coriolanus.’—KnicHt: 
We adhere to the original copy for the precise reason which Malone gives for 
departing from it. The first Citizen is a hater of public men—the second, of public 
measures; the first would kill Coriolanus—the second would repeal the laws relating 
to corn and usury. He says not one word against Coriolanus. We are satisfied 
that it was not Shakspere’s intention to make the low brawler against an indi- 
vidual argue so well with Menenius in the matter of the ‘kingly crowned head,’ 
-etc. This speaker is of a higher cast than he who says: ‘Let us kill him, and we’ll 
have corn at our own price.’—Dycer, who also mistakenly attributes the change of 
text to Malone, gives the latter part of the foregoing note by Knight and declares 
that this ‘view of the Citizen’s character is quite at variance with the description 
of it which, according to Knight’s own text, Menenius presently gives,’ [ll. 164-169]. 
In conclusion Dyce adds: ‘In fact, the passage just cited serves to prove that 
Malone was well warranted in altering the prefix here and subsequently.’ WHITE 
likewise credits Malone with this alteration, remarking that ‘he seems to have done 
well in trusting rather to Shakespeare’s consistency of characterization than to the 
typographical accuracy of this very incorrectly printed play, upon a point in which 
error might so easily be committed.—Hunson, on the other hand, in his ed. i. 
agrees with Knight that Malone’s reasons for varying from the original are not 
sufficient to warrant a change of text. In his ed. ii. Hudson recants completely 
without, however, mentioning his former opinion, and possibly thereto directed 
by WricHT, assigns the change rightfully to Capell, falls in line with the 
majority in accepting this, and characterises the Folio text as ‘clearly wrong.’ 
—Eb. 

60. Our busines . . . to th’Senat] MacCatium (524): Hardly a line in [Plu- 
tarch’s] description of this movement which the plebeians conducted so moderately 
and sagaciously to a successful end has passed into the picture of Shakespeare. 
He ignores the reasonableness of their cause, the reasonableness of their means, 
and fails to perceive the essential efficiency and steadiness of their character, 
though all these things are expressed or implied in Plutarch’s narrative. This 
episode in which the younger contemporary of Nero favours the people, the elder 
contemporary of Pym summarily dismisses, and substitutes for it another far less 
important, in which they appear in no very creditable light, but which had nothing 
to do with the institution of the Tribunate, and occurred in consequence of the 
dearth only after the capture of Corioli. ‘Now those busie pratlers . . . spread 
abroad false tales and rumours against the Nobilitie, that they in revenge of the 
people had practised and procured the extreme dearthe among them.’ This 
circumstance, combined with the still later demand for a distribution of corn, 
Shakespeare transposes, and makes the surely rather inappropriate cause of the 
appointment of the Tribunes. Inappropriate, that is, to what the logic of the 
situation requires, and to what the sagacity of the traditional plebs would solicit. 
They ask for bread and they get a magistrate. But not inappropriate to the 
unreasoning demands of a frenzied proletariat. Many parallels might be cited from 
the French revolutions. But this is just an instance of Shakespeare’s inability 
to conceive a popular rising in other terms than the outbreak of a mob. 


30 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


now wee’l fhew em in deeds : they fay poore Suters haue 62 
{trong breaths, they fhal know we haue {trong arms too. 
Menen. Why Mafters,my good Friends, mine honeft 
Neighbours, will you vndo your felues ? 65 
2 Cit. We cannot Sir, we are vndone already. 
Men. I tell you Friends, moft charitable care 
Haue the Patricians of you for your wants. 
Your fuffering in this dearth, you may as well 
Strike at the Heauen with your ftaues, as lift them To 
Againft the Roman State, whofe courfe will on 


62. fhew em) fhew’m FF. shew ’em 68. you for...] you. For... Johns. et 
Rowe,+, Varr. Mal. shew them Cap. seq. ; 
show ’em Steev. et seq. wants.] wants, FF, et seq. 

64, 65. Prose in Pope, Han. Two 69. Juffering] sufferings Rowe ii,+. 
lines ending Neighbours...felues? Theob. 70. Heauen] Heav’n Rowe. heavens 
eucet: Mason, Ran. 


65. you] ye Var. 85. 


62, 63. poore Suters ... strong breaths] A diligent search through Ray’s 
English Proverbs; Bohn’s Polyglot of Foreign Proverbs; Lean’s Collectanea of Proverbs 
and Folklore; Heywood’s 800 Epigrams on 800 Proverbs; Florio’s First Frutes; Florio’s 
Second Frutes; the Indices to the twelve series of Notes & Queries has failed to 
trace even a parallel to this saying put in the mouth of the 2 Citizen. I am there- 
fore reluctantly come to the conclusion that it is original with Shakespeare; I 
say reluctantly, since were another example forthcoming we might be led to an 
interpretation of its exact meaning better than that thus far offered —ScumiptT 
(Lex.), under the meaning of ‘strong,’ of evil odor, quotes the present line, as does 
also BraDLrEy (NV. E. D.) —CaseE (Arden Sh.) likewise so explains this phrase, saying 
that the word is here used in a double sense. Now, in spite of this formidable 
array, I cannot but think that ‘strong’ is here used only in direct opposition to 
‘poor.’ A suitor with an evil-smelling breath would hardly be likely to com- 
mend either himself or his suit; but one who realises that he has a poor, or weak 
gift of oratory, would have need to have a strong, or a large amount of, breath to 
carry out his argument. Schmidt cites All’s Well, V, ii, 5: ‘I am now, sir, muddied 
in fortune’s mood, and smell somewhat strong of her strong displeasure’; but this 
is merely an example of ‘strong’ in the sense of evil-smelling, and is in no way par- 
allel with the present line. Case quotes other passages both in this play and 
Jul. Ces. wherein reference is made to the malodorous breaths of the multitude. 
An ounce of civet, good apothecary!—Eb. 

68, 69. for your wants... this dearth] Capett (vol. I, pti, p. 81): The author 
has certainly drop’d some few words, in his haste of composing, that are wanting 
to introduce with propriety the sentiment that comes next after ‘dearth’ in the 
following line; what seems to have been his intention may be given in these 
words: ‘As for your wants, your suffering in this dearth,—if revenge for them be 
your aim in this rising, you will miss of it; for you may as well,’ &c., down to ‘im- 
pediment,’ [l. 74]. And as for the dearth itself, The gods, not the patricians, make 
it. But if this was the author’s drift in the passage before us (and it will be diffi- 


ACTAT SC? 1.) CORIOLANUS 3I 


The way it takes : cracking ten thoufand Curbes 72 
Of more ftrong linke affunder, then can euer 

Appeare in your impediment. For the Dearth, 

The Gods, not the Patricians make it, and 75 
Your knees to them (not armes) muft helpe. Alacke, 

You are tranfported by Calamity 

Thether, where more attends you, and you flander 

The Helmes o’th State; who care for you like Fathers, 


When you curfe them, as Enemies. 80 
2 Cit. Care for vs? True indeed, they nere car’d for vs 
yet. Suffer vs to famifh, and their Store-houfes cramm’d 82 
73. linke] linkd F,. link’d F,F,, 81. us?] Ff. wus! Cap. Dyce, Cam.+, 
Rowe. links Pope, Theob. Han. Huds. Words. Neils. us?— Coll. Wh. 
Warb. Johns. i. us!— Rowe et cet. ; 
74. wmpediment. For...) impediment: indeed,|] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
for... Dyce, Sta. Sta. Huds. imdeed/— Theob. et cet. 
79. o’th| Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 0’ the (subs.). 
Cap. et cet. 82. yet.) yet:— Dyce. 


cult to assign any other) his haste, as was said before, has betray’d him into a 
larger omission than the law of good writing either does admit of or should do. 

72-74. cracking . . . your impediment] Matone: So in Othello, ‘I have 
made my way through more impediments Than twenty times your stop,’ [V, 
li, 263]. 

74. your impediment] W. A. Wricut: That is, the impediment you make. For 
this objective use of the possessive pronoun see Psalm cix, 3 (Prayer Book): ‘They 
take now my contrary part’; that is, take part against me. And Jeremiah, ix, 8: 
“One speaketh peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth, but in heart he layeth 
his wait’; that is, layeth in wait for him. See also King John, ‘Vex’d with thy 
impediment,’ II, i, 336. 

74. impediment] Apgporr (§ 467) in reference to the scansion of this line says: 
‘T in the middle of a trisyllable, if unaccented, is frequently dropped, or so nearly 
as to make it a favorite syllable in trisyllabic feet.’ 

75. The Gods . . . and] Browne (p. 17), under syllabic expansion for absolute 
metric exactness, includes this line, where, accordingly, ‘gods’ must be pronounced 
‘godse.’ This is, of course, only for the printed words or to satisfy the finger- 
counting prosodists.—AxBsorr (§ 486) suggests that ‘‘‘gods” is probably prolonged 
by emphasis, and the second “the” is not accented.’—Ep. 

79. o’th State] For this elision of e before a consonant, see note by BAYFIELD, 
1. 50 ante. 

81, 82. Care for vs . . . yet] Hupson (ed. i.): We keep to the pointing of the 
original, which, to our mind, makes the sense much more coherent and clear. 

82. famish, and] Assort (§ gs): ‘And’ (in old Swedish gen is used for ‘and,’ 
‘if,’ and ‘even’) emphatically used for ‘also,’ ‘even,’ ‘and that too.’ We still 
use ‘and that’ to give emphasis and call attention to an additional circumstance, 
e. g., ‘He was condemned and that unheard.’ ‘This construction is most common 
in participial phrases. The ‘that’ is logically unnecessary and is omitted by 
Shakespeare. 


32 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


with Graine : Make Edicts for Vfurie, to fupport V{u- 83 
rers; repeale daily any wholfome Ac eftablifhed againft 

the rich, and prouide more piercing Statutes daily, to 85 
chaine vp and reftraine the poore. If the Warres eate vs 

not vppe, they will; and there’s allthe loue they beare 

vs. 

Menen. Either you muft 
Confeffe your felues wondrous Malicious, go 


90. wondrous] wond’rous Rowe, Theob. Warb. Johns. Varr. Mal. Ran. Hal. 


83-86. Make Edicts . . . the poore] MacCattum (p. 529): Shakespeare not 
only completely suppresses the remarkable secession to the Mons Sacer, but barely 
mentions the social grievances that led to it. The Citizen says, indeed, of the 
Patricians [ll. 83-86]; but this is a mere passing remark, and no stress is laid on 
these the real causes of the discontent, in comparison with the dearth, which for 
the rest seems to end with the Coriolun campaign, when there is, as Cominius 
promises, a ‘common distribution’ of the spoils. Now the dearth is represented 
as a mere disastrous accident for which no one is responsible, and for which there 
is no remedy save prayer—or such a foray as presently took place. Menenius 
expressly says so [ll. 74-76]. It is alleged, no doubt, by the mutineers that the 
‘store houses are crammed with grain,’ but there is no confirmation of this in the 
play, and the way in which ‘honest’ Menenius reports the rumour, and Marcius, 
who is never less than honest, receives it, implies that it is mere tittle tattle and 
gossip of the chimney corner. 

83. Edicts for Vsurie] Miss C. PorTER (First Folio Sh.): The grievance, accord- 
ing to Plutarch, of the first insurrection, the one that took place before the siege 
of Corioli, was that ‘the Senate did favour the rich against the people, who did 
complain of the sore oppression of usurers, of whom they borrowed money. For 
those that had little, were yet spoiled of that little they had by their creditors, 
for lack of ability to pay the usury.’ This is the basis for Shakespeare’s Edicts 
for Usurie. 

85. piercing Statutes] Rotre: Schmidt is in doubt, whether this is = morti- 
fying, revolting to the feelings, or = sweeping; entering and affecting all the 
interests of the people.’ It may be simply = sharp, severe.—E. J. WHITE (p. 
405): A statute is generally defined as a law enacted by the legislative power, or 
a written expression of the legislative will, in the form necessary to make it the law 
of the state or country where it is to obtain. The Poet many times speaks of 
‘biting statutes’ and ‘piercing statutes,’ showing that he had the lawyers’ regard 
for such strict legislative provisions as made it hard upon the individual citizen, 
when enforced, with the Poet’s sympathy for the individual in any hardship that 
he suffered, even though it resulted from the enforcement of the law. Speaking 
of the repeal of such statutes as were enacted for the benefit of the poor, the idea 
is that such acts were rendered migratory by inconsistent provisions, by which 
an implied repeal of a previous statute may be effected. ‘The legal observations in 
these lines are made in strict accord with the struggle then going on, between the 
plebeians and the patricians, for supremacy, and show an accurate knowledge not 
only of the legal requirements of legislative enactments but also of the historical 
facts existing at this period of the world’s history. 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 33 


Or be accus’d of Folly. I hall tell you gI 
A pretty Tale, it may be you haue heard it, 

But fince it ferues my purpofe, I will venture 

To {cale’t a little more. 94 


94. fcale’t] stale’? Theob. Han. Cap. Sing. Del. Dyce, Coll. ii, Sta. Hal. Ktly, 
Cam. Wh. Huds. Knt ii, C. Clarke, Words. Neils. Rlfe, Beeching, Cholmeley, 
Chambers, Dtn, Verity, Gordon. 


92. A pretty Tale] In the earliest known version of the Fables of Bidpai, The 
Morall Philosopie of Doni, translated by Sir Thomas North, 1570 (ed. Jacobs, 
p- 64), this fable of the belly and members is related, and it is prefaced with these 
words: ‘That noble Romaine that fought and laboured to bring the people and 
communaltie to loue their Magistrates and superiours, tolde them a pretie tale 
(to write it happilye in this Booke for him that knoweth it not) howe the handes 
were angrie with the bodie.’ It is, however, not necessary to transcribe the rest 
of the fable as there given; it is in no way like to that in other collections. The 
writer thus concludes: ‘With this pretie tale he made the people sensibly to 
vnderstand what became them, and how they should behave themselves to their 
superiours.’ We have no possible means of knowing whether Shakespeare either 
knew of or had ever seen this particular version of the story, but that it should 
be therein twice referred to as ‘a pretty tale’ and that same phrase be used by 
Shakespeare are points which would seem to indicate at least a recollection of this 
translation by North.—Epb. 

94. To scale’t] THEOBALD: Thus all the editions, but without any manner of 
sense that I can find out. The Poet must have wrote as I have corrected the 
text [see Text. Notes], and then the meaning will be plainly this: ‘Perhaps you 
may have heard my tale already, but for all that, ’ll venture to make it more 
stale and familiar to you by telling it over again.’ And nothing is more common 
than the verb in this sense with our three capital dramatic Poets. To begin with 
our own Author: ‘Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale Her infinite variety,’ 
Ant. & Cleo., Il, ii, 240; ‘Were I a common laugher, or did use To stale with ordi- 
nary oaths my love,’ Jil. Ces., I, ii, 72; ‘imitations Which out of use, and staled 
by other men Begin his fashion,’ Jul. Cas., IV, i, 38. [To these examples from 
Shakespeare of ‘stale’ used in this sense Theobald adds four others, one of these 
from Jonson’s Cynthia’s Revels, and three from Beaumont and Fletcher, Beggar’s 
Bush, Queen of Corinth, and Wit at Several Weapons.—Ep.]—WaRBURTON: Mr 
Theobald alters it to stale’t. And for a good reason, because he can find no sense, 
he says, in the common reading. For as good a reason I, who can, have restored 
the old one to its place, ‘To scale’t,’ signifying to weigh, examine, and apply 11. 
The author uses it again, in the same sense, in this very play: ‘Scaling his 
present bearing with his past,’ [II, iii, 261]. And so Fletcher, The Maid in the Mill: 
‘What, scale my invention beforehand?’ {ed. Dyce, ix, 259, where ‘scale’ is printed 
stale and whereon the editor has the following note: ‘So Sympson.—Both the 
folios “‘scale’’; and so the editors of 1778. The same misprint occurs in the old 
copies of Shakespeare’s Coriolanus, I, i, and has been carefully retained in the three 
latest editions of the great dramatist, though Theobald had long ago corrected the 
passage, and though Gifford in a most decisive note had proved that the true 
reading is stale.’ (See Note by STEEVENS and Gifford’s comment thereon, supra.) 


3 


34 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


ee eee 
[o4. To scale’t] ; 
—Ep.]—Jounson: Neither of Dr Warburton’s examples afford a sense congruous 
to the present occasion. In the passage quoted to ‘scale’ may be to weigh and 
compare, but where do we find that to ‘scale’ is to apply? If we scale the two 
critics, I think Theobald has the advantage.—CaPeLt (vol. I, pt i, p. 81) charac- 
terises Theobald’s alteration as ‘a most certain correction,’ and remarks that 
““<scale’t,” 4. e., weigh or examine it, is neither pertinent to the matter in hand nor 
suitable to the speaker.’—STEEVENS: To ‘scale’ is to disperse. ‘The word is used 
in the North. If emendation was at all necessary, Theobald’s is as good a one 
as could be proposed. The sense of the old reading is: Though some of you have 
heard the story, I will spread it yet wider, and impart it to the rest. A measure 
of wine spilt is called ‘a scal’d pottle of wine’ in Dekker’s comedy, The Honest 
Whore, 1635. So in The Hystorie of Clyomen, a play published in 1599: ‘[Ah 
sirrah, now] the hugy heapes of cares that lodged in my minde Are scaled from 
their nestling-place, and pleasures passage find,’ [Peele’s Works, ed. Dyce, iii, 78. 
Steevens gives three other examples of ‘scale’ used in the sense to disperse from 
Holinshed and from the Glossary to Douglas’s Translation of Virgil; and in later 
editions he added several more. Gifford, who seldom let slip an opportunity to 
gird at Steevens, says, in a note on the line, ‘I’ll not stale the jest By my relation’ 
(Massinger, The Unnatural Combat, IV, ii, p. 203). ‘This is one of a thousand 
instances which might be brought to prove that the true reading in Coriolanus is: 
“To stale’t alittle more.” . . . Steevens prefers scale, which he proves from a variety 
of learned authorities to mean scatter, disperse, spread; to make any of them, 
however, suit his purpose, he is obliged to give an unfaithful version of the text: 
“Though some of you have heard the story, I will spread it yet wider, and diffuse 
it among the rest!” There is nothing of this in Shakespeare; and, indeed, I cannot 
avoid looking on his long note as a feeble attempt to justify a palpable error of the 
press, at the cost of taste and sense.’ Gifford, in his edition of Jonson published 
ten years later, ina note on the line in Every Man in His Humour, ‘To stale 
himself in all societies’ (I, iv, p. 42), returns again to the attack with the words: 
‘So the word is used by Shakespeare, and, indeed, by every writer of his age. 
By a very common oversight it is printed scale in Coriolanus, which has happily 
furnished occasion for much perverse ingenuity to justify the poet’s adoption of 
a word which he would steadily have rejected.’—Ep.]J—Mason (Comments, etc., 
Pp: 245): I believe Theobald is right. In the passage which Warburton quotes 
from The Maid in the Mill it is evident that stale is the right reading, and that 
scale was introduced in that passage, as I believe it was into this, by a mistake 
of the printer’s. Steevens has proved beyond doubt that. to scale meant formerly 
to disperse; but the remark of Menenius, that though perhaps his audience had 
heard it before, he would venture to tell his tale again, convinces me that stale is 
the true reading.—MAtonr, who retains the Folio reading, apparently accepts 
Steevens’s interpretation, fo disperse; and merely mentions Theobald’s change, 
stale-—BOswELL: ‘To scale’ means also to weigh, to consider. If we understand it 
in the sense of to separate, as when it is said to ‘scale the corn,’ it may have the 
same metaphorical signification as to discuss; but Theobald’s emendation is so 
slight, and affords so clear a meaning, that I should be inclined to adopt it.— 
Horne Tooke, who is not always a very trustworthy authority on matters 
philological, in his “Ewea Irepéevra [Winged Words], or The Diversions of Purley, 
makes reference to the present passage and Steevens’s note thereon, and for the 


ACT, SC.1.] CORIOLANUS 35 


[94. To scale’t] 
latter reason only is entitled to a hearing; after giving a list of the various sig- 
nifications of the word ‘scale’ in English and other languages Tooke declares that 
all of these have but one meaning in common: viz., ‘Divided, Separated. ‘The 
tale of Menenius was “scaled a little more” by being divided into particulars and 
degrees, told more circumstantially and at length. That, I take, to be Shake- 
speare’s meaning by the expression, and not the staling or diffusing of the tale, 
which, if they had heard it before, could not have been done by his repetition. 
For Menenius does not say that some of them had heard it before; that word 
some is introduced by Mr Steevens in his note merely to give a colour to his 
explanation of “diffusing it among the rest.’’ Clyomen’s cares were scaled (i. e., 
‘ separated) from their nestling-place’ (ed. 1857, p. 482).—NARES (Glossary, s. v. 
Scale): To weigh as in scales, to estimate aright. I am convinced that this sense, 
which was given by Warburton, conveys the true meaning of the following passages: 
‘By this is your brother saved, the poor Mariana advantaged, and the correct 
[corrupt] deputy scaled.’—Meas. for Meas., III, i, 266. [Here follows the present 
line.] In the following passage it is manifest: ‘Scaling his present bearing with 
his past,’ II, iii, 261, and this has the more force, as occurring soon after in the 
same play. That it does also mean to separate and fly off, as scales fly from heated 
metal, is proved by the passages which Mr Steevens cites for that purpose. The 
other passages adduced are hardly relevant, and the Scottish dialect will not often 
authorise English words.—BrockeErt (s. v. Scale): To spread abroad, to separate, 
to divide. [The present line quoted.] Nearly all the commentators have mistaken 
the meaning of ‘to scale’t.’. I am quite satisfied that it was the author’s intention 
to have the tale spread a little more minutely; or, as Horne Tooke better expresses 
it, to have it divided into more particulars and degrees, told more circumstantially 
and atlength. If Archdeacon Nares, to borrow his own language, will ‘weigh as in 
scales, to estimate aright,’ Mr Lambe’s observations on this passage, and on the 
means of acquiring a competent knowledge of the old English tongue (Notes on the 
Battle of Flodden), I entertain a hope that the learned author of the elaborate 
and valuable Glossary may not be indisposed to alter in more respects than one 
the article, To Scale, in a future edition.—KwnicuT: It is necessary to see how 
Shakspere has used this verb [to scale] in other passages. In the second act 
Sicinius tells the citizens: ‘Scaling his present bearing with his past, That he’s 
your fixed enemy.’ Dr Johnson explains this: ‘Weighing his past and present 
behaviour.’ This interpretation seems obvious and natural; and none of the 
commentators object to it with reference to this particular passage. But in Meas. 
for Meas., when the Duke explains his project to Isabella, he says, ‘by this... 
is the corrupt deputy scaled,’ [III, i, 266]. Upon this passage Johnson says: ‘To 
svale the deputy may be to reach him, or it may be to strip him.’ Here he differs 
from his interpretation of the passage in Coriolanus. But surely ‘the corrupt 
deputy’ may be ‘scaled’ in the same way that the bearing of Coriolanus is ‘scaled.’ 
We have precisely the same meaning in the Scriptures—‘ Weighed in the balance, 
and found wanting.’ If this interpretation be good for two of the passages, why 
not for a third, that of the present passage before us? Menenius will venture to 
weigh, to try the value, of the ‘pretty tale’ a little more; though they may have 
heard it, he will again scale it... . Horne Tooke’s explanation of all these passages 
appears to us somewhat fanciful, and assumes that Shakspere uses the same word 
in different places under different meanings that can only be reconciled by an 


36 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


[94. To scale’t] 


etymological reference.—CoLieR in his ed. i. follows the Folio reading and accepts 
(without acknowledgment) Steevens’s interpretation that ‘scale’ here means fo 
disperse, which, as he says, may be shown by many examples. This and the 
foregoing note by Knight called forth a characteristic ‘Remark’ from Dyce (p. 
158) to the effect that such ‘blundering’ was ‘really piteous,’ since the correct 
reading, stale, had long since been restored by Theobald. Dyce then quotes in 
full Gifford’s note on the line from Massinger’s Unnatural Combat (see ante) and 
adds several other quotations wherein stale is used as a verb signifying to make 
common. Collier in his ed. ii. declares that he yields ‘to the weight of authority 
that “scale” of the old copies ought to be stale, although the corrected Folio 
of 1632 has no such emendation.’ He then concludes his note thus: ‘The Rev. 
Mr Dyce takes abundant pains to prove that to “stale” means to make stale, a 
point nobody disputed, the only question being whether scale was a misprint in 
the Folio, 1623; we think it was, and so treat it. In his enumeration of places, 
where to stale means to make stale or familiar, the Rev. Mr Dyce strangely forgot 
the most apposite instance, viz., in the address of the stationer to the reader, 
before Troilus and Cressida, 4to 1609, where he says that it had never been “‘staled 
with the stage.” The recollection of this fact would have spared Mr Dyce a great 
deal of useless labour in making and repeating stale quotations.—A Parthian shot 
which rendered his doughty antagonist quite speechless. Knight likewise, in his 
ed. ii, 1867, rather than again be accused of ‘piteous blundering,’ yielded to the 
weight of authority marshalled by Dyce and accepted Theobald’s emendation.— 
Ep.—HAtiiweE tt (Dict. of Archaisms, s. v. Scale: To spread, to disperse abroad): 
The word occurs in Cortol., I, i, but is there a misprint for stale, as distinctly proved 
by Gifford, and still more elaborately in Dyce’s Remarks, p. 158. The observa- 
tions of Brockett on this passage, which he quite misunderstands, lead me to ob- 
serve that, with a few trifling exceptions, the very worst annotations on Shake- 
speare have proceeded from the compilers of provincial glossaries, to whom the 
philological student would be more deeply indebted if they would confine them- 
selves to the correct explanation of words in actual use without entering into 
subjects that require a distinct range of reading and study.—R. G. WHITE: Some 
editors interpret ‘scale,’ to disperse; but granting the word that meaning, what 
sense does it afford in the place it holds? Menenius tells the people that it may 
be that they have heard his story, but, since it serves his purpose, he will venture 
to use it, old as it is, and make it even staler. Can there be the least doubt that 
Theobald was right in changing one letter and reading as in the text?-—Josepa 
Hunter (ii, 117): There is no doubt that ‘scale’ has been used to denote the 
spreading abroad, dispersing; but then the sense does not suit the passage, while the 
sense of stale suits it admirably. Stale is also a word of which Shakespeare is fond, 
while no other instance can be produced of his having used the rare word ‘scale.’ 
All persons conversant with the written characters of any age know that there 
are letters which are easily confounded, the forms of the literal elements having 
been as little the subject of reflection and science as the sounds of which they are 
the representatives. This correction...is more than sufficiently obvious.— 
WALKER (C7it., ii, 274): The corruption of ¢ into c is frequent in old books. This 
vindicates Theobald’s reading, defended by Gifford, Coriol., I, i, ‘to stale’t’ for 
scale’t. So Ace for ‘Ate,’ King John, II, i, fol. p. 4, col. 1, 1. 6, ‘An Ace stirring him 
to bloud and strife.’ Cymbeline, II, ii, p. 381, col. 1, ult., vice versd, ‘How many 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 37 


—— EE Se ee a ee ee eee eee ee ee 


{94. To scale’t] 
store of Miles may we well rid.” . . . King Lear, IV, vi, p. 304, col. 1, l. 2, ‘Place 
sinnes with Gold,’ for Plate.—Lxo (Coriolanus, ed., p. 119): To use the word [scale] 
here in the sense of to weigh [as does Knight] would seem exceedingly forced, and 
no one of the unlearned hearers of Menenius would understand it. As for disperse, 
the old Patrician may mean to do it a little more, since he supposes the tale to 
have been heard already by his audience, but it is more natural to understand to 
stale the already heard story, to make it as flat as every twice told story is.— 
KEIGHTLEY (Expositor, p. 359): All attempts to make sense of ‘scale’ having 
been most complete failures, it only remains to read, with Theobald, stale.— 
WaiITELAW (Coriolanus, ed. Gloss., p. 148) retains the Folio reading, but rejects 
_ both Steevens’s interpretation, to disperse, and Knight’s, to weigh; he goes some- 
what further than Tooke in twisting a meaning out of ‘scale’ in the sense fo sepa- 
rate, and thus renders it finally to discern. This new meaning he applies to the 
present passage, that from Meas. for Meas. already quoted by Nares, and the 
second passage in Coriol.; he thus concludes his elucidation: ‘This meaning suits 
all our three passages. The corrupt deputy will be unmasked, exposed, discerned. 
Menenius proposes to look a little more deeply into the inner meaning of the fable 
which all his hearers have heard, but not discerned before. The people have 
found, taking the behaviour of Coriolanus to pieces and scrutinizing it carefully, 
present and past together, that under the covering of compliance the old hate 
still rankles.’ [Gifford found grave fault with Steevens for a sophistication of 
the text to suit his own interpretation of the word ‘scale’; but what shall be 
said of such an utter perversion of the meaning and drift of the passage as this 
by Whitelaw? Schmidt, retaining the Folio reading in his text, declares that 
Whitelaw’s explanation is to be preferred to all the others, and that the emenda- 
tion stale is, therefore, to be unconditionally rejected, since it conveys an utterly 
false idea of what Menenius intends, which is not to render the fable more familiar, 
but to apply it more nearly to the present occasion, and make more striking its 
inner meaning. Schmidt is, I think, here misled by Whitelaw’s flow of words and 
has not sufficiently paid attention to the sentence preceding. Menenius does not 
say that although his hearers may have heard the fable before, he intends to make 
it clearer to them, what he expressly states is: although you may have heard 
this, Iam going to risk (‘venture’) to make it a little more familiar—Ep.J— 
B. Nicuotson (NV. & Q., May 4, 1878, p. 342): Theobald’s change is a very 
plausible one, the more that it substitutes a phrase more in use with and more 
understood by modern readers than the one that is somewhat antiquated. The 
rule, however, is beginning to be better understood (except by some emending 
critics) that a change which the emender believes to be an improvement is not to 
be adopted if the old reading gives a sufficient sense. Here, I believe, it gives not 
only a sufficient, but a better sense. To ‘scale a fish’ is to disfurnish, or clear, or 
clean it from its scales that it may be used by man. To ‘scale a piece of old and 
rusty metal’ is to clear off its rusty scaling, and so furbish it up anew for use or 
ornament. To ‘scale a bone,’ as practised by the old surgeons, was to scrape off 
the diseased surface, and so clear or clean it. The ordinary supposition (founded 
on the reading stale’t) is that Menenius only intends to say that ‘he will tell the 
tale again.’ But he does not merely do this nor intend to do it. What he intends 
to do, and afterwards does do, is intimated in the words ‘but since it serves 
my purpose.’ In accordance therewith he not only tells the tale but also takes 


38 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Acriruseane 


[94. To scale’t] 
off the covering and lays bare its meaning, or moral to their use, or, to use other 
synonyms, clears it, or shells it open to their apprehensions, that they may see 
and taste it in all its goodness. Nor are we without contemporary examples of a 
similar use of the word. A very pertinent one is to be found in James I.’s Demon- 
ologie, a work probably read by Shakspere, though the royal author may not be 
complimented on his collocation of terms: ‘The brightness of the Gospell .. . 
scaled [= cleared off] the cloudes of grosse errors, [z. ¢., all these gross clouds of 
error]’ (bk. ii, ch. vii, p. 53, first ed.). This example is sufficient for the rein- 
statement of ‘scale’ as Shakspere’s word. Richardson in his Dictionary, following 
Skinner, also reads ‘scale’ in this passage, though he quotes it as showing that 
it always implies ‘dividing’ or ‘division’; as that here ‘the tale was scaled by 
being divided more into particulars and degrees’ more circumstantially and 
at length. [Richardson acknowledges Horne Tooke as his authority for this. 
—Ep]. The phrase in Meas. for Meas., ‘The corrupt deputy scaled’ (III, i, 
241), he explains ‘by slipping off his covering of hypocrisy,’ and here I fully agree 
with him and claim this as a second or third example—W. A. Wricut follows 
Theobald’s reading, remarking that from the Folio reading ‘no satisfactory sense 
has been extracted by the ingenuity of commentators,’ and after enumerating the 
various interpretations of Steevens and Boswell thus concludes: ‘Others explain 
it as signifying to strip the fable of its scale, or shell, or outer integument and 
to lay bare its meaning. But in this case there is no force in the words “a 
little more,’’ for Menenius had not attempted to expound it at all.—BEECHING 
(Falcon Ed.): ‘A little more’ goes better with stale [than ‘scale’], and scale occurs 
in II, iii, 261 in another sense.—VeERITY (Student’s Sh.): Each interpretation [of 
the Folio reading] seems forced, and is open to the objection that scale means 
‘to weigh’ in II, iii, 261. The reading stale gives admirable sense. Shakespeare 
uses the word in four other passages, e. g., in the famous lines on Cleopatra in 
Ant. & Cleo., II, ii, 240. It is noticeable of the three other examples of Shake- 
speare’s use of stale (verb), two occur in Jul. Ces. Thus of the five instances 
(if we may count this line) in his works four occur in the Roman plays founded 
on North’s Plutarch, the actual diction of which Shakespeare so often retains. 
Possibly stale here and in the other places is an acho of something in North’s 
Plutarch—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.) accepts unhesitatingly Steevens’s 
interpretation of ‘scale’ in the sense to disperse, citing his various examples in 
illustration. ‘It will be seen,’ Miss Porter adds, ‘that this word fits the con- 
text perfectly. Theobald’s substitute obscures Shakespeare’s use of a legitimate 
word ‘now obsolete.’—Gorpon: Out of ‘scale’t,’ as out of anything, ingenuity may 
wrest a meaning, but probability declares it a misprint—Crarc (Arden Sh.): The 
present editor in the Oxford Shakespeare, 1891, retained the Ff reading, and nothing 
would induce him to follow Theobald; for though he admits it is not impossible 
that Shakespeare may have written séale’t, it is bad editing to strike out what 
already makes excellent sense and to ‘re-write Shakespeare.” Now with regard to 
the verb scale, first let us remember that Shakespeare often uses words in a 
somewhat licentious sense, bending them without scruple to one that pleases him. 
It is not impossible that the idea in his mind may have been to ventilate, air, 
disperse, with a sort of play on the sense ‘weigh in scales,’ a sense which the word 
bears in II, iii, 261 post. This sort of thing he has done often: Mid. N. Dream, 
I, i, 131, where it is most likely that he uses ‘between’ in the double sense of 


ACTA, SCH] CORIOLANUS 39 


2 Citizen. Well, 95 
Ile heare it Sir : yet you muft not thinke 
To fobbe off our difgrace with a tale : 
But and’t pleafe you deliuer. 


Men.There was a time, when all the bodies members 99 
95-98. Well...deliuer] As prose Cap. 96. yet] But yet Han. 
et seq. 97. difgrace] disgraces Theob.+. 
96. Tle| We'll Han. 98. and’t] an’t Theob. ii et seq. 
Sir:] Sir— Rowe,+. deliuer] deliver it Ktly conj. 


’ pour out and allow, permit; and Lear, III, vii, 61, where ‘stelled’ appears to be used 
in the double senses of fixed or set, and starry. Steevens gives several examples 
of ‘scale’ in the sense of disperse. [Craig here quotes these as the concluding 
paragraph of his note. Craig’s untimely death prevented the completion of his 
editing this play; that task was ably undertaken by R. H. Case, who here states 
that the Folio reading is retained solely out of deference to the intention of the 
original editor, and upon that intention remarks: ‘Mr Craig pleads for, and acts 
on, a good principle; but I feel bound to point out the words “‘some of” which 
Steevens slips into his interpretation to give it probability have no warrant from 
Shakespeare. Menenius speaks to all the citizens present: ‘‘Either you must, 
confess yourselves . . . I shall tell you a pretty tale; it may be you have heard 
it,” and assumes his story to be possibly known to all. Hence, to enable him to 
scale or diffuse it, we should have to assume that in saying “‘it may be you have 
heard it,’’ he suddenly and pointedly addresses the First Citizen only; we cannot’ 
turn you into some of you to please Steevens.’ Bradley (N. E. D.) under the 
various meanings of the verb éo scale does not include that first given by Steevens, 
to disperse; we may, therefore, conclude that the editor regarded such a restricted 
meaning as one that belonged to a language other than English. Bradley does, 
however, give two examples of scale in the sense of weighed, estimated, both of 
them from Shakespeare. The first, that line from Meas. for Meas. already quoted 
by several commentators in the foregoing notes, and the other that line still more 
often quoted from the second Act, third scene, of this play. Finally, the remarks 
of Hunter and, in particular, those of Walker in regard. to the confusion which 
might easily arise from the similarity of the written characters ¢ and c, would seem 
to be almost conclusive in favour of Theobald’s emendation. As the majority 
have accepted this, after weighing all the evidence, it is likewise accepted by 
the present Ep.] 

97. disgrace] Jounson: ‘Disgraces’ are hardships, injuries. [Cotgrave, s. v. 
Disgrace, gives: ‘A disgrace; an ill fortune, hard lucke, defeature, check mate, 
mishap; also, uncomelinesse, unseemlinesse,’ . . . etc.—ED.] 

98. and’t] For and or an = if; see ABBOTT, § ror. 

99. Men. There was a time, etc.] Douce (ii, 76): It is rather extraordinary 
that none of Shakespeare’s commentators should have noticed the skilful manner 
in which he has diversified and expanded the well-known apologue of the belly 
and the members, the origin of which it may be neither unentertaining nor unprofit- 
able to investigate, as well as the manner in which it has been used, and by whom. 
The composition has been generally ascribed to Menenius Agrippa; but as it 
occurs in a very ancient collection of A’sopian fables, there may be as much reason 


40 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. 1. 


[o9. Men. There was a time, etc.] 
for supposing it the invention of sop as there is for making him the parent of 
many others. The first person who has introduced Menenius as reciting this 
fable is Dionysius of Halicarnassus [25 B. C.], book vi. Then follow Livy, lib. 
ii.; Plutarch, in the life of Coriolanus; Florus, lib. i, cap. xxiii; each of whom gives 
it in his own manner. During the middle ages there appeared a collection of 
Latin fables in hexameter verse that has agitated the opinions of the learned to 
little purpose in their endeavors to ascertain the real name of the compiler or 
versifier. He has been called Romulus, Accius, and Salo. Nor is the time when 
he lived at all known. These fables are sometimes called anonymous, and have 
been published in various forms. An excellent edition by Nilant appeared in 
1709, 12mo. Many of them were translated into French verse in the eleventh 
century by a French lady who calls herself Marie de France, in which form they 
have been happily preserved with many others extremely curious composed by 
the same ingenious person. . . . William Herman of Gouda, in Holland, reduced 
them into Latin prose about the year 1500, omitting some and adding others. 
The works of Romulus and Herman of Gouda have been published in a great 
variety of forms and languages, and constitute the set of Asopian fables which 
commences with that of the cock and the precious stone; in all which the apologue 
of the belly and the members is to be found, and sometimes with considerable 
variation. . . . Nor was this fable unknown in the Eastern world. Syntipas, a 
Persian fabulist, has placed it in his work, published for the first time from a MS. 
at Moscow, by Mattheus, Lips. 1781, 8vo. Lafontaine has related it in his own 
inimitable manner; and, lastly, the editor of Baskerville and Dodsley’s sop 
has given it in a style not inferior perhaps to that of any of his predecessors. [See, 
also, note by Douce, 1. 144 supra.J—Jacoxs (Fables of Atsop, i, 82): There is a 
reference in the Mahabharata (xiv, 688) to a fable similar to The Belly and Mem- 
bers which deserves closer attention, as it is, in many ways, the most remarkable 
fable in existence. A variant of it, or something very like it, was discovered six 
years ago by M. Maspero in a fragmentary papyrus, which he dates about the 
twentieth dynasty (c. 1250 B. C.). It is, consequently, the oldest fable in exist- 
ence. ... The fable, if fable it can be called, takes the form of a mock-trial, 
corresponding, as M. Gaston Paris has pointed out, to the débat which is so familiar 
in medieval French literature. From this point of view the débat of Belly and 
Head affords us the earliest example of legal procedure extant. We again meet 
with the fable in the Upanishads, whence it doubtless got into the Mahabharata, 
and perhaps too into the Zend Yacna: Dispute of the Senses and the Soul....A 
similar apologue existed among the Buddhists as we know from the fact that it 
exists in the Chinese Buddhistic work Avadanas (No. 105); it occurs also in the 
Pantschatantra: The Bird with Two Heads. J have also found a Jewish variant, 
though with a somewhat different moral: The Tongue and the Members. But 
there is a still more striking use of the fable by a Jew. There can be little doubt 
that St. Paul had a similar fable in his mind in the characteristic passage (z Cor., , 
xii, 12-26). The passage combines the Indian idea of the contest of the members 
with the Roman notion of the body politic. As this passage is the foundation 
of the doctrine of the Visible Church, and indirectly of the conception of the 
Body Politic (of which Hobbes made such quaint use), we cannot well overrate 
the importance of the fable on which it is founded. We have thus seen this fable 
of the Body and its Members with its Belgian motto, L’union fait la force, forming 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 41 


Rebell’d againft the Belly; thus accus’d it : 100 

That onely like a Gulfe it did remajne 

Ith midd’ft a th’body, idle and vnactiue, 102 

102. ath’) o th’ Fy. 102. wnactiue] inactive Var. ’o3, ’13, 
’21, Sing. Hal. 


part of the sacred literature of Egyptians and Chinese, of Brahmins, Buddhists and 
Magians, of Jews, and Christians. The reader must not, however, assume that 
these are all necessarily derived from one source. . . . The various versions [afford] 
an instructive example of how different nations may hit upon the very same apo- 
logue to illustrate the same idea. Carefully examined, the various versions may 
be reduced to four independent ones. The Egyptian débat stands by itself, the 
Brahmin Contest of Senses and Soul, occurring in the Upanishads, recurs in the 
Indian epic, in the Persian scripture, and possibly through the latter, in Jewish 
commentaries, and may thence have influenced St. Paul. The lost Buddhist 
apologue of The Bird with Two Heads found its way to China, and was received 
into the Bidpai literature. The Roman fable is remarkable as being the only fable 
of its kind in Latin literature which can claim to be current among the Romans. 
It occurs late, and may have been interpolated by Livy, like so much of his work. 
But, on the whole, I am inclined to regard it as a genuine Roman folk-fable and 
another instance of the sporadic use of the fable... by nations who have not other- 
wise shown a turn towards that form of the apologue. The whole enquiry ought 
to make us careful in the future how we admit borrowing without sure evidence 
either of identity of the fables or of contact between the nations using them. [See 
Appendix: Fable of the Belly and the Members —ED.]—BUucxNI11 (Medical Knowledge, 
etc., p. 203): Rabelais uses this same fable of sop to illustrate the social miseries 
which would result if the world should be filled with a rascally rabble of people 
that would not lend; his hero, in the witty classification of men into those who 
borrow and those who lend, decidedly belonging to the former category, and being 
as decidedly inimical to all who did not belong to the latter—WorpswortH (Sh’s 
Knowledge and Use of Bible, p. 340): The weli-known apologue of Menenius 
Agrippa is not to be traced to St Paul’s First Epistle to the Corinthians, ch. xii, 
but rather to the common source in Roman history, from which they both, we 
may suppose, adopted it; except that St Paul probably read it in Livy, and 
Shakespeare in North’s translation of Plutarch. 

to1. That onely] For this transposition of the adverb of limitation see, if need- 
ful, ABBort, § 420. 

tor. Gulfe] W. A. Wricut: That is, a whirlpool. Compare Henry V: II, iv, 
10, ‘For England his approaches make as fierce As waters to the sucking of a 
gulf.’ And Hamlet, Ill, iii, 16, ‘The cease of majesty Dies not alone; but, like a 
gulf, doth draw What’s near it with it..—Casr (Arden Sh.) also quotes in illustra- 
tion, ‘resemblynge a bottomles goolphe, receyvinge all that is put into it, withoute 
castynge anyethinge upp againe,’ Fenton’s Bandello, Discourse VII. (Tudor 
Translations, II, 24), and, ‘Because the gulf his (the Cyclop’s) belly reacht his 
throat,’ Chapman, Homer’s Odysseys, Bk IX, 1. 412. 

102. vnactiue] ABBott (§ 442) gives a short list of adjectives used by Shake- 
speare with the negative suffix un- where in many cases in- is now used and vice 
versé, upon which point he thus comments: ‘We appear to have no definite rule 


42 THE TRAGEDIE OF fACTIT Seay: 


Still cubbording the Viand, neuer bearing 103 
Like labour with the reft, where th’other Inftruments 
Did fee, and heare, deuife, inftruct, walke, feele, 105 


And mutually participate, did minifter 
Vnto the appetite; and affection common 


Of the whole body, the Belly anfwer’d. 108 
103. cubbording| cupbording Rowe ii. 108, 109. Of the whole...Well fir,] As 
cup-boarding Pope et seq. one line Walker (Crit., iii, 206). 
106. And...participate,| Ff, Rowe,+, 108. body,] body. Rowe,-+. 
Cap. Var. ’78, 85. And...participate; ~ anfwer’d] anfwer. F,. anfwers. 
Knt, Huds.i. And...participant, Huds. F,. answered— Rowe,-+, Ktly, Neils. 
ji. And,...participate, Mal. et cet. answer’d,— Cap. et cet. 


of distinction even now, since we use ungrateful, imgratitude; wnequal, inequality. 
Un- seems to have been preferred by Shakespeare before and 7, which do not 
allow in- to precede except in the form im. In- also seems to have been in many 
cases retained from the Latin, as in the case of “‘imgratus,” ‘“‘imfortunium,” &c. 
As a general rule, we now use zm- where we desire to make the negative a part of 
the word, and wn- where the separation is maintained—“wntrue,” “infirm.” ’— 
Case (Arden Sh.): The only instance of this word (there is none of its modern 
equivalent inactive) in Shakespeare. Compare Milton, Paradise Regained, ‘his life, 
Private, unactive, calm, contemplative,’ II, 80, 81. 

103. cubbording] Casr (Arden Sh.): That is, stowing away as in a cupboard. 
The NV. £. D. gives an earlier instance of this verb: Darius, 1565 (1860), 53, 
‘He . . . With the woman also coberdith his lyfe.’ 

104. where] For other examples wherein ‘where’ is used for whereas, see ABBOTT, 
§ 134. 

104. Instruments] Murray (NV. E. D.,s. v. Instrument, 4): A part of the body 
having a special function; an organ.—MALonE compares, ‘As you feel, doing 
thus, and see withal The instruments that feel,’ Wint. Tale, II, i, 154.—[Compare 
also, ‘the Genius and the mortal instruments,’ Jul. C@s., II, i, 66, and ‘My 
speculative and officed instruments,’ Othello, I, iii, 271.—Ep.] 

106. participate] MALone: Here this word means participant or participat- 
ing.—KwnicutT: The modern mode of pointing the line, which is not that of the 
original, appears to us to destroy the freedom and euphony of the whole passage. 
[See Text. Notes, where it will be noticed that Knight himself does not retain the 
original ‘in his text.—VERPLANCK follows Malone’s pointing, but says in a note 
that he agrees with Knight that such is destructive to the freedom of the passage, 
possibly on the principle, Video meliora proboque, etc.—Ep.]—W. A. Wricut: 
We should expect participant, in the sense of sharing, taking part together. Per- 
haps there was a confusion caused by partly connecting the word with the preced- 
ing auxiliary ‘did.’ There are many instances of apparent participles in -ed which 
are really adjectives formed from nouns and are used in an active sense, but I do 
not at present remember any in -ate. [At the end of his notes on the present play 
Wright says: ‘Since this note [on I, i, 106] was printed I have met with the follow- 
ing instance of a similarly formed participle in Twelfth Night, I, vy, 291: “Hallow 
your name to the reverberate hills.””’ 

108. Of the whole] BAyrieLp (p. 184): A striking example of the copyists’ or 


ACT I, sc. il] CORIOLANUS 43 


2.Cit. Well fir,what anfwer made the Belly. 

Men. Sir, I fhall tell you with a kinde of Smile, be Ke) 
Which ne’re came from the Lungs, but:-euen thus : 
For looke you I may make the belly Smile, 
As well as fpeake, it taintingly replyed 


To’th’difcontented Members, the mutinous parts 114 
109. Belly.] belly? Rowe et seq. cet. 
IIo. you with] Ff, Rowe, Pope. you: 111. thus:] thus— Rowe,+. 

with Han. Cap. you. With Sing. ii, 113. taintingly|  tantingly FF. 


Cam.+, Neils. you.—Wiéith Theob. et tauntingly F,. 


printers’ practice of merely counting the syllables. But for the desire to keep 
ten, we should have had ‘o’ th’ whole’ here, as we have at I, iii, 33: ‘See him plucke 
Auffidius downe by th’ haire,’ and in ITI, iii, 69: ‘Like graves i’ th’ holy church- 
yard.’ Read and scan: ‘Of the | whole | body, the | belly | answer | ed.—[See 
note by Bayfield, 1. 50 ante.] 

110. tell you with . . . Smile] TaEoBatp: Thus all the Editors, most stupidly, 
hitherto; as if Menenius were to smile in telling his Story, tho’ the Lines, which 
immediately follow, make it evident that the Belly was meant to smile. 

111. Which . . . from the Lungs] Jonnson: With a smile not indicating pleas- 
ure, but contempt.—W. A. WricuT: The laughter of merriment came from the 
lungs. Compare Jacques in As You Like It, ‘My lungs began to crow like chanti- 
cleer.’—II, vii, 30. And The Tempest, ‘These gentlemen, who are of such sensible 
and nimble lungs that they always laugh at nothing.’—TII, i, 74. 

111. ne’re] BAYFIELD (p. 185): [Read mever], ‘ne’re” causes a false stress, yet 
editors print it here and in countless other places where the same thing happens. 

111. euen thus] DEtrus (Jahrbuch, xi, p. 51, 1876): Menenius should accompany 
the words ‘even thus’ with pantomimic action, wherein he imitates the smile of 
the Belly, for the better entertainment of his auditors—Miss C. PoRTER (First 
Folio Sh.): ‘Even thus’ suggests the action and gesture of the actor playing 
Menenius—a good-natured, yet large, not to say rotund, disgust at their foolish- 
ness. One imagines both hands out, the shoulders up, and the under lip thrust 
forth. 

112. Imay... belly Smile] Matone: ‘And so the belly, all this notwithstand- 
ing, laughed at their folly and sayed,’ &c. North’s Plutarch, p. 240, edit. 1579.— 
E. K. Caampers (Warwick Sh.): Menenius began his fable with a political mo- 
tive. He has now become interested in his own artistic treatment of it. The 
belly ‘laughed at their folly’ in North, so that Menenius’ jest is really a bit of 
literary criticism on Shakespeare’s part. 

113. taintingly] Scamipt (Coriolanus): All modern editors substitute tauntingly 
here; many consider the Folio reading not even worth noting. And yet it is 
undoubtedly correct. To taint in the moral sense means ‘to express scorn, to 
bring into discredit, to insult’ (without the comic effect); we may compare the 
passage in Othello: ‘find some occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too 
loud, or tainting his discipline.’—{II, i, 275]. Menenius means to say that the 
Belly for answer smiled, and this smile alone, which Menenius illustrates graph- 
ically to the Citizens, was morally annihilating; further words in refutation were 
scarcely necessary. Only thus does this story by Menenius with its pauses and 


44 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACE SCL 


That enuied his receite : euen fo moft fitly, 115 
As you maligne our Senators, for that 
They are not fuch as you. 

2.Cit. Your Bellies anfwer : What 


The Kingly crown’d head, the vigilant eye, 119 
115. fitly,] fitly Cap. et cet. answer? What! Coll. Dyce, Hal. Wh. 
117. fuch] Om. Steev. conj. Cam.+. answer. What! Ktly.  an- 

you.| you Rowe,+. you,— swer? What? Huds. answer: What! 

Ware 73- Cap. et cet. 

118. anfwer: What] Ff. answer— 119. Kingly crown’d) Ff, Rowe. 


What Rowe, Pope. answer—Whatl kingly crowned Pope, Han. Coll. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. answer kingly-crowned Theob. ii et cet. 
—what? Han. answer: What? Sing. i. (kingly-crownéd Dyce). 


interruptions by the impatient citizen acquire actual dramatic vitality—HERFORD 
(Eversley Sh., p. 15) accepts the F; reading, and remarks that ‘The Belly’s reply 
is not taunting (1. 138), and “‘taintingly”’ may well mean attaintingly, i. e., indicting 
(them in turn).’—Verity (Student’s Sh.), in answer to the foregoing note by 
Herford, says: ‘But lines 110, 111 surely imply that the Belly answered in a 
“taunting,” satirical tone; and one would like some other example of the use of 
“taintingly,” or even of attaintingly.—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): That 
is, putting what they have said in bad odor, impugning its credit; so Iago tells 
Rodorigo to ‘finde some occasion to anger Cassio . . . speaking too loud, or tainting 
his discipline.’ The misprint in F.F; ‘tantingly’ seems to have suggested the 
‘tauntingly’ of F,. 

115. his receite] Case (Arden Sh.): That is, his prerogative, or else, what he 
received, which agrees with a frequent sense. Compare Rich. II: ‘Three parts of 
that receipt I had for Calais,’ I, i, 126. 

118. 2. Cit. Your, etc.] Verity (Student's Sh.): Note how the interruptions 
vivify the story. The same device is used in The Tempest, I, ii, where Miranda 
breaks in on Prospero’s long narrative. Compare, too, Menenius’s own pauses 
(like Prospero’s reproofs of Miranda, The Tempest, I, ii, 78, 87, 106) to bespeak 
their close attention as he reaches the crucial point of his story. This is the 
dramatic, as distinct from the narrative, style. [See also Note by Scummpr, |. 113 
ante.-—Ep.]—E. K. CuamBers (Warwick Sh.): The Citizen is excited to eloquence, 
and therefore, from this point, speaks in blank verse instead of prose. 

119-130. The Kingly . . . answer] SINGER (ed. i.) thus distributes these speeches. 

‘Men. The kingly-crowned .. . if that they— 
1 Cit. What then? 

Men. ’Fore me... sink o’ the body,— 

1 Cit. Well, what then? . . . answer?’ 


With an evident reference to this rearrangement Singer, in his Text of Sh. Vin- 
dicated (p. 208), finds fault with Collier and his predecessors for assigning ll. 119, 
120 to the Citizen instead of to Menenius; yet in his ed. ii, published three years 
later, he returns to the arrangement as in F, without any comment.—Dyce (ed. 
i, p. 760), referring to Singer’s remark that ll. 119, 120 evidently belong to Menenius, 
says: ‘I think,on the contrary, that it evidently belongs to the Citizen, who assumes 
the part and language of the rebellious members. If it be taken from the Citizen, 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 45 


The Counfailor Heart, the Arme our Souldier,| 120 
Our Steed the Legge, the Tongue our Trumpeter, 
With other Muniments and petty helpes 
In this our Fabricke, if that they -——— 
<Aten. What then? Foreme, this Fellow {peakes. 


What then? What then? 125 
2 Cit. Should by the Cormorant belly be reftrain’d, 
120. Counfailor] Counfellor F,F,. 124. Foreme] F.F;. For me Fy, 
121. Our] Or Warb. (misprint). Rowe, Pope, Han. ’Fore me Theob. 
124, 125. Foreme...What then? What et cet. 

then?| As one line Cap. et seq. Jpeakes.| speaks!— Cap. et seq. 


what propriety is there in the subsequent exclamation of Menenius, “’Fore me, 
this fellow speaks!”?’ Dyce likewise refers to Singer’s rearrangement of speeches, 
remarking in conclusion, ‘among other changes in the distribution of the present 
dialogue the words “Should by the cormorant belly be restrain’d Who is the sink 
o’ the body” are transferred to Menenius—with great unfitness.’ 

119. Kingly crown’d] W. A. Wricut: That is, having a kingly crown. This is 
an example of the words, participial in form, which are derived from nouns. Of 
the ten sephiroth or intelligences, which appear in the philosophy of the Kabbalah, 
the first, which is called the ‘crown,’ is placed in the head. 

120. Counsailor Heart] Jonson: The heart was anciently esteemed the seat 
of prudence. Homo cordatus is a prudent man.—MALoneE: The heart was con- 
sidered by Shakespeare as the seat of the understanding. [See note by Malone on 
]. 144 supra.—WRIGcHT notes that in the Kabbalah the Heart is called the seat of 
the understanding.—ED.] 

122. Muniments] W. A. Wricut: That is, supports, defences; like the Latin 
munimenta.—CasE (Arden Sh.): The N. E. D. quotes this passage under the sense, 
‘Things with which a person or place is provided, furnishings,’ and also cites 
among other references Spenser, The Faerie Queene, IV, vili, 6, ‘By chance he 
certain muniments forthdrew, Which yet with him as relickes did abide.’ 

123. that] For other examples of ‘that’ as a conjunctional affix see ABBOTT, 
§ 287. 

124. Foreme] W. A. Wricut: A petty oath, probably substituted for the more 
common ‘’Fore God,’ to avoid the penalties imposed by the Act of Parliament, 
3 James I, ch. 21, to restrain the abuse of players. See Mer. of Ven., I, ii, 99. 
It occurs again in All’s Well, II, iii, 31: ‘Why, your dolphin is not lustier: ’fore me, 
I speak in respect.’ In 2 Henry IV: III, ii, 186, where the quartos read ‘’Fore 
God,’ the Folio’s have ‘Trust me’; and in two other passages of the same play 
where the objectionable expression occurs it is omitted in the Folios. Compare 
also Rom. & Jul., III, iv, 34: ‘Afore me! it is so very late.’ And Othello, IV, i, 
149, ‘Before me! look where she comes.’ 

126. Cormorant] In a note on Love’s Labour’s Lost, I, i, 9, this edition, wherein 
‘cormorant’ is used as here—as an adjective—the Editor says: ‘I can find no 
proof that this aquatic bird is more eager than others of its kind in satisfying 
hunger, and why the unfortunate fowl should have been selected from time im- 
memorial as an emblem of voracity I have not yet discovered. Possibly it is 
one of Pliny’s facts.—Murray (N. E. D.), in this regard, gives no help; he styles 


46 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


Who is the finke a th’body. 127 
Men. Well, what then? 
2.Cit. The former Agents, if they did complaine, 

What could the Belly anfwer? 130 
Men. I will tell you, 

If you’l beftow a {mall (of what you haue little) 


Patience awhile; you’ft heare the Bellies anfwer. 133 
127. ath’) o’th’ F,. 132. you haue] you've Words. 
body.] body— Rowe,+. body,— 133. awhile] F,, Dyce, Cam.+, Huds. 
Cap. Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr. ii, Words. a while F;F, et cet. 
128. Well,] Well— Rowe,+. you’ fi} Ff, Rowe i, Dyce i, 
129. former] foresaid Words. lordlier Neils. you’s Schmidt. you’ll Rowe ii 
L. Campbell. et cet. 


Agents] Agent F,. 


it “voracious,” but this hardly differentiates it from hungry beasts, birds, or 
men.’—ED. 

129. former Agents] WALKER (Crit., iii, 206) marks these words with a query, 
on which his editor, Letrsom, has the following foot-note: ‘From the doubt 
expressed here Walker was, perhaps, hesitating about the meaning of ‘“‘former.” 
We might, perhaps, compare “former ensigns” in Jul. C@es., V, i, 80; but there 
I should say Shakespeare wrote foremost ensigns, after North's Plutarch.’—[Is 
not ‘former’ here used in the sense aforesaid? Scumupt (Lew., s. v. 3) gives several 
examples of this use of ‘former’; among them he includes the present line —ED.] 

132. a small] DricHTon (p. 123): Though Shakespeare often uses ‘small’ 
where we should use Jitile, it is probable that but for the parentheses he would 
not have written ‘a small Patience.’ [Shakespeare’s phrase is not, I think, as 
Deighton takes it; the relative clause in the parentheses makes the sentence really 
read ‘a small of patience.’ CratcrE (WV. E. D., s. v. small, B. 5) says: ‘A small 
quantity or amount; a little piece, a morsel,’ and gives the following example: 
‘That we might have a small of bred, our carcase to contente.—Dranr: Horace, 
Sat., Wail Jeremiah V, Lib (1566). Among other examples of ‘small’ used 
substantively Scumupt (Lew.) does not include the present line.—Eb.] 

132. (of... little)] P. Smmeson (Sh. Punctuation, p. 93): Compound nouns or 
adjectives are enclosed within brackets, where we should employ the hyphen if 
we used any punctuation at all. ‘In ranke, and (not to be endur’d) riots Sir,’ 
Lear I, iv, 226. [Compare II, i, roo: ‘How now (my faire as Noble) Ladyes.’] 

133. you’st] W. A. Wricut: Apparently a provincialism which Shakespeare 
intentionally puts into the mouth of Menenius when addressing the citizens, and 
may, therefore, be retained as well as ‘woo’t’ in Hamlet, V, i, 298, 299, and Lady 
Capulet’s ‘thow’s’ for thou shalt in Rom. & Jul., I, iii, 9, where the quartos and folios 
all have ‘thou’se.’ Compare Webster and Marston’s Malcontent, IV, i, ‘Thou’st kill 
him.’ And again, V, iii, ‘You’st ne’er meet more’; ‘Nay, if you’ll do’s no good, 
You’st do’s no harm.’—Ro tre (p. 198) takes exception to Wright’s retention of the 
provincialism on the ground that ‘in the preceding line the Folio has “you’ll,” and 
“‘you’st”’ here may be a mere slip of the compositor—an absent-minded substitution 
of his provincial form for the more correct one in the ‘‘copy.’”’’—[Wright’s last 
quotation, wherein ‘you’ll’ and ‘you’st’ both are used to mark a difference in the 


ACW, SC] CORIOLANUS - 47 


2.Cit. Y’are long about it. 
Men. Note me this good Friend; 135 
Your moft graue Belly was deliberate, 
Not rafh like his Accufers,and thus anfwered. 
True is it my Incorporate Friends(quoth he) 
That I receiue the generall Food at firft 
Which you do liue vpon : and fit it is, 140 
Becaufe I am the Store-houfe, and the Shop 
Of the whole Body. But,if you do remember, 
I fend it through the Riuers of your blood 


Euen to the Court, the Heart, to th’feate o’th’Braine, 144 
134. Y’are] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Del. 142. But,] But F,F, et seq. 
Sing. ii, Ktly, Wh. i, Huds. i. Yow’re 144. the Heart,| the heart,— Mal. 


Cap. Dycei, Sta. Cam. Craig. You are Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Dyce, Sta. 

Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Hal. of the heart Ktly conj. the 

Knt, Hal. Ye’re Dyce ii, Glo. Cla. Wh. center’d heart Lettsom (ap. Dyce ii.). 

li, Words. Huds. ii, Neils. oth’ Braine] th’ high-seated brain 
135. this good...| this, good... F, et seq. Lettsom (ap. Dyce ii.). 


sense, shows, I think, that Rolfe’s explanation of the lack of consistency in the 
Folio does not fit the present case.—Ep.] 

136. deliberate] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Menenius is taking the part 
of the ‘Belly,’ that is, of the Senate, and so resents being hurried, assuming its 
manner of deliberating to rebuke hot-heads who accuse it rashly. 

141. Store-house, and the Shop] R. G. Waite: According to modern British 
usage Shakespeare is here somewhat pleonastic, but according to the best English 
usage, which is still preserved in New England and her off-shoots, he is not at 
all so. ‘Shop’ means properly a place where fabrics are made or work is done; 
and such is the sense in which it is always used with us, but in Great Britain it is 
rarely so applied, and is almost universally misused to mean a store or collection 
of articles kept or stored for sale—a confusion avoided in Elizabethan usage and 
of that in the present day in this country. Thus, for instance, we say a watch- 
maker’s shop, a milliner’s shop, . . . but a book store, a grocery store, . . . a shoe- 
maker’s shop, but a shoe store. . . . The transatlantic use of the word and its 
active verbal sense are clearly traceable to the custom of having the booth or the 
sales-room in front of the shop, such a vivid picture of which is presented in the 
opening chapter of The Fortunes of Nigel—In the passage before us the stomach 
is represented as both the store house of the body—‘still cupboarding the viand’— 
and its shop—‘sending it through the rivers of the blood.’ 

143. I send it. . . of your blood] A. H. G. Doran (Article, Medicine, ch. xiv, 
Sh’s England, i, 421): Shakespeare’s plays show that he had heard much about 
the teaching of practical anatomy and understood certain theories about the move- 
ment of the blood. He described the belly as sending ‘the general food . . . through 
the rivers of your blood.’ Such language, however, is perhaps merely figurative, 
and the poet died before Harvey’s views were made public, and doubtless held the 
old notion that the blood flowed in the veins, and that the arteries held, besides 
blood, the vital spirits. 

144. to th’seate o’th’Braine] Tyrwuitr: This seems to me a very languid 


48 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Act 1 Sex 


And through the Crankes and Offices of man, 145 


expression. I believe we should read, with the omission of a particle, ‘to the 
seat, the brain.’ He uses ‘seat’ for throne, the royal seat, which the first editors 
not apprehending, corrupted the passage. It is thus used in Rich. II: ‘Yea, 
distaff-women manage rusty bills Against thy seat,’ III, ii, 118. It should be 
observed, too, that one of the Citizens had just before characterized these prin- 
cipal parts of the human fabric by similar metaphors: ‘The kingly crowned 
head.’ . . . ‘The counsellor heart.’—[RANN is Trywhitt’s only follower in thus 
reading.—Ep.]—Matone™: I have too great respect for even the conjectures of my 
respectable and very judicious friend to suppress his note, though it appears to me 
erroneous. In the present instance I have not the smallest doubt, being clearly of 
opinion that the text is right. ‘Brain’ is here used for reason or understanding. 
Shakespeare seems to have had Camden as well as Plutarch before him; the former 
of whom has told a similar story in his Remaines, 1605, and has, like our poet, 
made the heart the seat of the brain, or understanding: ‘Hereupon they all agreed 
to pine away their lasie and publike enemy. One day passed over, the second 
followed very tedious, but the third day was so grievous to them that they called 
a common counsel. The eyes waxed dimme, the feete could not support the body, 
the armes waxed lazie, the tongue faltered and could not lay open the matter. 
Therefore they all with one accord desired the advice of the heart. There REASON 
laid open before them,’ &c., p. 109. [See Appendix: Date of Composition, Malone.] 
I agree, however, entirely with Tyrwhitt, in thinking that ‘seat’ means here the 
royal seat, the throne. ‘The seat of the brain’ is put in opposition with the heart, 
and is descriptive of it: ‘I send it (says the belly) through the blood, even to 
the royal residence, the heart, in which the kingly crowned understanding is en- 
throned.’-—Dovuce (ii, 77): What Camden has given is from John of Salisbury, 
who wrote in the reign of Henry II, and professes to have received it from Pope 
Hadrian IV. See his Polycraticon, sive de nugis curialium, hb. vi, ch. 24. Camden 
has omitted the latter part; and the learned reader will do well to consult the 
original, where he will find some verses by Q. Serenus Sammonicus, a physician in 
the reign of Caracalla, that allude to the fable. John of Salisbury has himself 
composed two hundred Latin lines De membris conspirantibus, which are in the 
first edition of his Polycraticon printed at Brussels, without date, about 1470. 
These were reprinted by Andreas Rivinus at Leipsic, 1655, 8vo; and likewise at 
the end of the fourth volume of Fabricius’s Bibliotheca medie et infime etatis, 
Hamburg, 1735. They are, most probably, the lines which are called in Sinner’s 
catalogue of the MSS at Berne, ‘Carmen Ovidii de altercatione ventris et artuum, 
vol. iii, p. 116. [See also note by Douce, 1. 99 amte.|—Hupson (ed. i.) maintains 
that the interpretation given to this line by Malone in the last paragraph of his 
note is ‘evidently wrong; the right sense being, apparently, ‘I send the general 
food through the rivers of your blood to the heart, which is the court; I send it 
to the seat of the brain,” that is, the head; for the belly may as justly claim the 
honour of sending nourishment to the head as to the heart.’—Casr (Arden Sh.): 
The confusion between two different bodily organs, and awkwardness of under- 
standing one literally and the other figuratively, disposes one to reject Malone’s 
view, but it certainly receives some support from the use of the two words court 
and seat, both equivalent to ‘royal residence.’ 

144, 145. seate o’th’Braine . . . the Crankes] CoLLiER (Notes and Emendations, 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 49 


The ftrongeft Nerues, and {mall inferiour Veines 146 
From me receiue that naturall competencie 

Whereby they liue. And though that all at once 

(You my good Friends, this fayes the Belly) marke me. 149 


148, 149. at once (You...Friends] at Coll. Del. i, Huds. You,...—this... 


once’ ,—You,...friends, Cla. belly, Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Wh. i, Com. 
149. (You...this...Belly)] You...(this Glo. Del. ii, Words. Craig, Neils. 

...Belly) Rowe,+, Varr. Mal. Ran. 149. me.] Ff. me— Rowe,+, Var. 

Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. Yov,... 78, Ran. Ktly. me,— Cap. et cet. 


this...belly; Cap. You,...this...belly, 


etc., p. 347): It is evident that this line is not measure; and we are instructed 
{by the MS. Corrector] to read it and the next in a way that not only cures this 
defect, but much improves the sense, by following up the figure of ‘the court, 
the heart,’ and completing the resemblance of the human body to the various parts 
of a commonwealth: ‘Even to the Court, the heart, the Senate, brain; And through 
the ranks and offices of man.’ When ‘seat’ was written seate the mistake for 
senate was easy; and the change (which never occurred to any commentator) is 
supported both by what precedes and by what follows it, going through the 
various degrees in a state—the court, the senate, persons of different ranks, the 
holders of offices, &c.—ANoN. (Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p. 320): The senate 
brain! when Shakespeare has distinctly told us that the senate is the belly [l. 157]. 
This, indeed, is the very point of the fable. Surely nothing except the most 
extreme degree of dotage can account for such a manifest perversion as that; yet 
Mr Collier says that ‘it much improves the sense.’—SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, p. 
208), referring to the MS. Corrector’s two new readings, says: ‘Perhaps there was 
never a more perverse and impertinent attempt made to alter the true language 
of the poet. The authority Shakespeare followed for the fable was Plutarch. [In] 
Camden’s Remaines, where it is also related, the heart is made the seat of the brain, 
or understanding; and there is no doubt that seat means the royal seat, the throne. 
... The alteration of “cranks” to ranks is equally unwarranted. What could the 
ranks signify here? ‘Cranks and offices” were certainly the words of the poet; 
“cranks” are sinuosities . . . and “‘offices” the functionary parts, as Shakespeare 
himself will show. Thus in Cymb., V, v, “All offices of nature should again Do 
their due functions.”? The Corrector’s instructions to read it otherwise will there- 
fore be in vain and of no effect.—T. Mommsren (Der Perkins Sh., p. 91): The 
alteration ranks and offices, if senate be right, only furnishes a description of the 
great machine of state, since ‘through the veins’ has preceded it, thus it is more 
pertinent here to understand ‘cranks.’ 

145. Crankes] SrerveNS: ‘Cranks’ are the meandrous ducts of the human 
body.—Matone: ‘Cranks’ are windings. In Venus & Adonis our Author has 
employed the same word as a verb: ‘He cranks and crosses, with a thousand 
doubles,’ [l. 682]. He has a similar metaphor in Hamlet: ‘The natural gates and 
alleys of the body,’ I, v, 67.—RoLFe (p. 198) notes that this is the only instance 
of the noun in Shakespeare. [Murray (N. E. D., s. v.) gives as an example of 
this use of the word: ‘How he might easily win out of the turnings and cranks of 
the Labyrinth.’—North’s Plutarch (1676), 7.] 

148. that] For other examples of ‘that’ as a conjunctional affix, see ABBOTT, § 287. 

149. You my good Friends] Joun Hunter (ed. p. 9): The Citizens. These 


4 


50 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT I, SC. i. 


2.Cit. I fir, well, well. 150 
Men. Though all at once, cannot 

See what I do deliuer out to each, 

Yet I can make my Awdit vp, that all 

From me do backe receiue the Flowre of all, 

And leaue me but the Bran. What fay you too’t ? 155 
2.Cit. It was an anfwer, how apply you this? 
Men. ‘The Senators of Rome, are this good Belly, 

And you the mutinous Members : For examine 

Their Counfailes, and their Cares;difgeft things rightly, 159 


154. Flowre] F,. Flowr F3F,. flow’r Pope, Han. answer;— Theob. Warb. 
Rowe,+. flower Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. answer. Johns. Coll. Del. Sta. Ktly, 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Del. i, Coll. ii, Hal. Wh. i, Neils. answer: Cap. et cet. 


flour Knt et cet. 159. Cares] Care Ff, Rowe. 
155. toot] toot F,. tot F,F,. difgeft] Ff, Beeching. digest 
156. anfwer,] Ff. answer— Rowe, Rowe et cet. 


words are generally regarded as part of the belly’s address to the members, but it 
is likely that Shakespeare here imitated the language of Holinshed, ‘Even so, 
(quoth he,) O you my masters, and citizens of Rome.’—W. A. Wricut evidently 
arrives at the same conclusion as Hunter in regard to the distribution of this line, 
as he likewise considers the whole line ‘a parenthetical interruption by Menenius 
to call the attention of the Citizens to the real point of the fable.’ 

154. Flowre] RoLFe (p. 199): Capell, followed by some modern editors, has 
‘flower’; but flour is the natural antithesis to ‘bran.’ It is curious, by the way, 
that this is the only instance of the word in Shakespeare. In III, i, 389 below 
he has the same figure in ‘meale and Bran’; as also in Cymb., IV, ii, 27: ‘Nature 
hath meal and bran, contempt and grace.’ 

155. Bran] SkEat (Dict., s. v.) remarks that the original meaning of this word, 
from Old French dren, is refuse, and especially ill-smelling refuse. 

155. What say you too’t] Bercuinc (Falcon Sh.): Menenius gives his apologue 
an unexpected turn, not asserting that the belly gave up all it should, but only 
that whatever the limbs did receive came from the belly, which, while putting 
the parable beside the mark, makes it for the moment unanswerable. However, 
he has got the mob into better humour, and so, before the First Citizen has time 
to discover the non sequitur, takes up the safer weapon of ridicule [l. 164]. 

158, 159. For examine . . . their Cares; disgest, etc.] A. E. Brak (Notes & 
Queries, t0 July, 1852, p. 27), If this reading were correct it would doubtless 
afford an example of the use of ‘digest’ in the abstract sense; but it is, in reality, 
a gross misprision of the true meaning of the passage, and is only another proof 
of how far we are still from possessing a correctly printed edition of Shakespeare. 
The proper punctuation would be this: 


‘The senators of Rome are this good belly, 

And you the mutinous members!—For examine— 
Their counsels, and their cares digest things rightly 
Touching the weal o’the common!—you shall find,’ &c. 


ACT HEMGC 21] CORIOLANUS 51 


Touching the Weale a’th Common, you fhall finde 160 
No publique benefit which you receiue 
But it proceeds, or comes from them to you, 


And no way from your felues. What do you thinke ? 163 
160. a’th) oth’ F,, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 163. thinke?] think,— Dyce, Cam.+ 
of the Sing. Ktly. o’the Cap. et cet. (subs.). 


‘For examine’ is introduced merely to diversify the discourse and to fix the atten- 
tion of the listeners; it might be wholly omitted without injury to the sense, but 
in the passage, as it now stands, ‘examine’ is made an effective verb, having for 
" its objects the counsels and the cares of the senators, while ‘digest’ is made auxiliary 
to and synonymous with ‘examine,’ and, like it, is in the imperative mood, as 
though addressed to the people, instead of being, as it ought to be, in the indicative, 
with ‘counsels’ and ‘cares’ for its agents. It is a curious instance of how com- 
pletely the true sense of a passage may be distorted by the misapplication of a 
few commas. ‘Digest,’ therefore, in this passage, as elsewhere, is in direct allusion 
to the animal function. The very essence and pith of the parable of ‘the belly 
and the members’ is to place in opposition the digestive function of the belly with 
the more active offices of the members; and the application of the parable is 
that ‘the senators are this good belly,’ their counsels and their cares digest for the 
general good, and distribute the resulting benefits throughout the whole com- 
munity. This is the true reading; and no person who duly considers it, or who 
has compared it with the original in Plutarch, but must be satisfied that it is so. 
[See also note by A. E. Brae on III, i, 158.] 

161-163. No publique . . . your selues] Verity (Student’s Sh.): The Citizens 
might have retorted that they earned these ‘public benefits’ (if any) by public 
services, such as fighting for the State; also that, as a matter of fact, they were 
starving, while the ‘members’ of the body, on Menenius’s own showing, received 
from the belly their ‘natural competency’ in return for their services.—[Verity’s 
point is, I think, well taken; but then Menenius knew well the intelligence of his 
audience, and that they would not be likely to detect the flaws in his argument 
either here or at l. 155, as shown by Beeching. Had it not been so, the Citizen 
might easily have turned the whole of Menenius’s fable against him by showing 
that, in the present situation, although actually in rebellion, the Citizens were 
more like to the Belly, in the fable, and the Senate to the limbs, than as repre- 
sented by Menenius. By starving and depriving them of their rights the Senate’s 
power would be weakened.—Eb.] 

163. What do you thinke?] E. K. Caamprrs (Warwick Sh.): Menenius has 
learnt one of the arts of the public speaker, to single out the most prominent 
of his interrupters and disconcert him by making him ridiculous. But, on the 
whole, his speech has not been a success. In North his persuasions ‘pacified the 
people’; in Shakespeare they have no effect. The whole episode only serves to 
bring out the complete divergence between the noble and the plebeian points of 
view. And one feels that the Citizen, who has shown a good deal of shrewd 
common sense, and has escaped all the pitfalls of Menenius’ dialectic, has really 
had the best of it. Menenius’ argument, when analysed, is only the ordinary 
sophistry by which the middlemen and the unproductive classes generally justify 
to themselves their own appropriation of nine-tenths of the profits of industry. 


52 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. 1. 


You, the great Toe of this Affembly? 
2.Cit. I the great Toe ? Why the great Toe ? 165 
Men. For that being one o’th loweft, bafeft, pooreft 

Of this moft wife Rebellion, thou goeft formoft : 


Thou Rafcall, that art worft in blood to run, 168 
167. goeft] go’st Cap. Var. ’78 et seq. 168, 169. blood to run, Lead’ jt firft 
168, 169. Thou...vantage] Deleted blood to run, Lead’st first, Theob. Warb. 

Coll. MS. Johns. Cap. Mal. Knt. blood, to ruin, 
168. worft in blood) first from blows Lead’st first, Var. ’73. blood, to run, 

Han. first in blood Cap. Lead’st first, Ran. blood, to run 


Lead’st first, Var. ’78, ’85, Steev. Varr. 


It is very plausible, but not calculated to convince a starving proletariate-— 
[The observation by Chambers that the persuasions of Menenius have no effect 
is one that must be apparent to any reader or auditor, and if to us, how much 
more so must it have been to Shakespeare with his abundant knowledge of dra- 
matic construction. That he realised how difficult was the task before him is 
shown at the beginning of the colloquy where the Citizen says that Menenius 
must not think ‘to fob off their disgraces with a tale.’ Menenius does attempt 
it, but does not succeed in making the mob put down their weapons and quietly 
disperse, a course of action, on so slight a cause, which Shakespeare rightly realised 
would be perfectly inconsistent with a crowd in such an ugly mood, bent on 
destruction. All that Menenius accomplishes is to delay their precipitate action. 
It can hardly be said, therefore, that this fable is here without any dramatic 
effect.—En.] 

164. the great Toe] Scumupt (ed. p. 35): Menenius so calls him, following out 
the fable of the Belly and the Members. 

168. Thou... to run] MaLone (Supplemental Observutions, i, 218) in reference 
to the pointing of this line as in the Variorwm of ’78 (see Text. Notes) suggests that 
a comma be placed after ‘run’ instead of after ‘blood.’ ’Tis true, ’tis pity, and 
pity ’tis, ’tis true that Malone has, in this case, neglected to glance at the Folio 
text wherein is the punctuation that he proposes as a change.——Ep.—STAuUNTON: 
Menenius is supposed to mean: ‘thou, meagre wretch, least in heart and resolu- 
tion, art prompt enough to lead when profit points the way.’ Yet if nothing 
better can be extracted from these words in their metaphorical sense, we would 
rather understand them literally, and believe ‘worst’ to be a misprint, as it might 
easily be, for /ast. The passage then becomes perfectly intelligible and in character 
with the speaker: ‘Thou rascal, that art last in blood (that is, znto blood shed) to 
run, Lead’st first to win some vantage.’ 

168. Rascall] MALoNe: ‘Rascal’ meant a lean deer, and is here used equiv- 
ocally. [In The Master of Game, the earliest-known book on Venery, ch. iii, 
the author says of the Hart: ‘And the first year that they be calved they be called a 
Calf, the second year a bullock; and that year they go forth to rut; the third year a 
brocket; the fourth year a staggard, the fifth year a stag; the sixth year a hart of 
ten and then first is he chaseable, for always before shall he be called but rascal or 
folly’ (ed. Baillie-Grohman, p. 29). On the derivation of this word Skrat (Dict., 
s. v.) says: ‘As the word was a term of the chase, and as it has the French suffix, 
aille, it must be of French origin, no other origin being conceivable, the word not 


AGIA SC. 1] CORIOLANUS 53 


Lead’ft firft to win fome vantage. 169 


being English. Nor can it, I think, be doubted that the English raskaille stands 
for an Old French rascaille, which is clearly the same word as modern French 
racaille, “the rascality or base and rascall sort, the scumme, dregs, offals, outcasts 
of any company,” Cotgrave.’ This last bears out Malone’s remark as to the 
equivocal use of the word in the present passage——MADDEN (p. 60, foot-note) 
says: ‘In the sense in which [rascal] is now used as a term of reproach, it was in 
the first instance spoken by the “figure Metaphore . . . as one should in reproch 
say to a poore man, thou raskall knaue where raskall is properly the hunters terme 
giuen to young deere, leane and out of season, and not to people.’—Puttenham: 
Arte of English Poesie, 1589 (ed. Arber, p. 191).—Hon. J. W. Fortescue (Shake- 
speare’s England, vol. ii, ch. xxvii, § 1, Hunting, p. 339, foot-note): Shakespeare’s 
use of the word [rascal] is peculiar: ‘Horns? Even so. Poor men alone? No, 
no; the noblest deer hath them as huge as the rascal.’-—As You Like It, III, iii, 
58. [The present line here quoted.] Reading these quotations together with the 
speech of John Talbot [z Henry VI: IV, ii, 48] it is plain that Shakespeare con- 
ceived of ‘rascal’ as a deer with a great head and a small body, who would neither 
fight nor run. Such deer though not unknown are very uncommon, though it is 
by no means unusual for a deer past his prime to carry an inferior head on a very 
large body. Shakespeare’s rascal would be at a great disadvantage, for deer fight 
by shoving before they come to goring; and here the light weight of his body would 
place him at the mercy of a stag of heavier frame. Moreover, the enormous mass 
of bone upon his head, . . . with no sufficient strength of body to carry it, would 
make such a deer weak and helpless. Hence the legitimate conclusion that he 
could neither run far nor fight well, for he would be overweighted and over- 
balanced by his head. He might very likely be in the foremost place in a herd, 
for, when a herd is moved the hinds and young male deer always move in front, 
and the big stags bring up the rear; but he could never bully anything bigger than 
a four year old....It may be questioned if Shakespeare was correct in using the 
word ‘rascal’ only in this restricted sense; and if the term be extended to its 
legitimate limits, so as to cover all young male deer, then Shakespeare’s similes are 
false; for a young stag (as the sportsmen of the day well knew) can and will run 
better than any other and can fight savagely enough if he husbands some strength 
for the bay; which, however, asa rule he does not. [It is to be feared that Fortescue 
has taken the words of Touchstone too literally as an indication of Shakespeare’s 
knowledge of venery. The context, of which this line is but a small part, shows 
that there is here intended but another allusion to a jest which was never stale to 
Shakespeare and his fellows, unsavory as it may be to us. ‘Rascal,’ as Touchstone 
uses it here, is simply following out the idea expressed in ‘poor men’ in contrast to 
the ‘noblest.’ That is, Both noble and poor are alike subject to the same mis- 
fortune.—ED.] 

168. that art worst] CAPELL (vol. I, pt i, p. 82) follows Hanmer in reading 
“that art first,’ and thereon says: ‘The maker of this alteration, the Oxford editor, 
has lessen’d the applause that was due to it by going farther than necessary, and 
changing “‘in blood” to from blows; for the former is very intelligible, signifying 
in any bloody business, any business of danger.’ 

168. that art . . . blood to run] Jonnson: I think we may better read, by an 
easy change, ‘thou art worst in blood, to rwin Lead’st first, to win,’ &c. Thou 


54 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


[168. that art worst in blood to run] 

that art the meanest by birth, art the foremost to lead thy fellows to ruin, in hope 
of some advantage. The meaning, however, is perhaps only this: ‘Thou that 
art a hound of the lowest breed, lead’st the pack, when anything is to be gotten.’ 
—STEEVENS: ‘Worst in blood’ may be the true reading. In 1 Henry VI: ‘If 
we be English deer, be then in blood; Not rascal-like to fall down with a pinch,’ IV, 
ii, 48.—Matone: The phrase ‘in blood’ was a phrase of the forest. Our author 
seldom was careful that. his comparisons should answer on both sides. He seems to 
mean here ‘thou worthless scoundrel, though like a deer not in blood, thou art in 
the worst condition for running of all the herd of plebeians, takest the lead in this 
tumult, in order to obtain some private advantage to yourself.’ What advantage 
the foremost of a herd of deer could obtain is not easy to point out, nor did Shake- 
speare, I believe, consider. Perhaps, indeed, he only uses ‘rascal’ in its ordinary 
sense. So afterwards, ‘From rascals worse than they,’ [I, vi, 56]. Dr John- 
son’s interpretation appears to me inadmissible; as the term, though it is applic- 
able both in its original and metaphorical sense to a man, cannot, I think, be 
applied to a dog; nor have I found any instance of the term ‘in blood’ being applied 
to the canine species. [Malone refers to a note of his on ‘The deer was, as you 
know, sanguis, in blood,’ Love’s Labour’s Lost, IV, ii, 3, but as he there merely 
discusses a question as to a textual change in regard to the word ‘sanguis,’ his 
remarks are of no assistance in the present passage. As to Malone’s remark that 
‘in blood’ is a ‘phrase of the forest’ I can but say that so it may be, but a careful 
search of the Duke of York’s volume, The Master of Game, circa 1400; of Turber- 
ville’s Noble Arte of Venerie, 1576, and of N. Coxe’s Gentleman’s Recreation, 1674, 
has not yielded any example of such a phrase either in the lists of terms used in 
the chase or in the various descriptions of the Hart, the Buck, the Roebuck, or the 
Deer; with these writers the usual term applied to a Hart in his prime condition 
is either ‘pride’ or ‘prime of grease.’ The WV. E. D.,s. v. Blood, under the cap- 
tion Hunting phrase, quotes the passages from r Henry VI. and Love’s Labour’s 
Lost, given above, and but one other as follows: ‘When hounds are out of blood, 
there is a kind of evil genius attending all that they do, while a pack of fox hounds 
well in blood, like troops flushed with conquest, are not easily withstood.’—P. 
Beckford (1781), Hunting, p. 308. It would, I think, be unfair to Malone to 
say that he did not know of this when he remarked that he had not ‘found any 
instance of the term applied to the canine species’; all that he means apparently 
is that in writings contemporary with Shakespeare the phrase, as far as he knows, 
does not appear; the comparatively modern date of the quotation from Beckford 
seems to justify such a conclusion. I speak with great diffidence, but possibly 
the phrase ‘in blood’ thus applied to a deer in its prime is original with Shake- 
speare since no other writer has used it in exactly this sense-—Ep.]—VERItTY 
(Student’s Sh.): Malone says, ‘What advantage the foremost of a herd of deer could 
obtain is not easy to point out.’ But the latter part of 1. 169 really applies to 
the Citizen: he—‘to win some advantage’—thrusts himself into the first place, 
though no more worthy of it than a ‘rascal’ stag which somehow gets into the 
place of honour at the head of the herd and ought therefore to be fittest to hunt. 
—wW. A. Wricut: Menenius argues that the citizen, who was most unfitted to be 
a leader, must have thrust himself into a prominent position for some purposes 
of his own.—BErEcuiInG (Henry Irving Sh): Menenius means that for rascals to 
lead may be for their own advantage, but not for that of the herd. 


ACTA, SC21:] CORIOLANUS 55 
But make you ready your ftiffe bats and clubs, 170 
Rome, and her Rats, are at the point of battell, 


The one fide muft haue baile. 


Enter Caius Martius. 


Hayle, Noble <-Aartius. 174 
171. Rome,...Rats,| Rome...rais Rowe 172-175. The one...Thanks] One line 
et seq. Ktly. 
172. baile] bale Theob. Warb. Johns. 173. Enter Caius Martius] After 1. 


Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 171 Cap. After 174 Mal. Ran. Steev. 

- Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Sta. Ktly. bane Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Hal. Ktly, 

Han. Huds. i. Enter Caius Marcius Corio- 
SCENE 111. Pope, Han. Warb. lanus. Johns. Var. ’73. 

Johns. 


171. Rome, and her Rats,] P. Smmpson (Sh. Punctuation, p. 30) shows by other 
examples that the comma is frequently used to mark emphasis, and in such case 
it follows the stressed word. ‘Timon will to the Woods, where he shall finde 
Th’ vnkindest Beast, more kinder than Mankinde.’—Timon, IV, i, 35. ‘Thou 
canst compell, no more then she entreate. —Mid. N. Dream, III, ii, 249. 

172. baile] THEOBALD: It must be the vanquisht side, sure, that could want it; 
and who were likely to be their Bail? But it is endless to question with negligence 
and stupidity. The Poet undoubtedly wrote as I have restor’d: Bale, i. e., 
Sorrow, Misfortune, must have the worst of it. I have restor’d this word in some 
other passages of our Author; and we meet with it in a play attributed to him, 
call’d Locrine, ‘Yea, with these eyes thou hast seen her, and therefore pull them 
out, for they will work thy Bale,’ [ed. Brooke, I, ii, 21. Theobald furnishes 
several other examples from other sources of bale used in this sense; but according 
to W. A. WricuT this is the only passage wherein Shakespeare uses the noun. 
Theobald’s statement that he had corrected the spelling in some other passages 
is, therefore, a slight exaggeration. Wright gives its derivation as from A. S. 
bealu, injury, mischief, and quotes, as a use by Shakespeare of an adjectival form 
of the word, ‘With baleful weeds, and precious juiced flowers,’ Rom. & Jul., 
II, iii, 8, a passage which Mason had earlier quoted to illustrate the fact that 
Shakespeare uses both bale and bane to signify poison. Matonr remarks that 
‘This word was antiquated in Shakespeare’s time, being marked as obsolete by 
Bullokar in his English Expositor, 1616.’—Ep.] 

173. Enter Caius Martius] ‘I can never forget Kemble’s Coriolanus; his 
entrée was the most brilliant I ever witnessed. His person derived a majesty 
from a scarlet robe which he managed with inimitable dignity. The Roman energy 
of his deportment, the seraphic grace of his gesture, and the movements of his 
perfect self-possession displayed the great mind, daring to command, and dis- 
daining to solicit, admiration. His form derived an additional elevation of per- 
haps two inches from his sandals. In every part of the house the audience rose, 
waved their hats, and huzzaed, and the cheering must have lasted more than five 
minutes.’—John Howard Payne, Letter from London, June 19, 1817: G. Harri- 
son’s Payne, ch. iii, pp. 68-69 (quoted by B. Matthews, Actors and Actresses of 
Great Britain and United States, vol. ii, p. 86). 


56 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT 1, Sc. i. 


Mar.Thanks. What’s the matter you diffentious rogues 175 
That rubbing the poore Itch of your Opinion, 
Make your felues Scabs. 

2.Cit. We haue euer your good word. 

Mar.He that will giue good words to thee, wil flatter 
Beneath abhorring. What would you haue, you Curres, 180 
That like nor Peace, nor Warre? The one affrights you, 


The other makes you proud. He that trufts to you, 182 
175-177. rogues...Scabs.] rogues?... 180. you] ye Rowe,+. 

Scabs, Rowe, Pope. F;F,. rogues,... 181. like nor] like not F;F,, Rowe, 

scabs? Theob. et seq. Pope, Han. Johns. likes not Warb. 
179. thee] ye Dyce, Coll. iii, Words. 182. makes you] makes yon F3. 

Huds. ii. to you] you Var. ’03, ’13, ’2I, 
180. you haue] haue Var. ’78. Sing. i. 


175. For a parallel between the expression of ideas in this and following lines 
and a passage in the play of Sir Thomas More see Appendix: Shakespeare and the 
Masses, R. W. CHAMBERS, P. 711. 


175. Thanks] Capett (vol. I, pti, p. 82): The address of theAuthor is wonderful 
in the entry of Marcius; giving us in one single word, and that his first and a mono- 
syllable, a thoro insight into his character, and a preparation for what is to follow. 

176. the poore Itch . . . Opinion] E. K. CHampBers (Warwick Sh.): That the 
rabble should have an opinion at all is to Coriolanus a sign of an unhealthy con- 
dition in the state. Unless they leave it alone they will only make themselves 
the more uncomfortable for it. The choice of metaphor is characteristic. The 
mob are always, physically as well as spiritually, offensive to Coriolanus. The 
grammar may either be ‘make for yourselves scabs’ or ‘make yourselves into 
scabs.’ ‘Scab’ was a common term of abuse; compare: ‘Con. Here, man, I am 
at thy elbow. Bor. Mass, and my elbow itch’d; I thought there would a scab 
follow.—Much Ado, III, iii, 105. 

179. to thee] Dyce: The Folio has ‘to thee’—the transcriber or compositor, 
it would seem, having mistaken ‘ye’ for ‘y’ (i. e., thee)—that the author could 
not possibly have written ‘thee’ here is manifest. [R. G. WurtTE agrees with 
Dyce that ‘thee’ is clearly a misprint, but I am not wholly persuaded that the 
Folio reading is not more dramatic than Dyce’s proposal. The words of Marcius 
are an echo of those of the Citizen, and are, therefore, directed at him specifically. 
The Citizen had used ‘good word’ sarcastically, and Marcius turns upon him 
with the literal meaning; having thus disposed of his single antagonist he again 
addresses the mob collectively.—Ep.] 

181, 182. That like nor . . . you proud] WarsBurton: That they did not like 
war is evident from the reason assigned, of its frighting them; but why they should 
not like peace (and the reason of that too is assigned) will be very hard to con- 
ceive. Peace, he says, made them proud by bringing with it an increase of wealth 
and power, for those are what make a people proud; but then those are what 
they like but too well, and so must needs like peace, the parent of them. This 
being contrary to what the text says, we may be assured it is corrupt, and that 
Shakespeare wrote: ‘That likes not peace, nor war?’—#. e., Whom neither peace 
nor war fits or agrees with, as making them either proud or cowardly. By this 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 57 


Where he fhould finde you Lyons, findes you Hares: 183 


183. you...you] your...your Rowe ii. (misprint). 


reading ‘peace’ and ‘war,’ from being the accusatives to likes, become the nom- 
inatives. But the Editors, not understanding this construction, and seeing likes, 
a verb singular, to ‘Curs,’ a noun plural, which they supposed the nominative to 
it, would, in order to show their skill in grammar, alter it to ‘like’; but likes for 
pleases was common with the writers of this time-—JoHNnson: That to like is to 
please every one knows, but in that sense it is as hard to say why peace should 
not /zke the people as, in the other sense, why the people should not like peace. 
The truth is, that Coriolanus does not use the two sentences consequentially, but 
. first reproaches them with unsteadiness, then with their other occasional vices. 
—THEOBALD, writing to Warburton, 12‘? February, 1729, says: ‘You would 
make nominatives of peace and war. I had always reconciled it to myself thus, 
that neither like war, nor can be content with peace. War frights you, and peace 
‘and plenty make you so insolent and exacting that you do not know what you would 
have yourselves, and thereby seem not to /ike tranquillity’ (Nichols: Jllus- 
trations, etc., ii, 479)—Mason (Comments, etc., p. 246): If it were not for the com- 
ments that have been made on this passage, I should have passed it over as one 
that required no manner of explanation. ‘That like nor peace nor war’ means, 
that are not contented with either peace or war; the one affrighted them, and 
they therefore disliked it; the other made them proud, and pride is the parent 
of discontent. I don’t understand the force of Warburton’s amendment, as I 
think the case is pretty much the same, whether we say ‘that they like not peace’ 
or ‘that peace does not please them.’—HEATH (409): The excessive affectation of 
subtilty misled Mr Warburton into this violent construction [‘that likes not,’ etc.]. 
The common reading to a common understanding is plain enough and would meet 
with no difficulty. The meaning is: Neither peace nor war can satisfy you, or 
content you. In war you are always afraid of the consequences; and in peace 
your pride won’t let you be quiet, or think any treatment of you, however kind 
and favourable, equal to your deservings. But Mr Warburton by a long train of 
profound reasonings, hath discovered that the mob must necessarily love peace 
because it brings with it an increase of wealth and power, whereas the very 
contrary of this was the constant experience of the Roman republic. In peace 
the Plebeians were always most oppressed because the Patricians had then most 
need of their assistance; whereas in time of war they were obliged to pay court 
to them for their own preservation. [It is, I think, quite beside the point here 
to enter into any discussion as to the relative value of the statements of either 
Warburton or Heath regarding the attitude of the Plebeians to the states of war 
and peace in the days of the Roman republic. Coriolanus says they are satisfied 
with neither state. That is all there is to it; we must, moreover, bear in mind that 
this is the petulant retort of a very testy and irritable man to a set of persons 
whom he despises. The Englishman’s attitude of mind, in the time of Shakespeare 
at least, is, perhaps, reflected in the colloquy between the Servingmen in Act IV, 
sc. v, lines 217-230, and from that we learn that the preference was on the side of 
the stirring times of war, and not for the lethargic days of peace.—Eb.] 

182. The other .. . proud] Cape.t (vol. I, pt i, p. 82): Meaning ungovern- 
able and prone to sedition; mark enough of their not liking peace, when they were 
so ready to break and disturb it. 


58 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act 1, sc. i. 


Where Foxes, Geefe you are : No furer,no, 

Then is the coale of fire vpon the Ice, 185 
Or Hailftone in the Sun. Your Vertue is, 

To make him worthy, whofe offence fubdues him, 

And curfe that Iuftice did it. Who deferues Greatnes, 

Deferues your Hate : and your Affeétions are 


A fickmans Appetite ; who defires moft that 190 
184. Geefe you are] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. : 
Han. geese. You are Ktly, Neils. 190. fickmans] fick mans Fy. sick 

geese: You are Theob. et cet. man’s Rowe et seq. : 
187. fubdues] fuddycs F,. 190, 191. defires...Which] most desires 


188. Iujftice] Justice, Rowe, Theob. That Words. 


184. No surer] Rev. Joun Hunrer: Compare: ‘An habitation giddy and 
unsure Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.’—2 Henry IV: I, iii, 89. 

185. coale of fire vpon the Ice] Hares (Academy, July 20, 1878; reprinted in 
Notes and Essays, p. 292): [There may be here] a reference to the famous frost 
of 1607-8. It must be allowed that this is a somewhat out-of-the-way image. 
Coals on ice are not usually a common spectacle; but it would seem they were 
so in the winter of 1607-8, and at that time the image would be by no means far- 
fetched or unfamiliar; it would, in fact, be obviously suggested. Of course one 
would lay no great stress on it if there was nothing else to connect the play with 
that time; but there being other things that so connect it, the allusion may per- 
haps be taken as confirmatory. ‘Above Westminster,’ writes Chamberlain to 
Carleton, January 8, 1607-8, ‘the Thames is quite frozen over, and the Archbishop 
came from Lambeth on Twelfth Day over the ice to Court. Many fantastical 
experiments are daily put in practice, as certain youths burnt a gallon of wine 
upon the ice, and made all the passengers partakers.’ An account of this frost, 
written during its prevalence, is given in a tract called ‘The Great Frost: Cold 
doings in London, a Dialogue,’ reprinted by Arber in An English Garner, vol. i, 
p. 79. The Citizen in this dialogue tells—to quote a side-note—of beer, ale, wine, 
victuals, and fires on the Thames. ‘Are you cold with going over?’ runs the text, 
“You shall ere you come to the middle of the river spy some ready with pans of 
coals to warm your fingers.’—W. A. Wricut: That is, no more lasting, having no 
more endurance; disappearing as rapidly at the approach of danger as a hot coal 
melts its way through ice, or a hailstone melts in the sun. Compare: ‘Rogues, 
hence, *avaunt! vanish like hailstones, go. —Merry Wives, I, iii, 9o. 

186-188. Your Vertue . . . did it] Strrvens: That is, Your virtue is to speak 
well of him whom his own offences have subjected to justice; and to rail at those 
laws by which he whom you praise was punished.—Casr (Arden Sh.): The thought 
is similar in Ant. & Cleo., I, ii, 192-194, ‘our slippery people, Whose love is never 
link’d to the deserver Till his deserts are past’; and again (Ibid., I, iv, 43), ‘the 
ebb’d man, ne’er loved till ne’er worth love.’ 

188. that Iustice] For examples of this omission of the relative, see, if need- 
ful, ABBotr, § 244.—Bapuam (p. 11): Read ‘That justice did,’ omitting ‘it’; 
t. €., that which justice did in punishing the criminal. 

190. sickmans] WALKER (Cyit., ii, 136): Richman, youngman, oldman, dead- 
man, sickman. In fact, man in combinations of this kind—such of them, I 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 59 


Which would encreafe his euill. He that depends I9gI 
Vpon your fauours, {wimmes with finnes of Leade, 

And hewes downe Oakes, with rufhes. Hang ye:truft ye? 

With euery Minute you do change a Minde, 

And call him Noble, that was now your Hate: 195 
Him vilde, that was your Garland. What’s the matter, 

That in thefe feuerall places of the Citie, 

You cry againft the Noble Senate, who 

(Vnder the Gods) keepe you in awe, which elfe 


_ Would feede on one another? What’s their feeking ? 200 

Men. For Corne at their owne rates, wherof they fay 

The Citie is well ftor’d. 202 
193. Oakes,] Oaks F, et seq. 196. vilde] F.F;. vild Del. i. vile 

Hang ye-truft ye?] Hang ye— F,, Rowe et cet. 

Trust ye? Rowe,+. Trust ye? Hang was} wore Anon. MS. (in 

ye! Huds. ii, Words. (Coleridge). Capell’s copy of F;). 

Hang yel Trust ye? Cap. et cet. 197. thefe] the Rowe,+. 
194. a@ Minde] your mind Huds. ii. 200. What’s their] What is’t they're 

(Coll. MS.). Mal. conj. (withdrawn). 


201. they] thy Rowe ii. (misprint). 


mean, as from their nature are of frequent occurrence—had an enclitic force. This 
is evident not only from their being so frequently printed either in the manner 
above, or with a hyphen, but also from the flow of the verse in many of the pas- 
sages where they occur. [In a foot-note Walker’s editor, Lettsom, calls attention 
to l. 222 below: ‘Corne for the Richmen onely.’-—EbD.] 

193. Hang ye: trust ye?] CoLeRmGE (Literary Remains, p. 100): I suspect 
that Shakespeare wrote it transposed: ‘Trust ye? Hang ye!’—[WALKER (Crit., 
iii, 206), in reference to Coleridge’s suggestion, merely remarks: ‘Perhaps right.’— 
Dyce (ed. ii.), quoting both of the foregoing, says: ‘But compare the first words of 
Marcius’s next speech, “Hang ’em! They say!”’ This last should, however, 
read ‘They said,’ see 1. 219.—Ep.] 

197. these] Dyce (ed. ii.) conjectures that ‘these’ should be the; had he but con- 
sulted any editor between Rowe and the Variorum of 1773 (except Capell) he 
would have learned that therein he was anticipated.—Eb. 

200. What’s their seeking] MALONE: When I was more fond of conjecture 
than I am at present, and, like many others, too desirous to reduce our author’s 
phraseology to that of the present day, I proposed to read, ‘What is’t they're 
seeking?’ but the text certainly is right. ‘Seeking’ is here used substantively. 
The answer is, ‘Their seeking, or swit (to use the language of the time), is for 
corn.’ [As this confession of youthful error appears only in Malone’s own edition, 
1790, the explanation of the word ‘seeking’ alone being retained in subsequent 
editions, it would seem that, having freed his soul by admission of the heinous 
offence, he wished that the whole dreadful sin should be buried in oblivion! 
—ED.] 

201. wherof] For other examples of ‘of’ used with verbs of fullness, where 
we should now use with, see ABBOTT, § 171. 


60 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


Mar. Hang ’em : They fay ? 203 
They’l fit by th’fire, and prefume to know 
What’s done i’th Capitoll : Who’s like to rife, 205 


Who thriues, & who declines : Side faétions, & giue out 
Conie¢turall Marriages, making parties ftrong, 


And feebling fuch as ftand not in their liking, 208 
203. They fay?] They say!— Rowe,+. 206. Who thriues] Om. Han. Cap. 
(Thy... Rowe ii.). 208. feebling] feeble Theob. ii, Warb. 

205. @’th] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. z’the Johns. 
Cap. et cet. 


204. They’!] Apzort (§ 321) cites the present line as perhaps an example wherein 
will is used with the third person with the meaning pretend to or desire to, as in: 
‘He will be here, and yet he is not here.—z Henry VI: II, iii, 58. Thus the 
whole line is: ‘They pretend to sit by the fire and presume to know.’—Eb. 

204-209. They’lsit . . . cobled Shooes] VERITY (Student’s Sh.): Compare Lear’s 
words to Cordelia: ‘Come, let’s away to prison...’ 

“4%. . so we ll live; 
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh 
At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues 
Talk of court news; and we’ll talk with them too, 
Who loses, and who wins; who’s in, who’s out.’—V, ili, r1—-15. 


206. Who thriues . . . giue out] BADHAM (p. 9) gives this line as an example 
of a true Alexandrine, in that it has an unaccented final syllable more than the 
regular pentameter line—ABBoTT (§ sor) marks this line as an example of the 
trimeter couplet. 

206. Side factions] W. A. WricHT: That is, take part in factions. The verb 
is used intransitively in IV, ii, 5. Similarly, Webster in The White Devil (p. 14, 
ed. Dyce, 1857) has ‘Do you bandy factions ’gainst me?’—PERRING (p. 286): Why 
say that ‘side factions’ means ‘take part in factions’ unless that be the only tol- 
erable, or decidedly the best, meaning that the words can bear? As a matter of 
fact, it is neither the only possible nor, in my opinion, the most probable one. 
These fire-side gossips affected to know the state of the political just as they 
affected to know the state of the social world; they patched up imaginary parties, 
making this man belong to this side, and that man to that, just as they gave out 
conjectural marriages; faction-makers and match-makers were they, albeit their 
factions.and their matches had no existence save in their idle imaginations and 
brainless babble-—Casr (Arden Sh.): That is, take the side of. But in view of 
the whole passage, and especially the making of imaginary matches and the arbi- 
trary estimation of parties, there is excuse for those who prefer to take ‘side fac- 
tions’ in some such sense as—invent factions and the composition of these opposite 
‘sides.’ 

207. Coniecturall Marriages} WorDswortH (Historical Plays, i, 116): I find 
no explanation of this, but the matter of intermarriage between upper and lower 
social classes was made a political and party question in the early days of the 
Roman Republic. 

208. feebling] That is, making feebie. Wright compares: ‘Shall that victorious 
hand be feebled here, That in your chambers gave you chastisement.’—King 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 61 


Below their cobled Shooes. They fay ther’s grain enough? 
Would the Nobility lay afide their ruth, 210 


209-213. They fay...Lance] Lines end: 209. They fay] F.F;, Pope, Han. 
grain...afide...make...flaues...lance. Han. Dyce. They fay, F,, Rowe et cet. 


John, V, ii, 146.—AsBort (§ 290) furnishes many examples of this conversion of 
nouns or adjectives into verbs. 

210-213. Would the Nobility . . . my Lance] MinrTo (p. 304): Let us see what 
can be said for and against the extravagant ramps of some of Shakespeare’s heroes. 
There are passages in Julius Cesar and Coriolanus almost as bombastic as any- 
- thing to be found in Shakespeare’s dramatic predecessors. Czsar’s bearing in the 
interview with the conspirators, when they beg the repeal of Cimber’s banish- 
ment, is not less lofty than Tamburlaine’s inflation, though more calm and dig- 
nifled—‘* Know Cesar doth not wrong, nor without cause Will he be satisfied.’ 
And the speech beginning ‘I could be well moved, if I were as you,’ may not 
be an offence against the modesty of nature, but, taken by itself, is an offence 
against the modesty of art. The boasts and brags of Coriolanus out-Herod the 
Herod of the Mysteries. For example [the present lines here quoted], and: 


‘Let me twine 
Mine arms about that body, where against 
My grained Ash an hundred times hath broke 
And scarr’d the moon with splinters.’—IV, v, rog-112. 


[This last is, however, in the speech of Aufidius to Coriolanus——Ep.] It is 
a noticeable circumstance that these inflated speeches—as well as one or two in 
Ant. & Cleo.—are put in the mouths of Roman heroes. I am not quite sure that 
this is not one explanation and justification of them: they may have been Shake- 
speare’s ideal of what appertained to the Roman character. But apart from 
their being true to the Roman manner, they may be justified also on the prin- 
ciple of variety. It must have been a relief to Shakespeare’s mind, ever hungry 
for fresh types of character, to expatiate in the well-marked high astounding 
ideal; and it is equally a relief to the student or spectator who may have followed 
his career and dwelt with appeciative insight on his varied representation of 
humanity. This is the broadest justification: if we consider more curiously, 
other justifications make themselves palpable. The inflation of Coriolanus and 
Cesar is not like Tamburlaine’s, presented to us as a thing unquestioned and ad- 
mired by those around them, as being, for aught said upon the stage to the con- 
trary, the becoming language of heroic manhood. The violent language of Corio- 
lanus is deprecated by his friends and raises a furious antagonism in his enemies. 
Side by side with Cesar’s high conception of himself we have the humorous 
expression of his greatness by blunt Casca and the sneering of cynical Cassius. 
In the case of Czsar, too, there is a profound contrast between his lofty declara- 
tion of immovable constancy and the immediate dethronement of the god to life- 
less clay. We must not take the rant of Cesar, Coriolanus, or Antony by itself 
simply as rant, and wish with Ben Jonson that it had been blotted out. We 
must consider whether it does not become the Roman character; we must remem- 
ber that a varied artist like Shakespeare may be allowed an occasional rant as a 
stretch to powers weary of the ordinary level; and, above all, we must observe 


62 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


And let me vfe my Sword, I’de make a Quarrie 211 
With thoufands of thefe quarter’d flaues, as high 
As I could picke my Lance. 215 


213. picke] pitch Rowe,+, Cap. Var. ’78,’85. pick Mal. et seq. 


how it is regarded by other personages in the drama—in what light it is presented 
to the audience. 

210. ruth] W. A. Wricut: That is, pity, compassion; from A. S. hredw, grief, 
sorrow. The word occurs in Early English in the forms reowthe or reouthe; later 
reuthe or rewthe and ruthe; but, although we find in Icelandic the corresponding 
word hryggth, it does not appear that the form with th occurs in Anglo-Saxon. 
‘Ruth’ has survived in the adjective ruthless, but is only used by itself as an 
archaic word. Compare Tyo. & Cress., V, iii, 48: ‘Spur them to ruthful work, 
rein them from ruth.’ 

211. Quarrie] JoHNSON: Why a quarry? I suppose not because he would 
pile them square, but because he would give them for carrion to the birds of prey. 
[This complete misunderstanding of the word ‘quarry’ called forth from both 
Monck Mason and Steevens an array of quotations wherein this word is used for 
either slaughtered animals or men. Malone closed the controversy by remarking, 
somewhat contemptuously, ‘Bullokar, in his English Expositor, 1616, says that 
‘“‘a quarry among hunters signifieth the reward given to hounds after they have 
hunted, or the venison which is taken by hunting.’”’’ This sufficiently explains the 
word of Coriolanus.—Ep.] 

212. quarter’d] Rev. JoHN Hunter: That is, war-shunning; home-sheltered. 
In North’s Plutarch they are called ‘home-tarriers and house-doves.’ [Hunter 
was perhaps led to this roundabout interpretation by the line above, ‘They’ll 
sit by the fire and presume to know,’ etc., but ‘quarter’d’ here, I think, bears its 
more usual meaning, cut in quarters, as in the sentence pronounced against trait- 
ors. There is, thus, a certain propriety in Coriolanus using the judicial term in 
connection with the rebellious citizens.—Ep.] 

213. picke] MALONE (Supplement: Observations, 1, 218): As the only authentic 
copy of this play reads ‘picke my lance,’ on what principle can it be changed? 
[See Text. Notes.| The same word occurs in the sense here required, with only 
a slight variation in the spelling, in Henry VIII; ‘Vl pecke you o’er the pales 
else.’—[V, iv, 94. Malone in his own edition (1790) furnished another example 
of ‘pick’ in the sense of pitch. ‘To wrestle, play at strole-ball, or torunne. To 
picke the barre, or to shoot off a gun.’—An Account of Auntient Customes ana 
Games, &c., MSS Harl. 2057, fol. 10, b.J—ToLiet, in reference to the spelling 
pitch, says that this word is still pronounced ‘pick’ in Staffordshire, ‘where they 
say picke me such a thing, that is, pitch or throw anything that the demander wants.’ 
—STEEVENS: Thus, in Froissart’s Chronicle, cap. C. Ixiii. fo. Ixxxii. b: ‘—and as 
he stouped downe to take up his swerde, the Frenche squyer dyd pycke his swerde 
at hym, and by hap strake hym through bothe the thyes.’—[The WN. E. D., s. v. 
Pick 2. ‘—to pitch, hurl, or throw,’ quotes this last passage as the earliest ex- 
ample of the use of this word. Under this head the present line is also given —Ep.] 
—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Commonly explained as pitch or throw my 
lance. But perhaps the picture it suggests is better of the lance running through 
a thick mass of bodies, as high as it could pierce, and leave enough of it sticking 
up for his hand to grasp or picke. 


ACT, SCH is] CORIOLANUS 63 


Menen. Nay thefe are almoft thoroughly perfwaded: 
For though abundantly they lacke difcretion 215 
Yet are they pafsing Cowardly. But I befeech you, 
What fayes the other Troope ? 
Mar. They are diffolu’d : Hang em; 
They faid they were an hungry, figh’d forth Prouerbes 


That Hunger-broke ftone wals : that dogges muft eate 220 
214. almoft] all most Coll. ii, iii. 215. though] although Han. 
(MS.), Sing. ii, Ktly, Wh. i. 216. But] Om. Han. 
thoroughly throughly F,, Rowei. 218. Hang em] Om. Han. 
214, 215. Lines end:  thefe...for... 220. Hunger-broke] Hunger broke 
difcretion Han. F,F,. 


214. almost] ANon. (New Readings, etc., Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p. 
320). [The MS. Corrector’s change of] ‘almost’ to all most is decidedly an improve- 
ment, and ought, we think, to get admission into the text. [See Text. Notes. 

215. lacke discretion] W. A. WricuT: That is, discretion, which is the better 
part of valour, lacking which they might be supposed to have courage. 

218. dissolu’d] Murray (NV. E. D., s. v. 16): Of an assembly or collective body: 
To break up into its individual constituents; to disperse, to lose.its aggregate or 
corporate character, 1513. More in Grafton Chron. (1568), II, 795: ‘The com- 
pany dissolved and departed.’ 

218. Hang em] BAYFIELD (p. 186): Altogether ’em occurs 11 times [in Coriol.], 
sometimes at the end of the line, sometimes in the middle. If the cases were 
genuine, it would be quite clear that Shakespeare never knew what he might 
write next, for them occurs in an unstressed position at least 32 times, and often 
at the end of the line, as for instance: ‘May they perceive ’s intent: he will re- 
quire them.’—II, ii, 174. ‘You must not speak of that, you must desire them 
To thinke upon you.—Thinke upon me? Hang ’em.’—II, iii, 56. ‘Ere yet the 
fight be done, packe up: downe with them!’—I, v, 11. If Shakespeare ever wrote 
em, surely he would have done so here. 

219. an hungry] W. A. Wricut: Coriolanus imitates the rustic language of the 
plebeians and uses what, in all probability, was a provincialism in Shakespeare’s 
time. In the Merry Wives, I, i, 280, Master Slender excuses himself with ‘I am 
not a-hungry, I thank you forsooth’; and in Twelfth Night, II, iii, 136, Sir Andrew 
Aguecheek says, ‘’Twere as good a deed as to drink when a man’s a-hungry.’ 

219. sigh’d forth Prouerbes] W. A. Wricut: ‘In a fastidious age, indeed,’ re- 
marks Archbishop Trench (Proverbs and their Lessons, pp. 2, 3), ‘and one of false 
refinement, they may go nearly, or quite out of useamong the so-called upper classes. 
No gentleman, says Lord Chesterfield, or “no man of fashion,” as I think is his 
exact phrase, “ever uses a proverb.” And with how fine a touch of nature Shake- 
speare makes Coriolanus, the man who, with all his greatness, is entirely devoid 
of all sympathy for the people, to utter his scorn of them in scorn of their prov- 
erbs, and of their frequent employment of these.’ [In a note on King John, I, i, 
169, Wright calls attention to the use of proverbial sayings by Faulconbridge as 
characteristic of the rusticity of his breeding —Eb.] 

220. Hunger-broke stone wals] In Ray’s Collection of English Proverbs this 
proverb appears thus: ‘Hunger will break through stone walls.’ The next one is 


64 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act I, Sc. i. 


That meate was made for mouths. That the gods fent not 221 
Corne for the Richmen onely : With thefe fhreds 

They vented their Complainings, which being anfwer’d 

And a petition granted them, a {trange one, 

To breake the heart of generofity, 225 
And make bold power looke pale, they threw their caps 

As they would hang them on the hornes a’th Moone, 


Shooting their Emulation. 228 
220-222. wals:.,.eate...mouths ....one- theses Cap. et seq. 
ly:] walls—...eat,—...mouths—...only— 227. ath] oth’ F,, Rowe,+. o’the 
Rowe,+, Var. ’78, ’85, Sta. Cap. et seq. 
221. fent] send Johns. Var. ’73. 228. Shooting] Ff, Rowe i. Suiting 


225, 226. To breake...pale,] In paren- Rowe ii. Shouting Pope et seq. 


not as easily identified; Ray has, ‘It’s an ill dog that deserves not a crust,’ which 
is perhaps as near as we can paraphrase Coriolanus’s contemptuous recollection 
of what was said. The other remaining phrases I have been unable to locate in 
the many collections of English proverbs. The hyphen connecting ‘hunger’ and 
‘broke’ should, of course, be placed between ‘stone’ and ‘wals.’—Eb. 

225. breake ... generosity] JOHNSON: That is, to give the final blow to the 
nobles. ‘Generosity’ is high birth—SrrEveNns: So in Meas. for Meas., ‘The 
generous and gravest citizens.’—IV, vi, 13. [Wricur also quotes in illustration: 
‘The generous islanders, By you invited, do attend your presence.’—Othello, III, iii, 
280.)—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.) gives quite a different interpretation of 
this: ‘Make it useless for generosity to have any heart, or yield any favors, since 
by this measure feebleness was given strength enough to make bold power show 
alarm. Martius, distrusting the people thoroughly, regards concessions as ex- 
tremely dangerous. These vigorous speeches, pelting with direct hard words 
those standing before him, are Shakespeare’s freely dramatic creations. Yet he 
has infused the spirit of Martius’s advice to the Senate about the people into this 
mould of his own. According to Plutarch, in the first disturbance, Martius held 
that “leuity . . . was a beginning of disobedience” that would “bring all to con- 
fusion”; also, in the second, that the people did not equal the nobles “in true 
nobility and valiantness.” When Plutarch’s words directly fit his situation, the 
Poet finds them good enough to borrow with adaptations; when he needs some- 
thing more direct and biting, as here, he himself fashions it, but not without 
foundation.’ 

227. hang them... a’th Moone] STEEVENS: So in Ant. & Cleo., ‘Let me 
lodge Lichas on the horns o’the moon,’ IV, xii, 45——W. A. WricuT: So also 
Heywood, The Silver Age, ‘Blowne And hang’d vpon the high hornes of the moone’ 
(Works, iii, 153). 

228. Shooting their Emulation] WarsBurtTon: ‘Shouting their emulation’ is 
no very elegant expression. I rather think Shakespeare wrote ‘suiting their 
emulation.’ That is, the action of throwing their caps on high suited or agreed 
with their aspiring thoughts.—HEAatTH (p. 410): One would think that the sense 
was so plain that it could not be easily mistaken, Shouting as if they strove who 
should shout loudest. Yet Mr Warburton, not understanding the elegance of the 
expression, rather thinks Shakespeare wrote, Suiting their emulation. That is, 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 65 


Menen. What is graunted them? 
Mar. Fiue Tribunes to defend their vulgar wifdoms 230 
Of their owne choice. One’s Iunius Brutus, 


220. them) Om. Han. 231. Brutus,] Brutus, an other Ktly 
230. Tribunes] Tributes F,. conj. Brutus, one Huds. ii. (Wal- 
231. One’s] One of them’s Han. ker). 


according to him, ‘they threw their caps so high as a suitable demonstration of 
their aspiring thoughts’; though Coriolanus himself had said but a few lines 
before that their thoughts aspired no higher than barely to get bread in order 
_ to preserve themselves and their families from starvation. [Johnson in his Preface 
says in reference to Heath’s attacks on Warburton that the assailant ‘bites like 
a viper, and would be glad to leave inflammations and gangrene behind him.’ 
In the present instance the malignant serpent might have added to the rancor 
of his bite had he but remarked, in conclusion, that Rowe, in his 2™4 ed., had, 
long before, anticipated Warburton.—Ep.]—MatoneE interprets these words in 
accordance with the paraphrase given above by Heath.—SrrEvens: ‘Emulation’ 
in the present instance, I believe, signifies faction. ‘Shouting their emulation’ 
may mean ‘expressing the triumph of their faction by shouts.’ Thus in 1 Henry 
VI: ‘the trust of England’s honour keep off aloof with worthless emulation,’ [IV, 
iv, 21]. Again in Tro. & Cress.: ‘Whilst emulation in the army crept,’ [II, ii, 
212), i. e., factionW. A. WRIGHT corroborates Steevens in this interpretation 
of ‘emulation’ and quotes, also, in illustration: ‘My heart laments that virtue 
cannot live Out of the teeth of emulation,’ Jul. Ces., II, iii, 14. Wright calls 
attention to the fact that in I, ix, 63 ‘shout’ is spelt ‘shoot’ in the first three Folios. 
—CoLuER (Notes & Emendations, etc., p. 347): ‘Shooting their emulation’ is 
altered [by the MS. Corrector] to ‘shouting their exultation.’ Modern editors 
have adopted shouting; and ‘emulation,’ in the sense in which Shakespeare uses it, 
does not seem to require change; exultation, however, better expresses what is in- 
tended, and ‘shooting’ for shouting shows that the compositor was careless.—Dycr 
(ed. ii, p. 241): The MS. Corrector reads ‘Shouting their exultation.’ But the text 
is certainly right, and seems to be rightly explained by Malone.—Leo (ed., p. 
119): The sense of the last word [‘emulation’] is not very clear in this place (if 
it does not mean ‘They shout at the success of their emulation’); perhaps we 
ought to read instead of ‘their emulation’ the innovation. ‘They shout at the 
innovation, with which they have succeeded.’ [This somewhat unfortunate 
emendation Leo repeats in his collected edition of Notes, published in 1885, 
twenty-one years later—Ep.]—HeErwecu (ap. ULrici, p. 159): It is not very 
evident that there is here a misprint. If there were, Leo’s suggestion might 
solve the difficulty. . . . If we retain ‘emulation’ then, according to my opinion, 
it must be understood that they exult over their rivalry with the nobles for the 
dominance, or rather over the happy success of that rivalry. 

230. Fiue Tribunes] For an account of the establishment of the office of 
Tribuni Plebis, and the rights and functions of those officers, see Niebuhr, Lectures 
on the History of Rome, ed. Schmitz, vol. i, pp. 142-146; and also Mommsen, 
History of Rome, trans. Dickson, vol. i, pp. 280-294.—ED. 

231-233. One’s .. . the City] WALKER (Cyit., iii, 207): Perhaps we should write 
and point: 

5 


66 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


Sicinius Velutus, and I know not. Sdeath, 232 
The rabble fhould haue firft vnroo’ft the City 
Ere fo preuayl’d with me; it will in time 
Win vpon power,and throw forth greater Theames 235 
For Infurre¢ctions arguing. 

Menen. This is ftrange. 

Mar. Go get you home you Fragments. 

Enter a Meffenger hafitly. 
Meff. Where’s Caius Martius ? 240 
Mar. Heere: what’s the matter? 


232. not.| not— Rowe et seq. 238. home] home, F,. 
Sdeath| Heaven! Wordsworth. 241. Heere:] Here— Rowe, Pope, 
233. wnroo’ ft] unroost Rowe, Pope. Theob. Han. Warb. Here. Johns. Var. 
unroof’d Theob. et seq. ae, 
‘____One’s Junius Brutus, one 
Sicinius Velutus, and—I know not— 
Sdeath! 


The rabble should,’ etc. 


232. Sicinius Velutus] C. & M. CowpEN CLARKE (Shakespeare): The omitted 
word another, which is elliptically understood before ‘Sicinius Velutus,’ and the 
abruptly broken-off sentence, admirably aid to express the speaker's haughty 


petulance. 
232. Sdeath] WorpswortH (Historical Plays, i, 116): The common text has 
“S death’ = God’s death!—an exclamation which occurs nowhere else in our 


author, and is singularly unsuitable in the mouth of a heathen. [See Text. Notes.] 

235. Win vpon power] RANN: That is, Gain ground from such concessions, 
which will be improved into fresh occasions of insurrection.—R. G. WuiTE: Should 
we not read ‘Win open power’? The rhythm and the sense of the passage leave 
me hardly a doubt that we should.—W. A. Wricut: That is, get the advantage 
over authority. Soin Ant. & Cleo., II, iv, 9, ‘You'll win two days upon me’; that 
is, you will get the advantage of me by two days. Compare ‘got on the Antiates,’ 
III, iii, 5 —-DEIGHTON explains this as ‘gradually make an inroad upon the power 
wielded by the nobles’; and objects to White’s suggestion, ‘open,’ since ‘the text 
seems better to indicate the gradual process.’ [It is somewhat difficult, I think, 
to get the force of Deighton’s objection; the preceding words ‘will in time’ 
convey the idea of gradual progress quite as well in one case as the other. As to 
the other words in this line Deighton adds: ‘It seems tempting to read “‘throe forth,” 
as in Ant. & Clco., III, vii, 81, ““With news the time’s in labour, and throes forth, 
Each minute, some.’”’’—Ep.]—Verity (Student’s Sh.): That is, encroach on the 
aristocracy (‘the powerful class’).—E. K. CaamBers (Warwick Sh.): That is, take 
advantage of the power won to win more. 

236. For Insurrections arguing] MALong: That is, for insurgents to debate upon. 
—Verity (Student’s Sh.): Coriolanus shows true political insight. He recognises 
in the Tribunes the foes of his own class, and the contest between them and him 
is foreshadowed early. His prophecy, in fact, is a piece of dramatic irony. 

241. Mar. Heere, etc.] E. K. CaamBers (Warwick Sh.): The insurrection has 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 67 


Mef. The newes is fir, the Volcies are in Armes. 242 
Mar. Iam glad on’t, then we fhall ha meanes to vent 
Our muftie fuperfluity. See our beft Elders. 


Enter Sicinius Velutus, Annius Brutus Cominisn, Titus 245 
Lartius, with other Senatours. 


1.Sen. Martius ’tis true, that you haue lately told vs, 


The Volces are in Armes. 248 
, 242. Volcies] F.F;. Volfcies Fy, Senators, Cominius, Titus Lartius, 
Rowe. Volscians Pope,+. Volcians Brutus, and Sicinius. Cap. Enter 
Cap. Volces Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Ran. Cominius, Titus Lartius, with other 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt. Volsces Coll. Senators; Junius Brutus and Sicinius 
et seq. Velutus. Var. ’78 et seq. (subs.). 
243. ha] F.F;. ha’ Dyce, Cam.+, 245. Annius] Junius F, et seq. 
Huds. ii. have F, et cet. Cominisn] Fy. 
244. See] Ff. See! Han. See, Rowe 246. Lartius] Lucius F,. 
et cet. 248. Volces| Var. ’78, 85, Mal. Ran. 
245. SCENE Iv. Pope, Han. Warb. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt. Volcies F;. 
Johns. Volfcies F,, Rowe. Volscians Pope,+. 
245, 246. Enter Sicinius...other Sen- Volcians Cap. Volsces Coll. et seq. 


atours.] Ff, Rowe,t+. Enter certain 


been well nigh quelled not by the methods of Menenius or Coriolanus, but by the 
grant of tribunes. The outbreak of war completes the business. And now the 
finer side of Coriolanus, to which our attention is to be directed in this act, comes 
into play. At the first whisper of danger he becomes the champion of Rome. 
His high-bred courtesy towards his fellow captains contrasts markedly with his 
former manner towards the Plebeians. 

243, 244. I am glad on’t...superfluity] Verity (Student’s Sh.): The spirit 
which prompts these words is surely that which ultimately leads to his great wrong 
done against his country. [In the remaining part of this sentence] there is an echo 
of a sentence in North’s Plutarch. Velitre, a Latin town, being depopulated by 
a plague, prayed the Romans to send them ‘new inhabitants to replenish’ their 
town. The Senate thought this would be a good way of getting rid of many 
‘mutinous and seditious persons, being the superfluous ill humours that grievously 
fed this disease’ of civil turmoil at Rome. 

243. vent] W. A. Wricut: That is, to dispose of, get rid of. See 1. 217 above, 
and III, i, 310.—Der1cHTon also takes ‘vent’ as here meaning to get rid of, but 
further explains it as ‘to sell, and the idea is that of getting rid to foreigners of 
goods not fit for home consumption, here, of course, by getting them killed off.’ 
As corroboration of this use of ‘vent’ Deighton quotes Skeat (Dict., s. v. Vent. 
3.), who gives as an example: ‘The Merchant adventurers likewise . . . did hold 
out bravely; taking off the commodities, ... though they lay dead upon their 
hands for want of vent,’ Bacon, Life of Henry VII, ed. Lumby, p. 146, |. 6. 

247. ’tis true . . . told vs] JonNnson: Coriolanus had been just told himself 
that ‘the Volces were in arms.’ The meaning is: ‘The intelligence which you 
gave us some little time ago of the designs of the Volces is now verified; they 
are in arms.’—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): This is not in Plutarch. It is 


68 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


Mar. They haue a Leader, 
Tullus Auffidius that will put you too’t: 250 
I finne in enuying his Nobility : 
And were I any thing but what I am, 
I would wifh me onely he. 

Com. You haue fought together ? 

Mar. Were halfe to halfe the world by th’eares, & he 255 
vpon my partie, I’de reuolt to make 
Onely my warres with him. He is a Lion 


That I am proud to hunt. 258 
250. too’t] to’t F,. 254. You haue] You've Huds. ii, 
253. I would] I could F,, Rowe. Words. 

I'd Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. together?] Rowe, Pope,+, Cla. 

he] him Han. Cam. ii, Herford, Neils. together. Cap. 
eticet: 


devised by Shakespeare, apparently to show the importance to the Senate of the 
special skilled knowledge of Martius, just confirmed to him and to the Senate, 
also to shorten time for dramatic purposes, by making the war seem possible at 
once. 

249-253. They haue a Leader ... onely he] Vrerity (Student’s Sh.): This 
prepares us for scenes ii. and viii. of this Act. The early introduction of Aufidius 
into the action of Coriolanus is one of the most effective features of Shakespeare’s 
use of the materials supplied him by Plutarch. 

254. together?] W. A. Wricut: The folios print this as a question, and there 
seems no good reason for changing the note of interrogation, as Capell did, to a 
full stop.— BEEcuinG (Falcon Sh.), in defense of the full stop, says: ‘But Cominius 
could not have been ignorant of the fact (see I, x, 9), and it is better to take it 
as a soldier’s explanation of Marcius’s praise.’ [The Text. Notes will show that, 
in this question of punctuation, Beeching is on the side of the majority of editors. 
—Ep.] 

255-257. Were halfe . . . with him] GErvinus (p. 753): In this declaration 
how delicately is a very characteristic stain cast on the valour of Coriolanus! 
He betrays by these words that his personal renown is of more value to him than 
his party, his cause, his country; he would fight as a hireling against Aufidius, 
no matter on which side!—Boas (Sh. & His Predecessors, p. 489): Like Hotspur, 
Coriolanus cares far more for personal glory than for the triumph of a common 
cause, as is shown by his declaration about the Volscian general, Tullus Aufidius. 
. .. This is to treat war merely as a gigantic duel between rival champions, and 
to ignore those patriotic aspects of it which alone give it moral justification. It 
is the same exaggerated passion for solely personal distinction that makes Corio- 
lanus reject all material rewards for his services. He feels that the glory of 
achievements such as his is tarnished by the acceptance of spoils, however splendid, 
and similarly he refuses to listen to any laudation of his deeds not from humility, 
but because he deems them above the reach of due recognition by the voices of 
his fellow-men.—Protss (p. 93): Here there is made evident a new virtue in 
Marcius—he is without hate and envy. He recognises without reservation the 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 69 
1.Sen. Then worthy Martius, 

Attend vpon Cominius to thefe Warres. 260 
Com. It is your former promife. 
Mar. Sir it is, 

And I am conftant : Titus Lucius, thou 

Shalt fee me once more {trike at Tullus face. 

What art thou ftiffe? Stand’ft out? 265 
Tit. No Caius Martius, 

Ile leane vpon one Crutch, and fight with tother, 

Ere {tay behinde this Bufineffe. 

' Men. Oh true-bred. 
Sen. Your Company to’th’Capitoll, where I know 270 

Our greateft Friends attend vs. 
Tit. Lead you on : Follow Cominius, we mutt followe 

you, right worthy you Priority. 
Com. Noble Martius. 274 


272. Tit. Lead...Follow...| Tit. [To 
Com.] Lead... [To Mar.] Follow... 


259. Martius] Matrius F,. 
263. Lucius] Lartius Rowe. 


264. Tullus] Tullus’s F,, Rowe i. 
Tullius’s Rowe ii. Tulliw Pope i. 
(misprint). Tullius’ Pope ii. et seq. 

267. with tother| with tother F,. 
Rowe,+. Knt, Dyce, Sing. ii, Ktly, 
Wh. i, Huds. ii, Cam.+, Words. Craig, 
Neils. wi’ the other Cap. with the 


Cam.+, Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. 
272, 273. Lead...Priority] Lines end: 
on...followe you...Priority. Pope et seq. 
273. you Priority] your Prioritie F,. 
your priority Rowe, Pope, Han. Mason, 
Coll. MS. 
274. Martius] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, 


Coll. Del. Dyce, Sta. Wh. i. Lartius!— 
Theob. et cet. 


other Var. ’73 et cet. 
272-274. Om. Words. 


characteristics of another, though that other be an opponent, perhaps freely only, 
since he is of equal rank with Aufidius. He does not feel himself thereby re- 
pressed, but his self-confidence is so much the more exalted. He cannot desire 
strongly enough a veritable heroic nature for his adversary. Yet another virtue 
should be visible in him: that is the willingness with which, in spite of his pride, 
he submits hirnself to those above him in command.—BeErEcuinc (Falcon Sh.): 
This is not said altogether seriously, but there is truth in it. Men who are sol- 
diers before everything have not seldom been careless as to the side on which 
they fought. 

263. I am constant] STEEVENS: That is, immoveable in my resolution. 
Jul. Ces., ‘But I am constant as the northern star,’ [III, i, 60]. 

265. What .. . stiffe? Stand’st out] W. A. Wricut: That is, are you obsti- 
nate? dost thou resist or stand aloof? Compare Twelfth Night, III, iii, 35: ‘Only 
myself stood out.’—[ROLFE and CasE (Arden Sh.) interpret ‘stiff’ here as mean- 
ing, rather, stiff with age; ‘the reply of Titus,’ remarks Rolfe, ‘seems to favor 
this interpretation.’ For other examples of the omission of thow in peremptory 
and familiar questions, see ABBorr, § 241.—ED.] 

272-274. Lead you on . . . worthy you Priority . . . Martius] THEOBALD, 
in a letter to Warburton, dated Feb. 12, 1729, rejects the change in F, of ‘you’ 


So, in 


7° THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACTar, SG 


[272-274. Lead youon . . . worthy you Priority . . . Martius] 
to your, 1. 273, and interprets the First Folio reading: ‘You being right worthy of 
precedence.’ ‘But there are still more faults in this passage,’ continues Theobald, 
‘which I make no question should be thus rectified: 


“—_ Lead you on; ~ 
Follow, Cominius; we must follow you; 
Right worthy you priority. 
Com. Noble Lartius!” 


Titus Lartius first desires the general Senators to lead the way; then tells Com- 
inius that he well deserves to go first in rank; and therefore, I think, Cominius, 
to return that compliment, says, Noble Lartius!’ (Nichols: Lit. Illust., ii, 479). 
This rectification of the pointing of the Folio text Theobald adopts in his own 
edition, and this arrangement has been accepted, substantially, by subsequent 
editors.—MALONE, without referring to the distribution of speeches in this pas- 
sage, interprets 1. 273 in the identical words of Theobald, though, in the nature 
of the case, it was quite improbable that he could have seen Theobald’s letter 
which was not published until 1817, more than twenty-five years after Malone’s 
edition appeared.— WALKER (Cyit., ii, pp. 190 et seq.) will furnish ample corrobo- 
ration, if such be needed, for the change of ‘you’ to your in this line. Confusion 
of these two words, as Walker shows by many examples, is frequent in the Folio. 
He there quotes this present line, and among the more striking instances the 
following: Titus Andronicus, III, i, p. 41, col. 2, ‘Now stay you strife, what shall 
be is dispatcht.’ Jbid., IV, ii, p. 44, col. ii, ‘Heere lack’s but you mother for to 
say, Amen.’ Hamlet, V, i, near the end, p. 279, col. 1, ‘Strengthen you patience 
in our last night’s speech.—On the other hand, Malone’s explanation seems to 
render any change of the text unnecessary, and ABBotT (§ 198a) gives examples 
wherein ‘the preposition is omitted after some verbs that imply value or worth.’ 
Compare ‘Some precepts worthy the note,’ All’s Well, III, v, 104.—C. & M. 
CowDEN CLARKE (Shakespeare) adopt Malone’s interpretation of |. 273, and add: 
‘It appears to us that in this speech Titus Lartius addresses the words “Lead you 
on” to the Senators; then bids Cominius follow them; adding “we” (Coriolanus 
and himself) “must follow you”; concluding with, for you are right worthy of 
that precedence which your appointment as commander-general gives you.’—In 
disagreement with Theobald’s change of ‘Martius,’ 1. 274, to Lartius the Cowden 
Clarkes thus continue: ‘We think this is Cominius’s sentence of courtesy to 
Coriolanus (intended probably to be accompanied by an inclination of the head), 
in passing to go before him, according to the appointed “‘priority.”’ It, as it were, 
acknowledges the speaker’s sense of Coriolanus’s right of precedence, even while 
he takes it himself in deference to the Senate’s decree.’—ULrici (Zusdtze und 
Berichtigungen, p. 175): Several English editors take this, that Lartius commands 
Cominius to precede and Coriolanus to follow. The whole passage first gains 
sense and meaning when the honour of precedence is granted to Coriolanus. 
Titus Lartius stands on an equal footing with Cominius. Only with such an 
interpretation is there significance if Cominius, to express his complete agreement, 
turns to Coriolanus with the words, ‘Noble Martius’; and Theobald’s emendation 
‘Lartius’ becomes unnecessary.—ROLFE: It is doubtful whether this is addressed 
to Cominius, as the Cam. Edd. take it [see Text. Notes,] or to the Senators, as 
generally understood; but we incline to the latter view. [The distribution of 


ACT I, Sc, i.] 


CORIOLANUS 71 


Sen. Hence to your homes,be gone. 275 


Mar. Nay let them follow, 


The Volces haue much Corne : take thefe Rats thither, 
To gnaw their Garners. Worfhipfull Mutiners, 


Your valour puts well forth : Pray follow. 


Exeunt. 


Citizens fieale away. Manet Sicin.& Brutus, 280 


275. Sen.] 1 Sen. Rowe et seq. 
homes,| homes— Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. homes. Johns. 
Var. ’73. 
[To the Citizens. Rowe et seq. 

276. Nay] Om. Rowe, Pope. 

277. Volces] F,. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt. Volcies 
F;. Volfcies F,, Rowe.  Volscians 
Pope,+. Volcians Cap. Volsces Coll. 
eUicet. 

278. Mutiners] Ff, Del. Sta. Cam. 


279. Pray] I pray Han. 

follow.] follow on. Words. 

279, 280. Exeunt. Citizens fteale 
away. Manet Sicin. & Brutus.] Exeunt 
..Manent Sicinius & Brutus. Ff, 
Rowe, Pope,+, Varr. Ran. Exeunt all 
except Brutus and Sicinius. The Citi- 
zens steal away. Dyce ii, Words. Huds. 
li. Citizens steal away. Exeunt all 
but Sicinius and Brutus. Cam.-++. 
Exeunt Senators, Com. Mar. Tit. and 
Menenius; Citizens steal away. Cap. 


Neils. mutineers Rowe et cet. et cet. 


speeches by the Cam. Edd.] gives the precedence to Cominius, as general-in-chief, 
and allots the next place to Marcius; but ‘Lead you on’ seems rather to be a reply 
to the Senator, who has just spoken. [The remainder of Rolfe’s note is substantially 
the same as the concluding sentence of the foregoing note by the Cowden Clarkes. 
—Ep.] 

278. Mutiners] WALKER (Vers., p. 222) gives several examples from Eliza- 
bethan writers wherein this word is accented as here, metri gratid, on the first 
syllable—Assortt (§ 492) quotes Walker on this point, but remarks that he ‘can- 
not find a conclusive instance in Shakespeare.’—ED. 

279. puts well forth] JoHNson: That is, you have in this mutiny shown fair 
blossoms of valour.—Matone: So in Henry VIII: ‘Today he puts forth The 
tender leaves of hope, tomorrow blossoms,’ III, ii, 352. 

279, 280. Exeunt ... Manet Sicin. & Brutus] Verity (Student’s Sh.): Ac- 
cording to the modern method of dramatic construction—the method, that 
is, of making the curtain fall at the climax of the scene—this scene would close, 
I should think, at the exit of Coriolanus. Shakespeare, however, allows char- 
acters to remain behind, as the Tribunes remain here, and wind up the scene 
with further comments or some slight extension of the action. Thus in Richard 
IT, I, iti, when the stirring scene at the lists at Coventry has culminated in the 
King’s passing sentence on the rivals and then sweeping from the field with all 
his train, Gaunt and Bolingbroke stay behind for an interview which a modern 
playwright would throw into a scene. Cf. again Mid. N. Dream, I, i, 127, where 
strictly it is an artificial device to let Hermia and Lysander remain behind to- 
gether, while her father, Egeus, who is angry with Lysander for stealing her affec- 
tions, leaves the stage with all the others. Another illustration is the conversa- 
tion between Goneril and Regan at the end of the first scene in Lear. In such 
continuations of the scene there is some risk of an anti-climax. I think that 
this peculiar feature of the structure of Shakespeare’s plays is attributable to the 
scenic poverty of the Elizabethan stage, on which Shakespeare himself dwells 


72 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


Sicin. Was euer man fo proud as is this Martius? 281 
Bru. He has no equall. 

Sicin.When we were chofen Tribunes for the|people. 

Bru. Mark’d you his lip and eyes. 

Sicin. Nay, but his taunts. 285 
Bru. Being mou’d, he will not {pare to gird the Gods. 

Sicin. Bemocke the modeft Moone. 

Bru. The prefent Warres deuoure him, he is growne 


Too proud to be fo valiant. 289 

283. people.| people— F;F,, Rowe,+. Cla. Cam. ii, Dtn, Sherman, Neils. 
people,— Cap. et seq. The...him: Mal. et cet. (subs.). 

286. Gods.] Gods— Pope,+. 288. Warres] war Huds. ii. 

287. Moone.] moon— Theob. Warb. 289-294. Too proud...aymes,| Five 
Johns. lines, verse, ending lines: nature... 

288, 289. Om. Words. (reading And fhadow...wonder ... commanded ... aymes, 
such... 1. 290). Pope et seq. 

288. The...him,] Fi, Rowe, Pope. 289. to be] of being Han. 


The...him! Han. Ran. Wh. i, Schmidt, 


so strongly in the first and fourth Prologues of Henry V. In the Elizabethan 
theatre there was no curtain to fall, and practically no scenery to mark a change of 
scene. Hence the tendency was to extend a scene instead of starting a fresh 
one in a fresh locality, as if the playwright thought that certain of his persone 
might as well stay behind as go off and return to the same spot. 

280. Sicin. & Brutus] S. LEE (Caxton Sh., Introd., p. xxxiv.): These repre- 
sentatives of the popular faction, with whom Coriolanus has no bond of sym- 
pathy, are the primary instruments of his ruin, and the contrast between their 
natures and the character of the hero is drawn in high relief. The demagogues 
are corrupt and cowardly bullies, and the rabble whom they dupe, although it 
has some brighter aspects, is mainly characterised by fickleness and gullible 
ignorance. 

286. gird the Gods] W. A. Wricut: That is, to taunt them, use sarcasm 
against them. Falstaff (2 Henry IV: I, ii, 7) says of himself, ‘Men of all sorts 
take a pride to gird at me.’ And in Earle’s Microcosmographie, 6, we find the same 
construction as here: ‘His life is a perpetuale Satyre, and hee is still girding the 
ages vanity’ (ed. Arber, p. 28). To ‘gird’ (or ‘gyrd’) originally signified to smite 
or strike, and hence in its figurative sense a ‘gird’ or jest is analogous to bob, 
which originally meant a blow or rap... That the original meaning of the word 
was blow is evident from Tam. of Shrew, V, ii, 58: ‘Bap. O ho, Petruchio! Tranio 
hits you now. Luc. I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.’ 

288, 289. The present Warres . . . so valiant] THEOBALD: This is very obscurely 
express’d; but the Poet’s meaning must certainly be this. Marcius is so con- 
scious of, and so elate upon the notion of his own valour, that he is eaten up with 
Pride; devour’d with the apprehension of that Glory which he promises himself 
from the ensuing war. A sentiment like this occurs again in Tro. & Cress.: 
‘He that is proud eats up himself. Pride is his own glass, his own trumpet, his 
own chronicle; and whatever praises itself but in the deed, devours the deed in 
the praise,’ [II, iii, 164 et seq.}—Warsurton: According to this Critic [Theobald] 


ACT I, sc. i] - CORIOLANUS 73 


[288, 289. The present Warres . . . so valiant] 


then we must conclude that when Shakespeare had a mind to say A man was 
eaten up with pride, he was so great a blunderer in expression as to say He was 
eaten up with war. But our poet wrote at a different rate, and the blunder is his 
critic’s. ‘The present wars devour him’ is an imprecation and should be so 
pointed. As much as to say, May he fall in those wars! The reason of the curse 
is subjoined, for (says the speaker), having so much pride with so much valour, 
his life, with increase of honours, is dangerous to the republic.—[The arrogant and 
contemptuous tone of the foregoing doubtless caused—as the writer intended— 
both consternation and pain, coming as it did from one who’but a few short 
years before had subscribed himself in many letters, ‘ever, my dearest friend, yours 
affectionately, W. WARBURTON.’ The head and front of Theobald’s offence was 
that he had not, as Warburton thought, been sufficiently recognisant of the deep 
obligation he was under for the various notes and emendations which Warburton 
had contributed for Theobald’s own edition. Warburton made no mention of the 
fact that Hanmer, his preceding editor, prints this line as an imprecation with 
an exclamation point instead of the Folio’s comma after ‘him’; and Hanmer does 
not refer to Warburton as the source of this pointing. Hanmer should, therefore, 
I think, be given credit for this reading in spite of Warburton’s elucidation — 
Ep.]—Capett (vol. I, pt i, p. 82): Pointed [as an imprecation] in the two latter 
moderns [Han. and Warb.], and properly, but what the first of them has put in 
his text in the line after this he should have put as a gloss; for of being so valiant 
is, indeed, the sense which the Poet intended in ‘to be so valiant,’ though a more 
refin’d one is pitch’d upon for it by the last of those gentlemen.—STrEEVENs: I am 
by no means convinced that Dr Warburton’s punctuation or explanation is right. 
The sense may be that ‘the present wars annihilate his gentler qualities.’ To eat 
up and, consequently, to devour has this meaning. So in 2 Henry IV: ‘But thou 
[the crown] most fine, most honour’d, most renown’d, Hast eat thy bearer up,’ IV, 
v, 165. To be ‘eat up with pride’ is still a phrase in common and vulgar use. 
‘He is grown too proud to be so valiant’ may signify ‘his pride is such as not to 
deserve the accompanying of so much valour.’ [‘But it is difficult to see,’ com- 
ments W. A. Wright on the foregoing, ‘how “‘the present wars,” in which Corio- 
lanus had not yet been engaged, can denote the military reputation derived from 
his past achievements.—Ep.]—Matone: I concur with Mr Steevens. ‘The 
present wars’ Shakespeare uses to express the pride of Coriolanus grounded on 
his military prowess; which kind of pride Brutus says devours him. [Malone, 
without referring to his predecessor, quotes a portion of the passage from Tyo. & 
Cress. as in the foregoing note by Theobald, and thus concludes:] Perhaps the 
meaning of the latter member of the sentence is, ‘he is grown too proud of being 
so valiant, to be endured.’—Crort (p. 18): ‘The present wars devour him,’ 7. e., 
quite absorb or monopolize his thoughts; he is too proud of his valour, that he is so 
valiant occasions too much pride.—DeEttus: May the present campaign overwhelm 
him or destroy him; he has been too proud, that he is so valiant; the consciousness 
of his bravery has made him so overbearing that he should live no longer. Those 
editors who take ‘devour’ as the indicative and so punctuate, obscure the sense. 
—STAUNTON: The beginning of this speech which has been explained—his pride 
of military prowess in these wars devours him—we prefer to read, with Warburton, 
as an imprecation. The latter words appear to import [as Malone explains 
them].—WALKER (Crit., iii, 207) is in favor of reading 1. 288 according to 


74 THE TRAGEDIE OF (ACT, SCL 


[288, 289. The present Warres . . . so valiant] 
Hanmer’s pointing —Assort (§ 356): To was originally used not with the infinitive, 
but with the gerund in -e, and, like the Latin ‘ad’ with the gerund, denoted a 
purpose. Thus ‘to love’ was originally ‘to lovene,’ 7. e., ‘to (or toward) loving’ 
(ad amandum). Gradually, as fo superseded the proper infinitival inflection, to 
was used in other and more indefinite senses, ‘for,’ ‘about,’ ‘in,’ ‘as regards,’ 
and, in a word, for any form of the gerund as well as for the infinitive. [Among 
other examples of the infinitive thus indefinitely used Abbott quotes and para- 
phrases 1. 289: ‘Too proud to be (of being) so valiant.’ Also: ‘““To fright you 
thus methinks I am too savage.”—Macbeth, IV, ii, 70. Not “‘too savage to fright 
you,” but “im or for frighting you.”’—Ep.!—Dvyce (ed. ii.) discards the Folio 
pointing and, without comment, adopts Hanmer’s.—Hupson (ed. i.) follows the 
Folio pointing, explaining the line, ‘his pride on account of his valour and success 
in “the present wars” devours him.’ Hudson likewise gives the line from Tro. & 
Cress., ‘He that is proud eats up himself,’ which both Theobald and Malone had 
already quoted in support of this; and Hudson concludes his note with Malone’s 
interpretation of the latter part of the sentence. In his ed. ii. Hudson, influenced, 
as ever, by Dyce, makes a complete recantation, and without reference to his 
former opinion says: ‘The first part of this speech is imprecative: “May the 
present war devour him!”’ that is, make an end of him.’ In conclusion he retains 
his agreement with Malone.—Ketcut_ey, both in his Expositor and in his text, 
adopts Hanmer’s punctuation; he likewise explains ‘to be,’ 1. 289, as the gerundial 
infinitive with Malone and Hudson.—C. & M. CowbENn CiarkE (Shakespeare): 
This is elliptically expressed, but we think the sense is obviously, ‘The wars absorb 
him wholly: he is grown too proud of being so valiant.’ In the speech of Gower, 
as Chorus, in Pericles, IV, iv, we find: ‘And Pericles in sorrow all devoured,’ [l. 
25;] and to be ‘devoured by grief’ or ‘eaten up by pride’ are idioms still in use. 
We think, therefore, that the idea of ‘pride in his own valour, strengthened by 
the occasion for its display afforded by these wars, devours him entirely’ is 
presented by this sentence.—LrEo (Coriolanus): That is, May he perish in the 
present wars! The consciousness of his being so valiant has made him too proud. 
[The complete suppression of the fact that such an interpretation of 1. 288 is based 
upon a modern text and not upon the Folio reading may seem somewhat singular. 
In fairness to Leo it may, however, be stated that such an omission is, I think, an 
example of an avowed purpose in his Edition of Cortolanus. In his Preface, 
p- vi, where, among other features which should constitute an ideal edition of 
Shakespeare, he says: ‘Every passage that has succeeded in establishing its title 
to respect, either by the agreement of the old editions or of later emendators, 
should be adopted in the text, without the slightest mention of all arguments for 
and against, which hitherto have been bandied about respecting it. The mention 
of them is not of the least advantage to the public, and does not at all advance 
the purification of the text. There are emendations which have stood the ordeal 
of time, and the errors they are intended to remove, the errors of copyists, 
printers, and early editors, errors which the rust of centuries has consecrated in 
the eyes of fanatics, might at length be consigned to a lasting repose.’—Ep.]—Rev. 
Joun Hunter: ‘Devour him,’ that is, Take up all his thoughts; engage his whole 
soul; actuate his whole conduct. We similarly say of a very proud person that 
he is eaten up with pride. ‘The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up,’ Psalm 
lxix, 9, and John, ii, 17, [where this verse from the Psalm is quoted.—Ep.].— RoLFeE: 


ACT'T, ‘SC. i.] CORIOLA NUS 75 


[288, 289. The present Warres . . . so valiant] 
We take this to be the expression of a wish, as Hanmer makes it.—PERRING (p. 
286): The punctuation of the Folio, though not always to be depended upon, may 
[here] be accepted with confidence; it certainly is not an advantageous exchange to 
put a note of exclamation after ‘The present wars devour him’; the Tribunes are 
telling each other what they think of Coriolanus; how proud he was; how he had 
scorned and taunted them when they were appointed tribunes; they aggravate his 
offence by the remark, while perhaps they comfort themselves by the reflection, 
that even the gods themselves—those most high sacrosanct irresponsible arbiters 
—even the moon, the very ideal of modesty, he would not scruple to ‘gird’—to 
mock at; what wonder, then, if their tribunitian majesty, their tribunitian modesty 
he despised, he insulted! And now what further? Do they, as some would have 
it, invoke a curse on Coriolanus, and wish him perdition by the wars? No such 
thing. ‘This man,’ they continue, ‘who has no regard for god or tribune, what 
does he care for?’ ‘The wars’—for the poet here, with a license which is common 
to him .. . uses the plural form as an exact equivalent of the singular, an example 
of which we have in Cymb., IV, iii, 43, where ‘These present wars’ is said of a war 
then instant—‘the wars’ then, or, as we may express it, the war, such as at that 
very moment was brewing with the Volsci—‘this is his devouring passion; he is 
carried away, he is swallowed up, he is wholly absorbed by the war; and this is how 
he has grown—grown far “too proud”; and the reason he is so proud is because he 
is so valiant.’ Such I conceive to be a fair gloss on a much misconceived passage, 
though I am not quite sure that I have correctly expounded just the fag end of it. 
—BreEcuinc (Henry Irving Sh.) follows Hanmer without either note or comment; 
in the Falcon Ed., some five years later, he accepts the Folio reading, placing an 
exclamation point after ‘grown,’ but this is doubtless a misprint. In the latter 
edition Beeching, in reference to |. 288, says: ‘Is this a statement or an impreca- 
tion? The Folio has a comma; reading which the sense will be, “These warlike 
times spoil him by making him proud; the pride of valour devours him.” Cf. 
Tro. & Cress., Il, iii, 164, ‘He that’s proud eats up himself.” This sense seems to 
suit best with the speech of Sicinius which follows. If it be construed as an 
imprecation, the present wars will mean “‘the war now set on foot.” ’—WorDSsWwoRTH 
(Historical Plays, i, 116), in explanation for his omission of these lines, says: ‘The 
former clause, though probably imprecative, is doubtful; the latter, though capable 
of explanation, is unbearably harsh.’—Pace [follows Hanmer’s reading, but adds:] 
The Folio reading may be right, in the sense of ‘His military pride, elated at the 
thought of acquiring additional glory in the impending war, takes complete 
possession of him.’—E. K. Caampers (Warwick Sh.) follows the Folio, but remarks 
that ‘“devour him” is rather an optative than an indicative. Brutus goes on, 
“Such valour, coupled with such pride, is dangerous.’”’’—Veritry (Student’s Sh.), 
following Hanmer, remarks that ‘the passage is commonly interpreted thus’ as 
an imprecation, and after quoting Perring’s interpretation of the Folio reading, 
says in conclusion, ‘But the allusion to particular wars (‘the present wars”’) surely 
does not suit a general description of Coriolanus’s character. One would have 
expected ‘War’ personified, with some epithet descriptive of its general attributes, 
or “the wars” (without ‘“‘present’’).’—STaNnLtEyY Woop (Oxford & Cambridge Sh.): 
That is, he is consumed with pride, the result of his triumphs in war.—H. D. 
WEISER, following Hanmer, says: ‘Not to be regarded as an assertion, in view of 
the fears expressed in the remainder of Brutus’s words.’—CasE (Arden Shakespeare): 


76 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act I, sc. i. 


Sicin. Such a Nature, tickled with good fucceffe, dif- 290 
daines the fhadow which he treads on at noone, but I do 
wonder, his infolence can brooke to be commanded vn- 
der Cominius ? 

Bru. Fame, at the which he aymes, 


In whom already he’s well grac’d, cannot 295 
294, 295. at the...grac’d] In paren- 295. In...grac’d] In parentheses, Cap. 
theses, Ktly. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 
the which...whom] which... Sing. Dyce, Sta. Hal. Huds. Words. 
which Han. the which...which Cap. he’s| Dyce, Sta. Cam.+, Huds. 
Ran. Neils. he is Ff et cet. 


Mr Craig evidently intended to retain this, practically the Folio punctuation, [z. e., 
a semicolon instead of a comma], though he had not set down his reasons. The 
sentence stretches with difficulty to a meaning which is perhaps expressed as 
well as anywhere else by Perring [see ante]. . . . The objection to the interpretation 
that the present wars would not be given as the cause of a permanent character- 
istic of Coriolanus does not seem altogether valid if we consider that it is not the 
existence of the quality of pride in him, but its excessive manifestation at the time 
that has given rise to the dialogue. After all, most readers will prefer the usual 
punctuation (Hanmer’s) and sense: May he fall in these wars!—[In all cases where 
the Folio text or punctuation yields an intelligible meaning it should, I think, be 
retained; that it does so in the present instance is manifest by the several para- 
phrases given in the foregoing notes. On the other hand, while Hanmer’s and 
Warburton’s change is more forcible than the original, it is actually a refinement 
of expression and is, therefore, meo judicio, unnecessary. I have placed in the 
Text. Notes the names of those editors only who have followed Hanmer’s pointing 
without comment, since, in general, a reading given in the commentary is not 
repeated in the Text. Notes——Ep.] 

290. good successe] W. A. Wricut: In Shakespeare’s time ‘success’ was fre- 
quently a colourless word, which required a qualifying adjective ‘good’ or ‘ill.’ 
Compare Joshua, i, 8: ‘Then thou shalt have good success.’ The modern usage is, 
however, also common in Shakespeare. See I, ix, 90. [See also Macbeth, I, vii, 
3, 4, ‘and catch With his surcease success,’ where ‘success’ means simply termi- 
nation.—ED.] 

291. the shadow] BEercuine (Falcon Sh.): A man’s imaginary conduct to his 
shadow is used by Shakespeare several times as an illustration of character. 
Gratiano will fence with his shadow (Mer. of Ven., I, ii, 66); Malvolio practises 
behaviour to his (Twelfth Night, Il, v, 21); a drunkard is one who discourses 
fustian with his (Othello, II, iii, 282); a madman curses his for a traitor (Lear, 
III, iv, 58); ‘Coriolanus’s solitariness’ (as Plutarch called it) or ‘singularity’ 
(1. 311) could not be better expressed. 

292. brooke] SkEaT (Dict., s. v. (1)): To endure, put up with. Mid. Eng. 
brouke, which almost invariably had the sense of ‘to use’ or ‘to enjoy.’ 

292. to be commanded] W. A. Wricut: That is, to be entrusted with a com- 
mand. ‘Commanded’ is here formed from the substantive and not from the 
verb. See l. 113 ante; I, iv, 21; IL, i, 77, [‘dishonour’d’]; V, ii, 83, and compare 


ACI TSC] CORIOLANUS WG 


Better be held, nor more attain’d then by 206 
A place below the firft : for what mifcarries 
Shall be the Generals fault, though he performe 
To th’vtmoft of a man, and giddy cenfure 
Will then cry out of <artius : Oh, if he 300 
Had borne the bufineffe. 
Sicin. Befides, if things go well, 
Opinion that fo ftickes on Martius, fhall 


Of his demerits rob Cominius. 304 
296. be] he F.F;. business! Cap. et seq. 
299. To th’] Ff, Dyce ii, Wh. i, Huds. 302. Befides] And Han. 

Words. To the Rowe et cet. 304, 305. Of his...Come] As one line 
300. of] on Cap. Var. ’78, ’85. Theob. et seq. 
301. bufineffe.] business— Rowe,+. 304. demerits] due merits Leo conj. 


‘the guiled shore’ in Mer. of Ven., III, ii, 97; and ‘the ravin’d salt sea shark,’ 
Macbeth, IV, i, 24. 

294-301. Fame. . . the businesse] CAsE (Arden Sh.): Brutus utterly mistakes 
the character of Caius Marcius. But he was a man of ignoble soul, and so natu- 
rally inclined to believe the worst. 

300. cry out of Martius] That is, cry out concerning or about Marcius. ABBOTT 
(§ 174) will furnish many examples of this meaning. This were hardly worth 
the noting were it not that Scumipt takes exception to the silence of other editors 
on this point, which reticence he thinks takes it too easily for granted that ‘of’ 
here means about or concerning. ‘But this,’ he says, ‘after “cry out” is impos- 
sible’; and therefore declares that it is ‘more likely that “of” here stands for 
on, as exactly similar in “‘he cried out of sack,” [Henry V: II, iii, 297], ‘he called 
out for sack.’—In this last passage ‘of’ means, as in the present line, about, and 
not as Schmidt takes it. Is it necessary to instance as examples the titles to each 
of Bacon’s Essays?—Ep. 

303, 304. Opinion that . . . Cominius] Roprerick (ap. Epwarps, Canons, 
etc., p. 275): This passage, as it stands here, presents us with a strange kind of 
mock-reasoning. Brutus and Sicinius are reasoning together about Martius’s 
contenting himself with the second place in the army, leaving the first to Cominius. 
‘Herein (says Brutus) he acts prudently; for, Fame being his motive, and he 
having already an established character, he by this means less risks the losing 
of it. For, in case of any miscarriage, the fault will be thrown on Cominius, the 
General; and giddy censurers will be apt enough to cry: It would have been 
otherwise if Martius had had the management!’ To this observation Sicinius 
might very pertinently add the following: ‘That, moreover, if things should go 
well the opinion of the people was so firmly to Martius that he would certainly carry 
off some part of the praise due to Cominius.’ And this sense will be obtained: 


‘Opinion, that so sticks on Martius, 
Shall of his merits rob Cominius.’ 


Thus the passage goes on very sensibly. Brutus remarks, ‘That by his inferiority 
of place he would quit himself of all the disgrace of any miscarriage,’ and Sicinius 


78 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


Bru. Come: halfe all Cominius Honors are to Martius 305 
Though Martius earn’d them not : and all his faults 
To Martius fhall be Honors, though indeed 
In ought he merit not. 

Sicin. Let’s hence,and heare 
How the difpatch is made, and in what fafhion 310 
More then his fingularity, he goes 


305. Cominius]  Cominius’s Fy, 310. fashion] F.F;, Leo.  fa/hion, 
Rowe. Cominius’ Pope et seq. F, et cet. 
306. earn’d] earn Han. 311. his] this Han. Leo. im Var. 


308. ought] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Lor aicH hooray Mey la kyr, 
i, Han. Cap. aught Theob. ii. et cet. 


adds, ‘That by his superiority in character he would possess himself of more 
than his true share of merzt in any success.’ Or, probably, Merit and Demerit did 
in Shakespeare’s time mean the same thing, as they certainly did originally, the 
supposed opposition in the sense of these words being comparatively modern 
and, as I apprehend, altogether fantastical. [Had Roderick but ascertained the 
truth in regard to the sense of the words merit and ‘demerit’ before writing his 
remark, he might have spared himself this rather verbose paraphrase, with its 
needless alteration of text and line. See next note by Steevens.—ED.] 

304. demerits] STEEvENS: Merits and ‘demerits’ had anciently the same mean- 
ing. So, in Othello, ‘My demerits May speak unbonneted,’ [I], ii, 22]. 

305. Come] Dyce (ed. ii.): Mr W. N. Lettsom, after proposing an entirely 
new distribution of the dialogue here between Sicinius and Brutus, remarks: 
‘The word “Come” is evidently displaced, and should be inserted, if at all, either 
before “‘Let’s hence’’ or “‘Let’s along.”” The metre will allow either.’ 

309. Sicin. Let’s hence] BrEcuine (Falcon Sh.): The two Tribunes are not 
much discriminated in character. Speeches are often divided between them, as 
above. (See especially II, iii, ad fin.) Sicinius has more initiative, perhaps, as 
being the senior. 

311. More then his singularity] JoHNsoN: We will learn what he is to do be- 
sides going himself; what are his powers, and what is his appointment.—-STEEVENS: 
Perhaps the word ‘singularity’ implies a sarcasm on Coriolanus, and the speaker 
means to say, after what fashion, beside that in which his own singularity of 
disposition invests him, he goes into the field. So in Twelfth Night, ‘Put thy- 
self into the trick of singularity,’ (II, v, 164]—PveE (p. 242): The passage is 
very obscure and wants explanation, which is very properly given by Dr 
Johnson. There seems no meaning in the question according to the suggestion of 
Steevens. There is also an inaccuracy of construction in his note; he goes should 
be either does he go, goes he.-—VERPLANCK: That is, More than the fashion of 
his own singular and perverse character, says the sneering Tribune. Such I take 
to be the sense.—STaunton: As ‘singularity’ formerly implied pre-eminence, 
Sicinius may mean, sarcastically, after what fashion, beside his usual assumption 
of superiority——Lro, apparently unaware that he is anticipated by Hanmer, 
proposes to change ‘his’ to this; he also retains the Folio reading of ‘fashion’ 
without its following comma (see Text. Notes), and thus explains the lines: ‘The 
Tribunes had just been speaking about the singular fashion of arrangement 


ACT I, SC. ii.] 


Vpon this prefent ACtion. 


CORIOLANUS 79 


Biz 
Bru. Let’s along. Exeunt 
[Scene II.] 
Enter Tullus Auffidius with Senators of Coriolus. I 
1.Sen. So, your opinion is Auffidius, 


312. this] his Huds. i. 

SCENE Vv. Pope, Han. Scene changes 
to Corioli. Theob. Warb. Johns. 
SCENE 1. Rowe et cet. 

Coriolus. Rowe. Corioli. Pope, Han. 
Warb. Johns. The Senate-House in 
Corioli. Var. ’73, 78, 785, Ran. Corioli: 


1. Enter...Coriolus} Enter certain 
Senators and Aufidius. Cap. Enter 
Titus Aufidius and certain Senators. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. 
Dyce, Sta. Hal. Ktly. 

1. of Coriolus] of Corioli. Pope,+, 
Camis OimnueVAtw 7 se 7O,8 1856 


the Senate-house. Cap. et cet. Ran. 


between Cominius and Marcius; they now go to the Capitol to see “in what 
fashion more”—in what further fashion, beside the just mentioned singularity— 
“he goes upon this present action.”’—[Scumipr (Lex., s. v.) quotes the present 
line, adding in parentheses, ‘independently from his peculiar private character.’] 
—Utrici (Zusdtze und Berichtigungen, p. 175): I read with Hanmer and Leo 
this instead of ‘his,’ because by such reading only can this passage have a meaning. 
But ‘singularity’ cannot, meo judicio, refer, as Leo thinks, to the special arrange- 
ment already mentioned as made between Cominius and Coriolanus; since an 
‘arrangement’ has not been concluded, and ‘singularity’ with Shakespeare always 
has the meaning peculiarity, strangeness, remarkable. Sicinius means the pecu- 
liarity of Coriolanus, in preferring to place himself under Cominius rather than 
lead the army himself—WuitEtaw: Ironical. ‘This paragon of generals, how 
he is accompanied’; ‘with what force—over and above his own great self—he takes 
the field.—PAcE: The reference is, of course, to Marcius and his peculiarities of 
temperament.—E. K. CoampBers (Warwick Sh.): That is, with what troops, to back 
up his personal valour, which will count for more than anything in the expedition.— 
Verity (Student’s Sh.): The meaning seems to me: ‘let us see in what manner, 
beyond his usual peculiarity of character, he enters upon the war,’ 7. ¢., whether 
with an exceptional manifestation of his usual pride. Radically singularity means 
‘the state or character of being singular’ (literally and figuratively); hence ‘indi- 
vidual or personal peculiarity,’ whence the easily derived idea ‘oddity, eccen- 
tricity.’ . . . Malvolio is advised in the letter (II, v, 164): ‘Be opposite with a 
kinsman, surly with servants, .. . put thyself into the trick of s¢wgularity,’ on which 
he comments: ‘I will be proud, ... I will wash off gross acquaintance.’ There, 
as here, the essential notion seems to me to be ‘unlike to other people, apart from 
others,’ and the nearest rendering is ‘peculiarity. —Gorpon: That is, over and 
above his natural singularity (which, Sicinius implies, may be taken for granted in 
anything he may do). 

313. along] For examples of ‘along’ thus used without a verb of motion, see, 
if needful, ABBorT, § 30. 

1. Tullus Auffidius] Prorss (p. 94): After we have thus been made acquainted 
with one despised opponent, at whom Marcius has railed, the Roman people 
and its Tribunes, Shakespeare, in this second scene of the drama, presents to us 


80 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. ii. 


That they of Rome are entred in our Counfailes, 3 


3. entred| enter’d Cap. et seq. 


in person another opponent, one both sought for and highly regarded by Marcius, 
Tullus Aufidius. He is perhaps quite as blood-thirsty and brave as Marcius; in 
any case he possesses quite as strong a feeling of self-confidence, which draws 
him towards Marcius in no less degree than that which attracts the latter. Yet he 
has no word of praise for Marcius, but rather he cherishes the wish to conquer him 
either now or later, in honourable battle, because the fame of Marcius allows 
him no rest. This scene as well as the following is designed to foreshadow and 
prepare for the battle scenes. The sudden uprising of the Romans has com- 
pletely thwarted the designs of the Volscians to fall upon them unprepared. They 
are themselves on the point of attack. Corioli, which must bear the first brunt, 
must protect itself, and, while Aufidius with the army awaits the enemy in the 
field, must, if needful, bring reinforcements. 

1. Coriolus] Scummrt, whose stage-direction here reads, ‘Corioles. The Senate- 
house,’ says: ‘This is the standing form of the name of the Volscian town not 
only in Shakespeare but also in North’s translation.’ Schmidt has evidently 
overlooked the present line, and likewise two other passages, I, iv, 3 (stage- 
direction) and I, iv, 23, where there is still another variation in the spelling, viz.: 
‘Corialus’; in the six other passages wherein the name occurs it is spelt ‘Corioles’ 
as Schmidt gives it; this last, as he says, is the only form in which the name 
appears in North’s translation —Ep.—S. Lrr (Caxton Sh., Introd., p. xxxiii.): The 
character of Aufidius is developed by Shakespeare on lines which Plutarch sug- 
gested, and the mingling in him of meanness and liberality lacks completeness 
in either author. At the opening of the play he figures as a brave soldier, ‘a 
lion’ whom Coriolanus is ‘proud to hunt,’ but the rivalry between the two 
warriors has generated a personal hatred which evokes a characteristic divergence 
of expression. It is Coriolanus’s highest ambition to meet and kill his hated 
adversary in a fair personal encounter. Aufidius confesses that he cares not by 
what device he overcome his enemy, provided only he get the better of him. 
—BRADLEY (Coriolanus, p. 16): The drawing of the character of Aufidius seems 
to me by far the weakest spot in the drama. At one place, where he moralizes 
on the banishment of the hero, Shakespeare, it appears to some critics, is himself 
delivering a speech which tells the audience nothing essential and ends in desper- 
ate obscurity, [IV, vii, 30-59]. Two other speeches have been criticized. In the 
first, Aufidius, after his defeat in the field, declares that, since he cannot overcome 
his rival in fair fight, he will do it in any way open to him, however dishonour- 
able. The other is his lyrical cry of rapture when Coriolanus discloses himself 
in the house at Antium. The intention in both cases is clear. Aufidius is con- 
trasted with the hero as a man of much slighter and less noble nature, whose 
lively impulses, good and bad, quickly give way before a new influence, and 
whose action is in the end determined by the permanent pressure of ambition 
and rivalry. But he is a man of straw. He was wanted merely for the plot, 
and in reading some passages in his talk we seem to see Shakespeare yawning as 
he wrote. 

3- are entred in] For the use of ¢o be with intransitive verbs see, if needful, 
ABBOTT, § 295; and for ‘in’ used for into, Ibid., § 159. 


ACTATWSCii:| CORIOLANUS 81 


And know how we proceede, 
Auf. Is it not yours ? 5 
What euer haue bin thought one in this State 
That could be brought to bodily aét, ere Rome 
Had circumuention : ’tis not foure dayes gone 
Since I heard thence, thefe are the words, I thinke 
Ijhaue the Letter heere : yes, heere it is; 10 
They haue preft a Power, but it is not knowne 


6. haue] Mal. Var. ’21, Knt, Coll. i, g. thence,...words,] thence—...words— 
li, Del. Dyce, Sing. ii, Sta. Wh. i, Cam. Rowe,+. 
Craig, Neils. hath Ff et cet. Io. yes,| yes— Rowe,+. 
bin] been F3F,. we Ktly conj. 11. They haue] They’ve Words. 
one] on F;F, et seq. prefi| Ff, Rowe,+, Sing. Ktly. 
8. circumuention :]  circumuention ? press’d Cap. et cet. 
F,F, et seq. {Reading. Theob. Warb. Johns. 


Var. ’73,’78,’85. Reads. Cap. et cet. 


3. entred in] W. A. Wricut: That is, initiated into, admitted to; and so, ac- 
quainted with. Compare ‘man-enter’d’ in II, ii, 107. The term is perhaps bor- 
rowed from the Universities, where it still survives, and this is rendered more 
probable by the recurrence of the word ‘proceed,’ which has also a technical 
academic sense. An undergraduate enters the University and ‘proceeds’ to a 
degree, and the taking a degree in any faculty, such as arts, law, physic or divinity, 
is called ‘proceeding’ in that faculty. Bacon says of travellers (Essay xviii.): 
‘He that travelleth into a country, before he hath some entrance into the language, 
goeth to schoole, and not to travaile,’ where entrance = initiation, preliminary 
instruction. 

6. What euer ... thought one] Boswett: Ellpitically, whatever things.— 
Dettius: ‘Have’ is here the subjunctive, that is, may have; hardly as Boswell 
explains it—Scumupt: In order to retain the interrogative form of this sentence 
as in the Folios it is not possible to take ‘have’ as an ellipsis, as does Boswell; 
still less as a subjunctive, as does Delius, since both are ungrammatical; but after 
the word ‘what’ we must supply the foregoing word ‘counsels,’ a use of the pronoun 
which would not be unusual, but, on the other hand, is quite customary.—W. A. 
Wricut: If the reading of the Folio be correct we must understand ‘what’ to 
mean what things. Delius regards ‘have’ as the subjunctive, but this cannot be. 
In Henry V: II, ii, 75 the first Folio reads: ‘Why what reade you there, That 
haue so cowarded and chac’d your blood Out of apparance.’ 

11. prest] STEEVENS, from this form of spelling the word press’d, suggested 
that possibly it might signify ready, from pret, Fr—MAatone: The spelling of the 
old copy proves nothing, for participles were generally so spelt in Shakespeare’s 
time: so distrest, blest, &c. I believe press’d in its usual sense is right. It appears 
to have been used in Shakespeare’s time in the sense of impress’d. So Plutarch’s 
Coriolanus, translated by North: ‘—the common people—would not appeare when 
the consuls called their names by a bill to press them for the wars.’—PYE (p. 243): 
The conjecture of Steevens is too absurd to need refutation. It is a little odd 
that Mr Malone should say that ‘press’d’ is applied in its usual sense and then 
refer us for this sense to the age of Shakespeare. But, in fact, press’d is the 

6 


82 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. ii. 


Whether for Eaft or Weft : the Dearth is great, 12 
The people Mutinous : And it is rumour’d, 

Cominius , Martius your old Enemy 

(Who is of Rome worfe hated then of you) 15 
And Titus Lartius, a moft valiant Roman, 

Thefe three leade on this Preparation 

Whether ’tis bent : moft likely, ’tis for you : 

Confider of it. 


1.Sen. Our Armie’s in the Field : 20 

We neuer yet made doubt but Rome was ready 

To anfwer vs. 22 
12. Dearth] Death F2. 18. bent:] bent— Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
16. Lartius] Lucius F,. Han. Warb. bent. Johns. Var. ’73, 
18. Whether] Whither F,F,, Rowe et Ktly, Neils. 

seq. 


usual, and ‘impress’d’ only the legal word now.—SxeaT (Dict., s. v. (2).): To 
hire men for service, to engage men by earnest-money for the public service, to 
carry men off forcibly to become sailors or soldiers. The Dictionaries do not 
explain this word at all well; the only adequate explanation is in Wedgwood. It 
is quite certain, as he shews, that press is here a corruption of the old word prest, 
ready, because it was customary to give earnest-money to a soldier on entering 
service, just as to this day a recruit receives a shilling. This earnest-money 
was called prest-money, i. e., ready-money advanced, and to give a man such money 
was to imprest him, now corruptly written impress. ‘At a later period the practise 
of taking for the public service by compulsion made the word to be understood as 
if it signified to force men into the service, and the original reference to earnest- 
money was lost sight of,’ Wedgwood.—Hupson adopts Malone’s explanation of 
press'd as meaning constrained WHITELAW (Glossary): That is, impressed. 
Nothing to do with prest, ‘ready’ (Latin presto, Fr. pret.), which could not be used 
as an active participle-—VeERItTy (Student’s Sh.): That is, levied anarmy. Shake- 
speare uses press and impress several times with the idea of compulsory military 
service. Cf. Richard II: III, ii, 58, ‘For every man that Bolingbroke hath press’d 
To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,’ etc. See also 1 Henry IV: I, i, 21; 
Hamlet, I, i, 75 (‘such impress of shipwrights’). 

12. Whether for East or West] DeicHron: That is, whether they are to be 
sent against us or against some other enemy.—CasE (Arden Sh.) agrees with the 
foregoing explanation, and adds: ‘It possibly might mean whether they are to 
be sent against Corioles or some other Volscian city. Compare what Aufidius 
says to Coriolanus (IV, v, 142-147), ‘set down . . . thine own ways Whether to 
knock against the gates of Rome, Or rudely visit them in parts remote,’ etc. 

16. And... Roman] Assorr (§ 486) quotes this line among other examples 
of the prolongation of a syllable in order to reduce the measure to the necessary 
five feet; and thus divides the line: And Ti | tus Larcius | a mo | st val | iant 
Roman. ‘“Larcius,” adds Abbott, ‘has probably but one accent. However “a” 
appears sometimes to have the accent.’ It cannot, I think, be too often remarked 


ACT I, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 83 


Auf. Nor did you thinke it folly, 23 
To keepe your great pretences vayl’d, till when 
They needs muft fhew themfelues, which in the hatching 25 
It feem’d appear’d to Rome. By the difcouery, 
We fhalbe fhortned in our ayme, which was 
To take in many Townes, ere (almoft)Rome 
Should know we were a-foot. 29 


25. shew] fhews F,. 27. fhorined] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
26. feem’d] seems Han. Ktly, Words. Theob. Johns. shortened Han. Warb. 
Hal. shorten’d Cap. et cet. 


that such scansion is but for the printed page; the very slight irregularity could 
never be detected in the flow of the spoken words.—Ep. 

24. pretences] Murray (UN. E. D., s. v. 3.): An expressed aim, intention, pur- 
pose, or design; an intending or purposing; the object aimed at, the end purposed. 
Obs. 1526. Pilgr. Perf (W. de W. 1531) 181 In whome he coude fynde neyther 
synne nor pretense of synne. 1547. Boorde, Introd. Knowl., xxxii. (1870) 205 I, 
knowynge theyr pretence, aduertysed them to returne home to Englande. [CASE 
compares: ‘Against the undivulged pretence I fight Of treasonous malice.’—Mac- 
beth, II, iii, 137.] 

28. take in} MALONE: To ‘take in’ is here, as in many other places, to sub- 
due. So, in The Execration of Vulcan, by Ben Jonson: ‘The Globe the glory of 
the Bank . . . I saw with two poor chambers taken in, And raz’d.’—[Underwoods, 
ed. Gifford, vol. viii, pp. 420-422.—Ep.]|—-STEEVENS quotes in illustration ‘more 
appositely’: ‘He could so quicly cut the Ionian sea And take in Toryne,’ Ant. & 
Cleo., ILI, ii, 61; and W. A. Wricut contributes also, from this latter play: ‘When 
he hath mused of taking kingdoms in,’ III, xiii, 83. Wright likewise adds other 
examples from Chapman, Jonson, Drayton, and Massinger of ‘take in’ in the sense 
of to subdue.—Ep. 

28. ere (almost) Rome] P. Srmpson (Shakespearian Punctuation, p. 89) quotes 
the present line in illustration of parentheses used to mark ‘a qualifying expression 
or an afterthought,’ and further quotes ‘That (almost) might’st haue coyn’d 
me into Golde,’ Henry V: II, ii, 98. The use of parentheses as a guide to the man- 
ner in which the word or words enclosed are to be spoken is again treated by 
Simpson in his article, The Bibliographical Study of Shakespeare (Proceedings of 
Oxford Bibliographical Society, 1922-23, p. 33); he there quotes from Richard Mul- 
caster’s Elementarie (1582, pp. 148-153): ‘Of Distinction,’ as follows: ‘Paren- 
thesis is expressed by two half circles . . . and in reading warneth vs, that the words 
inclosed by them, ar to be pronounced with a lower and quikker voice, then the 
words before or after them.’ ‘Modern punctuation,’ says Simpson, ‘aims at 
making a sentence clear by marking off the clauses; it is logical, at least in inten- 
tion. Elizabethan stopping, on the other hand, aimed at guiding the reader. 
It was elocutionary and rhetorical in principle.—Axssotr (§ 29) gives other 
instances wherein ‘almost’ follows the word it qualifies. 

28, 29. ere. . . Rome Should know, etc.] Case (Arden Sh.): There is nothing 
of this in Plutarch, and Shakespeare took it from the after designs of the Volsces 
under Coriolanus. [See Appendix: Source of Plot, Plutarch, p. 637.] 


84 THE TRAGEDIE OF fAcT iT, SC.1a, 


2.Sen. Noble Auffidius, 30 

Take your Commiffion, hye you to your Bands, 

Let vs alone to guard Corioles 

If they fet downe before’s : for the remoue 

Bring vp your Army : but (I thinke) you’! finde 

Th’haue not prepar’d for vs. 35 
Auf. O doubt not that, 

I {peake from Certainties. Nay more, 


Some parcels of their Power are forth already, 38 
31. [Giving it. Coll. ii. 35. TWhaue] Ff. They've Rowe,+, 
32. Corioles] Ktly. Coriolus Ff, Knt, Coll. Dyce, Sing. ii, Sta. Ktly, Wh. 

Rowe. Corioli Pope et cet. Cam.+, Huds. Words. Craig, Neils. 
33. before’s] before us Cap. Varr. They have Cap. et cet. 

Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Del. Hal. 37. Certainties] very certainties Han. 

Ktly. Words. 

for the] for their Huds. ii. (Johns. 38. Power] powers Steev. Varr. Sing. 
conj.). i, Knt, Hal. Huds. i. 


33. for the remoue] WARBURTON: The first part of this sentence is without 
meaning. The General had told the Senators that the Romans had prest a power, 
which was on foot. To which the words in question are the answer of a Senator. 
And to make them pertinent we should read them thus: ‘fore they remove Bring 
up your army,’ 7. e., Before that power, already on foot, be in motion, bring up 
your army; then he corrects himself and says, but I believe you will find your 
intelligence groundless, the Romans are not yet prepared for us.—JouNson: I do 
not see the nonsense or the impropriety of the old reading. Says the senator to 
Aufidius, Go to your troops, we will garrison Corioli. If the Romans besiege us, 
bring up your army to remove them. If any change should be made, I would read: 
for their remove.—HEATH (p. 411): Mr Warburton, in explaining his conjecture, 
hath made a very pleasant blunder, which the vulgar would be apt to call a bull. 
{Heath here gives Warburton’s interpretation.] It will perhaps puzzle Mr War- 
burton’s philosophy to explain, how the Roman power could set down, and lay 
siege to Corioli, before they were in motion. But the common reading, ‘for the 
remove’ was perfectly right, if he had but endeavored to understand it. The 
sense is, In order to oblige them to raise the siege, bring up your army; in the 
mean time we are fully sufficient to guard the city Maton: ‘The remove’ and 
‘their remove’ are so near in sound that the transcriber’s ear might easily have 
deceived him. But it is always dangerous to let conjecture loose where there is 
no difficulty. 

37. I speake from Certainties] BapHam (Criticism Applied to Sh., p. 12), in 
reference to Hanmer’s interpolation very, metri causd, says: ‘This critic deserves 
praise for his zeal on behalf of the Shaksperian prosody, but his corrections too 
often remind one of that sovereign specific in Greek metres, the particle yé. In 
this passage the antithesis of the sentence absolutely requires us to read “I speak 
from certainties; nay more, I hear,” &c. Let the reader observe that, without 
those words, Aufidius announces a piece of certain intelligence which he had no 
business to reserve till the end of the scene, seeing that, like the Irishman’s first 
reason which superseded the necessity of all others, this news would have saved 


ACT I, SC. iii.] 


CORIOLANUS 85 


And onely hitherward. I leaue your Honors. 
If we, and Caius Martius chance to meete, 40 
’Tis fworne betweene vs, we fhall euer ftrike 


Till one can do no more. 


All. The Gods afsift you. 


Auf. And keepe your Honors fafe. 


1.Sen. Farewell. 
2.Sen. Farewell. 
All. Farewell. 


45 


Exeunt omnes. 47 


[Scene ITT.] 


Enter Volumnia and Virgilia, mother and wife to Martius : I 
They fet them downe on two lowe ftooles and fowe. 


40, 41. we...euer] we...never Var. ’03, 
’13, ’21, Sing. i, Hal. T...either Theob. 
conj. (Nichols, Lit. Ilust., ii, 479). 

43. afsift you.] assist! Var. ’73. 

SCENE vi. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 
SCENE m1. Rowe et cet. 

Rome. Rowe. Scene changes to 


Rome. A Room in Caius Marcius’s 
House. Cap. Dyce, Cam. Huds. ii, 
Words. Rome. An Apartment in 
Marcius’s House. Mal. et cet. 

1. mother...to Martius] Om. Rowe 
et seq. 

2. fet them] Ff, Cam.+, Coll. iii, 


Caius Marcius’s House in Rome. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Caius Marcius’s 
House in Rome. Han. Varr. Ran. 


Craig, Neils. seat themselves: Cap. 
sit: Rowe ii. et cet. 
2. on two lowe] upon Cap. 


the senators a world of discussion.’—[This interpolation to remedy the metre, and 
his rejection of Hanmer’s, Badham repeated in his article ‘The Text of Shakespeare,’ 
contributed to the Cambridge Essays, 1856.—ED.] 

40-42. If we . . . no more] Casr (Arden Sh.): Aufidius thus alludes to the per- 
sonal rivalry between himself and Coriolanus, and the hint of the chances of its 
issue adds to the solemnity of the leave-taking. 

41. we shall euer] Knicut: The modern editors have strangely changed this 
to never [see Text. Notes]. By ‘ever strike’ we understand we shall continue to 
strike; if we adopt the modern reading of never, we must accept ‘strike’ in the 
sense of striking a colour—vyielding. [‘A phrase not of Shakespeare’s age,’ adds 
Verplanck.—Eb.] 

Scene III.] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): This scene was set in the rear- 
stage, whose compartment-like semi-separation from the fore-stage could simulate, 
without interruption for stage-setting, an interior somewhat removed from the 
outdoor turmoil of the preceding part of the action. There could conveniently be 
placed the two lowe stooles where Volumnia and Virgilia set them downe and sewed. 
Possibly when Volumnia and Valeria made their exeunt ‘over the threshold,’ 
which Virgilia declared she would not pass, nor turn her solemnesse out a doore 
as Valeria begged her to do, the effect for the audience was that she was still at 
home in Rome, as the curtains, with which the rear-stage seems to have been fur- 
nished in Shakespeare’s plays, closed her from view, after the other ladies were 
seen to pass through the central door in the rear-stage into the ‘tyring-room.’— 
Ruoves (The Stagery of Sh., p. 40): The setting of properties upon the after-stage 


86 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act I, Sc. iii. 


Volum. I pray you daughter fing, or expreffe your felfe 3 


in no way precluded, but usually demanded the action—at least in part—taking 
place upon the fore-stage. Indeed, in very few scenes was the action confined 
to the after-stage. . . . Again, because ‘moveables’ were used in a scene, it does 
not always follow that they were discovered on the after-stage. (Wote, p. 98: 
In The Taming of the Shrew, as revived for continuous performance in full text by 
Sir John Martin Harvey, in 1913, the stage properties, such as chairs, tables, and 
so on, were placed in position, in full view of the audience, by the servants dressed 
‘in the period.’ This method was perhaps due to his adviser, Mr William Poel, 
who has always been enamoured with it; but there is no reason to suppose that 
on the stage of Shakespeare it was the general practice or anything but an ex- 
pediency. Moreover, where the men appeared, to move properties, it is usually 
clear that they appeared in the dramatic character of household servants. Some- 
times, however, it was otherwise. As Mr Puff said to the scenemen in The Critic 
(1779): ‘It is always awkward, in a tragedy, to have you fellows coming on in 
your playhouse liveries to remove things. I wish it could be managed better.’) 
In Coriolanus, Act I, sc. iii, whose initial direction is: ‘They set them downe on 
two lowe stooles and sowe,’ was played on the fore-stage, since the after-stage 
could not be used ‘with set movables’ in two successive scenes, and it was needed 
for the next scene, which is before the Gates of Corioli. This is the only direction 
in Shakespeare which points to the early origin of ‘Two chairs to the front. It’s 
a custom in our profession,’ as it is styled in Robertson’s David Garrick (1864). 
[Who shall decide when two such critics disagree? Miss Porter’s descriptive ar- 
rangement—be it said nowise in disparagement—is evidently based on a theoretic 
knowledge of the Elizabethan stage, while that of Rhodes is, just as evidently, 
based on the pragmatic. His illustrations of the actual working out of other 
scenes inclines me to favour his view of the present case.—ED.] 

i. Enter Volumnia and Virgilia] Verity (Siudent’s Sh.): The main purpose of 
this scene is to show up the character of Volumnia, the typical Roman matron, 
to whom Virgilia is obviously meant as a foil. Volumnia is important not only 
per se in that she has so much to do with the actual working of the plot but also 
in relation to Coriolanus, who is what he is largely through her and her training. 
As a scene of domestic interest set in a framework of natural stress this scene 
may be compared with the scene between Lady Macduff and Ross in Macbeth, 
IV, ii. The resemblance is heightened by the introduction of the little boy. 
There are not very many portraits of children in Shakespeare’s plays, and (as has 
been well said) about almost all of them clings a certain pathos. Witness, above 
all, Prince Arthur in King John. Perhaps, indeed, this lies not in the presentment 
of the individual child, but in the ever-felt contrast between simple childhood 
and great surroundings. 

3. Volum. I pray you, etc.] Drtius (Jahrbuch, vol. v, p. 268): The intimate 
conversation of the mother and wife of the hero, to whom later their friend Valeria 
comes, is carried on in trustful terms bespeaking domestic relations in homely 
prose. Only as Volumnia, in the ecstasy of her maternal pride, describes her son 
in the middle of the turmoil of battle, does she rise to expressing herself in blank 
verse. [In this long article Delius attempts to show by examples the various 
reasons for Shakespeare’s use of prose and blank verse. On the blank half-page 
at the beginning the late Editor of this edition—whose lightest word ever gave 


ACT I, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 87 


in a more comfortable fort : If my Sonne were my Huf- 
band, I fhould freelier reioyce in that abfence wherein 5 
he wonne Honor, then in the embracements of his Bed, 
where he would fhew moft loue. When yet hee was but 
tender-bodied, and the onely Sonne of my womb; when 
youth with comelineffe pluck’d all gaze his way; when 
for a day of Kings entreaties, a Mother fhould not fel him 10 
an houre from her beholding; I confidering how Honour 
would become fuch a perfon, that it was no better then 
Picture-like to hang by th’wall, if renowne made it not 
{tirre, was pleas’d to let him feeke danger, where he was 
like to finde fame: To a cruell Warre I fent him, from 15 
whence he return’d, his browes bound with Oake. I tell 
thee Daughter, I {prang not more in ioy at firft hearing 17 


5. Jnould] would F,, Rowe,+. Theob. et cet. 
7. would] fhould F,F,, Rowe. to. fel] fell F,F, let Anon. (ap. 
10. Kings] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Cam.). 

king’s Johns. Varr. Mal. Ran. kings’ 17. not] no F,, Rowe, Pope. 


illumination and dignity to any page of Shakespearean comment—has written 
as follows: ‘This Essay of Delius’s is a good illustration of the laborious assiduity 
with which Germans will make mountains out of molehills. It can all be summed 
up in one sentence: Shakespeare always fitted the form to the dignity of the 
thought, except, as Coleridge shows, where the highest emotions are to be ex- 
pressed, then prose is used.’—Eb.] 

8, 9. when youth .. . his way] Douce: That is, attracted the attention of 
every one towards him.—Casr (Arden Sh.): Compare Winter’s Tale, IV, iv, 385: 
‘were I the fairest youth That ever made eye swerve’; and Sonnet, v, 2: ‘The 
lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell.’ 

13. to hang by th’wall] W. A. Wricut: That is, to be useless or neglected. 
Compare Cymbeline, III, iv, 54: ‘Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion; And, 
for I am richer than to hang by the walls, I must be ripp’d.’ 

13, 14. made it not stirre] E. K. Coampers (Warwick Sh.): The ‘it’ is, I 
think, Marcius’s ‘person,’ his noble appearance, which would better become the 
stirring of war than the repose of peace. 

15. To a cruell Warre] W. A. WricuT: The first experience of Coriolanus in 
war was at the battle of the Lake Regillus—Casr (Arden Sh.): The expression 
is found in North’s Plutarch, ‘Comparison between Alcibiades and Coriolanus,’ 
ed. 1595, 258: ‘And hereby it appeared he was entred into this cruell warre.’ 

16. his browes bound with Oake] JoHnson: The crown given by the Romans to 
him that saved the life of a Citizen, which was accounted more honorable than any 
other.—CaseE (Arden Sh.): North’s Plutarch (ed. 1595, p. 236) gives an interesting 
account of the origin as follows: ‘This was either because the lawe did this honour 
to the oke, in favour of the Arcadians, who by the oracle of Apollo were in olde 
time called the eaters of akornes: or else because the souldiers mighte easily in 
every place come by oken boughes: or lastly, because they thought it very neces- 
sarie to give him that had saved a citizen’s life a crowne of this tree to honour him, 


88 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACTH ASC ait 


he was a Man-child, then now in firft feeing he had pro- 18 
ued himfelfe a man. 

Virg. But had he died in the Bufineffe Madame, how 20 
then ? 

Volum. Then his good report fhould haue beene my 
Sonne, I therein would haue found iffue. Heare me pro- 
feffe fincerely, had I a dozen fons each in my loue alike, 
and none leffe deere then thine, and my good Martius, I 25 
had rather had eleuen dye Nobly for their Countrey,then 
one voluptuoufly furfet out of Action. 

Enter a Gentlewoman. 

Gent. Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to vifit you. 

Virg. Befeech you giue me leaue to retire my felfe. 30 

Volum. Indeed you fhall not : 
Me thinkes, I heare hither your Husbands Drumme : 


See him plucke -4uffidius downe by th’haire : 23 

18. Man-child] manchild Han. 32. heare hither] hither hear Pope,+, 

now] then Anon. (ap. Cam.). Cap. Varr. Ran. 

26. rather had] rather Rowe+ (—Var. 33. See] I see Rowe,+ (—Var. ’73), 
73). rather have Dyce ii, Coll. iii, Cap. Dyce ii, iii, Huds. ii, Words. 
Huds. ii, Words. Auffidius downe] down Aufidius 

31. you shall] thou shalt F,, Rowe,+. Warr Fen Joos. 

32-46. Mnemonic Warb. th’haire| Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i, 


Huds. i. the hair Cap. et cet. 


being properly dedicated vnto Jupiter, the patron and protector of their citties 
and thought amongst other wilde trees to bring forth a profitable frute, and of 
plantes to be the strongest.’ 

18. Man-child] W. A. Wricut: Compare Revelation, xii, 5: ‘And she brought 
forth a man-child.’ In this passage the word is found in the Wicliffite Versions, 
some MSS of which have ‘man-child’ and others ‘knave-child.’ Again in Stow’s 
Summarie (ed. 1565), fol. 116a: ‘This yere the quene was deliuered of a man child 
at Langley.’ 

22, 23. should .. . would] For this use of ‘should’ and ‘would’ see, if needful, 
ABBOTT, § 322. 

30. to retire my selfe] W. A. WricHt: Many verbs which are now intransitive 
were formerly reflexive; as, for instance, assemble, behave, endeavor, remember, 
repent, sport, submit, and others. Compare Temp., V, i, 310: ‘And thence 
retire me to my Milan, where Every third thought shall be my grave.’ Again, 
Rich. II: IV, i, 96: ‘And toil’d with works of war, retired himself To Italy.’ 
[See also ABzBorrt, § 296.] 

32. hither] For other examples of this use of like adverbs without a verb of 
motion (motion being implied), see ABBorr, § 41.—W. A. Wricut: That is, hear 
the sound of it penetrating hither—DricHTon compares Beggar’s Bush, IV, iii: 
‘Oh these bak’d meats! Methinks I smell them hither.’ 


ACT I, SC. iii] CORIOLA NUS 89 


(As children from a Beare) the Volces fhunning him : 

Me thinkes I fee him ftampe thus, and call thus, 35 

Come on you Cowards, you were got in feare 

Though you were borne in Rome ; his bloody brow 

With his mail’d hand, then wiping, forth he goes 

Like to a Harueft man, that task’d to mowe 

Or all, or loofe his hyre. 40 
Virg. His bloody Brow ? Oh Iupiter, no blood. 
Volum. Away you Foole ; it more becomes a man! 

Then gilt his Trophe. The brefts of Hecuba 

‘When the did fuckle Heétor, look’d not louelier 


Then Hecéiors forhead, when it {pit forth blood 45 
34. from] Om. Han. 36. you] ye F;F,, Rowe,+ (—Var. 
Volces] F,, Var. 778, ’85, Mal. als 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt. Volcies you were] ye were Rowe,+ 
F;. Volfcies F,, Rowe. Volsci Pope, (—Var. ’73). 
+. Volscians Cap. Volsces Coll. et 37- you were] ye were Warb. Johns. 
Cet Var. ’73. 
35. thus,...thus,) thus—...tkus— 39. that] thats F,. what's F,F,. 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. that’s Rowe et seq. 
thus [stamping]...thus Johns. thus,... mowe] mote F;. 
thus— Var. ’73 et seq. 40. Or all] O’er all Sing. ii. 


43. Trophe] Trophy Ff. 


34. As ... from a Beare] W. A. Wricut: The construction is, according to 
the sense, as if ‘fleeing’ had been used for shunning. 

43. gilt] Braptey (NV. £. D.,s. v. 2): Gilding; the thin layer of gold with which 
anything is gilt, 1593. Rich. II: II, i, 294: ‘Wipe off the dust that hides our 
sceptre’s gilt.’ [STEEVENS, in the Varioruwm 1773, remarks that the word in the 
foregoing sense ‘is now obsolete’; Bradley does not so mark it, but examples of 
its use between 1642 and 1880 are lacking; Steevens was possibly correct; if so, 
this is a case of resuscitation.—Eb.] 

43. Trophe] SkEat (Dict., s. v. Trophy): A memorial of the defeat of an enemy, 
something taken from an enemy. Formerly spelt trophec, as in Cotgrave, and 
in Spenser, Faerie Queene, VII, vii, 56: ‘trophée, a trophee, a sign or mark of vic- 
tory,’ Cotgrave. [This word occurs in the singular in four other passages in 
Shakespeare, viz.: All’s Well, II, iii, 146, ‘—on every grave A lying trophy’; 
Henry V: V, Prol. 21: ‘Giving full trophy, signal and ostent’; Ibid., V, i, 75: 
‘worn as a memorable trophy of predeceased valour’; Hamlet, IV, v, 214: ‘No 
trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones.’ In all these passages the word is 
spelt trophee in the Folio. Its spelling in the present line, ‘trophe,’ is, therefore, 
merely an error of the compositor. It is, perhaps, interesting to observe that 
by the time of the second Folio, 1632, the word had assumed its present form, 
twophy.—Eb.] 

43-46. The brests of Hecuba . . . Contenning] WorpswortH omits these 
lines, as he says, ‘on the score of delicacy’; Bowdler is not so squeamish; he does 
not class them among those ‘which cannot with propriety be read in a family.’ 


go THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. ili. 


At Grecian fword. Contenning, tell Valeria 46 


46. fword. Contenning,] fwordes Contending: F,. fwords Contending: FF, 
Rowe,+, Del. i, Dyce, Wh. i. swords’ contending. Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Ran. 
Steey. Varr. Sing. i, Knt, Sta. Hal. Hunter. sword’s contending. Coll. i. swords 
Wh. ii, Herford. sword, contemning. Cam.+, Del. ii, Neils. Case. sword, contem- 
ning... Ktly. 


Bowdler was a Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the Society of Antiquaries and 
therefore could hardly be as competent a judge as Wordsworth, who was a Bishop, 
of the concealed impropriety in this outspoken mention of a part of the human 
body.—Ep. 

46. At Grecian sword. Contenning] Cortier: We feel bound to follow F, 
as next in authenticity [to F,]; but ‘contemning’—Hector’s forehead contemning 
at the Grecian sword—seems, possibly, the word which was written by Shake- 
speare and misread by the old compositor.—[In his Notes and Emendations, p. 348, 
Collier announces that ‘the probability’ of the foregoing conjecture ‘is confirmed 
by the fact that the MS. Corrector informs us that we ought to print as follows: 
“At Grecian swords contemning,” 7. e., contemning at Grecian swords, despising 
them.’ Although the witless notes of E. H. Seymour, published in 1805, have 
long since been banished from the pages of this edition, it is but fair to say that 
this reading (‘At Grecian swords, contemning’) was first proposed by him, thus 
anticipating Collier’s conjecture and the punctuation of the Cambridge Edd., 
neither of whom, however, mention Seymour as the originator—Ep.]—VERPLANCK: 
‘Contenning,’ I think, is clearly an error for contemning. With that correction 
the sense is clear, giving the strong but natural image of the hero’s forehead 
spitting forth its blood; not as from the injury of the enemies’ sword, but as in 
contempt of them. This reading differs little whether we take the sword of F, or 
the ‘swords’ of F,. [Verplanck objects to Capell’s reading on the ground that thus 
taking ‘contending’ substantively yields ‘a very harsh and obscure sense’ and loses 
‘the bold figure of the warrior’s forehead thus bleeding as in contempt of his adver- 
sary.’—It will be noticed that Verplanck does not credit the reading contemning 
to his predecessor, Collier—Ep.]—SIncER (Sh. Vindicated, p. 209): The self- 
evident correction, which I long since adopted, of ‘At Grecian swords contemning,’ 
should have been also adopted by Mr Collier when he suggested that contemning 
seemed “possibly the word which was written by Shakespeare,’ and yet contented 
himself with the very inferior reading ‘contending.’ [Collier might have replied 
to Singer ‘Tu quoque’—as Singer in his first ed., 1826, had also contented himself 
with the very inferior reading; in his second ed., 1856, three years later than the 
foregoing note in Sh. Vindicated, he prints ‘contemning,’ without any mention 
either of Collier’s conjecture or the MS. correction, remarking merely that he adopts 
this reading because he considers that ‘it improves the passage,’ certainly a lapse 
in editorial courtesy to which Collier in his second ed. resentfully calls his attention. 
Singer’s remark that he had ‘long since adopted’ the reading, contemning, is difficult 
of verification; we have no means of knowing how long before publication in 1856 
his notes on Coriolanus were composed, or whether he had consulted Seymour’s 
Notes.—Ep.]—Anon. (Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p. 320): Unless we can 
obtain a better substitute than contemning we are not disposed to alter the received 


ACT I, SC. iii.] CORIOLA NUS oI 


[46. At Grecian sword. Contenning] 
reading of these lines: ‘At Grecian swords contending.’—Dyce (ed. i.): Collier’s 
MS. Corrector reads: ‘At Grecian swords contemning.’ . . . But qy. is ‘contemning 
AT’ legitimate phraseology? (Since this note was written W. N. Lettsom has 
proposed to me, ‘As Grecian swords contemning.’)—[In his ed. ii. Dyce adopted 
Collier’s MS. Corrector’s reading, but placed a comma after the word ‘swords.’— 
Ep.]—LEo (ed., p. 120): Dyce is right in asking whether ‘contemning at’ is legiti- 
mate phraseology. But Volumnia does not speak about ‘contemning at’; she says 
spit at, and the construction of the phrase must be: when contemning it spit forth 
blood at Grecian sword.—Battey (ii, 48): Why contending, which is a reciprocal 
process, involving both Grecian and Trojan swords? Something more definite, 
something peculiar to the enemy, seems required, as e. g., ‘at the stroke of Grecian 
swords.’ My suggestion, in accordance with this view, is the alteration of merely 
a single letter: ‘At Grecian swords’ contunding,’ i. e., the forehead spits forth blood 
at the bruising inflicted by Grecian swords. The objection against this, that 
contund is a verb not employed by our author, although he has contusion, and 
rarely by anybody else, is certainly formidable, and I can set against it only the 
pleas that the emendation requires the smallest of changes in the text, that it yields 
the exact sense wanted, and that Shakespeare was in the constant habit of using 
what we should now consider uncouth and pedantic terms derived from the Latin, 
yet seldom without a precise and even forcible meaning. The last clause of this 
remark is, in fact, exemplified by the proposed emendation. The Latin contundo 
signifies to batter, bang, bruise; and since the old Grecian warriors wore helmets 
that completely hid the forehead, the only way of drawing blood from that part 
with the sword was by contunding the casque. Had our author written piercing or 
pricking, the language would have been less appropriate.—[On philological grounds 
alone Bailey’s extravagant proposal is quite inadmissible. The earliest example 
of the verb contund, in the sense to bruise or hurt the human body, is given in the 
NV. E. D. as 1654. Prior to that date the verb is used only in its technical sense 
to break or macerate in pieces for medicinal purposes—Ep.]—Hunson (ed. i.): 
There can be little doubt that contemning is the right word, and certainly it makes 
a most apt and striking figure. [In his ed. ii. Hudson prints from Dyce’s ed. ii, 
‘swords, contemning.’—Ep.]—R. G. WuirTe: I will not say that I am certain that 
the compositor was in error [when he printed ‘Contenning’ as the name of the 
gentle-woman.] The reading of F, is given in the text because it has been generally 
received and I have no better one to substitute, rather than from any confidence 
on my part that it is what Shakespeare wrote. The word ‘contending’ is at least 
superfluous. [White records the reading of Collier’s MS. Corrector without com- 
ment.]—CampBripce Epp. (Note II.): Perhaps we might read, ‘At Grecian, con- 
temning’t.’ It has also been suggested to us that ‘Contenning’ is the remnant of 
a stage-direction [containing herself]. But we know of no similar instance in any 
old edition.—Scumipt (Coriolanus): The reading we have adopted in the text, 
‘at Grecian sword-contending’ (as if it spit forth blood at Grecian sword-contest), 
makes no higher claim for acceptance than the conjectures already proposed. The 
hyphen between ‘sword’ and ‘contending’ would account for the period of the 
Folio; likewise a carelessly written d could easily be mistaken for a u, and thus 
contending was made ‘contenuing.’ But perhaps there actually remains in ‘con- 
tending’ a name, and the whole line is not as corrupt as it appears. [It will be 
noticed that Schmidt throughout his note gives the Folio reading as contenuing. 


92 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iii. 


We are fit to bid her welcome. Exit Gent. 47 
Vir. Heauens bleffe my Lord from fell Auffidius. 
Vol, Hee’l beat Auffidius head below his knee, 


And treade vpon his necke. 50 
48. Heauens] Heav’ns Rowe, Pope,+. 49. Auffidius] Aufidius’s F,, Rowe. 
Heaven’s Var. ’73. Aufidius’ Pope et seq. 


From what source he obtained this reading it is now impossible to say.—Ep.]— 
PERRING (p. 289) rejects the participle ‘contemning’ as it ‘does not add much 
to the spirit and force of the passage,’ coming after such a strong expression 
as ‘spit forth blood’; likewise the reading of F., while it must claim attention, 
Perring casts aside; then, since the word in F; is in Italics and is followed by a full 
stop, he is of the opinion that we have here ‘one of those numerous stage-directions, 
like “coming forward,” “digging,” ‘‘aside”—all these taken at random from 
Timon—which ever and anon interrupt the text, signifying that Volumnia had 
ceased speaking to Virgilia, and in “‘continuing” her remarks—so the word should 
have been spelt—was addressing the gentlewoman in attendance.’—[Not a single 
one of the stage-directions which Perring has ‘taken at random’ from Timon 
appears in the Folio text; they are all additions by later editors. Further com- 
ment is, therefore, needless. Perring ends his remarks with the valuable infor- 
mation ‘that stage-directions were usually printed in italics. —Ep.]—ROLFE: 
“Contemning’ is, on the whole, the best emendation that has been proposed. 
‘Contending’ merely serves to fill out the line, while contemning adds to the 
meaning as well.—OrGER (p. 58): May not ‘Contenning,’ awkwardly replaced by 
either ‘contending’ or ‘contemning,’ be a mistake for ‘Content ye’ addressed to 
Virgilia, or ‘content thee’? Such a phrase is constant in Shakespeare to bespeak 
acquiescence, as, é. g., Tro. & Cress., III, ii, 135: ‘Pray you, content you,’ as it is 
found, too, in Scripture, 2 Kings, v, 23: ‘Be content, take two talents.’ Here it 
expresses Volumnia’s desire that Virgilia will allow of Valeria’s visit, and turning 
to the Gentleman (sic) she bids her to be admitted.—BEEcHING in both the Henry 
Irving Sh. and the Falcon Sh. reads: ‘At Grecian swords, contemning,’ with the note 
that this is Collier’s reading; as will be noticed, by reference to the Text. Notes, 
it is a combination of Collier’s reading and the punctuation of the Cambridge 
Edd. and was originally given by Seymour.—Ep.—Miss C. Porter (First Folio 
Sh.): ‘Contenning’ after all is likelier to be some slightly misprinted name (names 
being commonly put in Italic) than a verb referring to ‘swordes.’ It is common 
for Shakespeare to introduce a servant’s name thus casually. He does so in IV, 
Vv, 5, in the case of a servant of Auffidius, whom he names Cotus.—Gorpon: Per- 
haps ‘Contenning’ is a name corrupted. If it is not, then Collier’s contemning is 
excellent and may be right—[{VeERiry, Dr1icHToN, CHAMBERS, PAGE, and GoRDON 
follow Collier’s and Seymour’s reading, merely recording the textual emendations 
proposed.—Ep.] 

48. blesse my Lord from] W. A. Wricut: That is, protect or preserve by 
their blessing. Compare Much Ado, V, i, 145: ‘God bless me from a challenge!’ 
Also King Lear, II, iv, 60: ‘Bless thee from whirlwinds, star-blasting, and 
taking!’ 


ACT I, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 93 


Enter Valeria with an Vfher, and a Gentlewoman. 51 

Val. My Ladies both good day to you,| 

Vol. Sweet Madam. 

Vir. Iam glad to fee your Ladyhhip. 

Val. How do you both ? You are manifeft houfe-kee- 55 
pers. What are you fowing heere ? A fine {potte in good 
faith. How does your little Sonne ? 57 

51. Enter...Gentlewoman] Enter Coll. Del. Dyce, Hal. Huds. Words. 
_ Valeria attended. Cap. Re-enter Craig. 


Gentlewoman, with Valeria, and her 56. What are] What, are Cap. 
Usher. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, (withdrawn in Errata). 


51. Enter Valeria] C. C. CLARKE (Sh. Characters, p. 485): There is but one sub- 
ordinate character among the females in this play, and that is Valeria, the friend 
of Volumnia and Virgilia. The part is necessarily a very slight one; yet, being a 
patrician lady, and an intimate of the principals, the poet takes occasion to exalt 
her qualities with the reader through a third party. Coriolanus describes her as 


‘The noble sister of Publicola, 
The moon of Rome; chaste as the icicle 
That’s curded by the frost from purest snow, 
And hangs on Dian’s temple.’ 


A passage which, for the beauty of the poetry, and as a lustrous image of wom- 
an’s perfection, I should suppose has never been surpassed. In Act I, sc. iii, 
where Valeria comes to pay a morning visit to the two ladies, we again have an 
example—even upon so minim an occasion—of Shakespeare’s perception of. all 
the characteristic points to be produced, and with advantage. One would sup- 
pose, from this effective little scene, that he had put himself upon ‘a course’ 
of etiquette, and had taken honours and degrees in the science of making ‘morning 
calls.’ . . . After reading this very unimportant part of Valeria, and which consists 
of but a half-dozen short sentences, no one, I should think, would be so hardy as to 
maintain (which nevertheless has been asserted in the fantastical spirit of criticism) 
that Shakespeare slovened his insignificant characters in order to throw his prin- 
cipals into high relief. 

55, 56. manifest house-keepers] W. A. Wricur: That is, notorious or well- 
known keepers at home. For ‘manifest’ in this sense compare All’s Well, I, iii, 
229: ‘You know my father left me some prescriptions Of rare and proved effects, 
such as his reading And manifest experience had collected.’ 

56. A fine spotte] Strrvens: This expression (whatever may be the precise 
meaning of it) is still in use among the vulgar: ‘You have made a fine spot of work 
of it,’ being a common phrase of reproach to those who have brought themselves 
into a scrape-—BOoswELL: Surely it means a pretty spot of embroidery. We 
often hear of spotted muslin. [Steevens is possibly right; J. Wricur (English 
Dialect Dict., s. v. Spot Sb. 1.) has ‘Fig. In phrase a proper spot of work, a sad or 
unfortunate occurrence or business. Sc. “This is a proper spot of work, said 
the king, beginning to amble about.”—Scott, Nigel, xxxii.’—Ep.]—BAlILev (ii, 50): 
I cannot help regarding ‘spot’ as altogether spurious. Valeria is gaily rallying her 
friends on their keeping so much within doors, and proceeds, ‘What! are you 


94 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iii. 


Vir. I thanke your Lady-fhip : Well good Madam. 58 
Vol. He had rather fee the {words, and heare a Drum, 
then looke vpon his Schoolmatter. 60 


Val. A my word the Fathers Sonne : Ile fweare ’tis a 
very pretty boy. A my troth, I look’d vpon him a Wenf- 62 


59. the words] swords Coll. MS. 61, 62. A...A...a] O’...0’...0’ Rowe ii. 
et seq. 


sewing?’ Then, turning to the wife of Coriolanus, she exclaims, ‘a fine spot in 
good faith!’ which is no continuation of the raillery and is supremely flat. To 
remove this blemish I propose to read: ‘a fine spouse in good faith!’ Then 
naturally follows: ‘How does your little son?’ By this small change consistency 
is given to the whole speech, and it accords too with the subsequent part of the 
dialogue, in which Valeria, in the same style of banter, says to her friend: ‘You 
would be another Penelope.’ Instead of a fine spouse a speaker nowadays, under 
the same circumstances, would probably say, ‘What a notable wife!’—Lro (Corio- 
lanus, p. 120): It seems to me highly probable that the First Folio has a misprint 
in the word /potte, for I am disposed to regard this letter as an erroneous repetition 
of the compositor, who looked at the f in the word ‘fine’ (f and / being easily 
confounded); the words to be composed were not, as I conjecture, ‘a fine /potte 
in good faith,’ but a fine pattern, good faith W. A. Wricut: That is, a fine pattern; 
used of the figures in embroidery. Compare Othello, III, iii, 438: ‘Have you not 
sometimes seen a handkerchief Spotted with strawberries in your wife’s hand?’ 
Of which Othello afterwards (III, iv, 72) says, a sibyl ‘In her prophetic fury 
sewed the work.’—Caser (Arden Sh.): Of ‘spot,’ in the sense of a fine pattern in 
embroidery, Professor Dowden kindly furnished the following instance: William 
Teril, A Piece of Friar Bacon’s Brazenhead’s Prophecie, ‘Now Sempsters few are 
taught The fine stitch in their spots.’—[Apart from those editors or commentators _ 
who offer a conjectural emendation of the word ‘spot,’ the consensus of opinion is 
in favour of Boswell’s interpretation that the word has direct reference to the work 
of embroidery that Virgilia has in hand.—Ep.] 

56, 57. in good faith] Brrecuinc (Falcon Sh.): Notice as characteristic of Eliza- 
bethan ladies the extraordinary number of asseverations in this scene. 

61-69. A my word . . . mammockt it] J. C. Cortrs (Studies in Sh., p. 202): 
Longinus has observed of a celebrated sentence in Demosthenes that so abso- 
lutely perfect is the construction that if a synonym be substituted, if the slightest 
alteration be made in the order of the words, the whole is ruined—the music is a 
discord (De Sublimitate, xxxix.). What is true of the sentence in Demosthenes 
is true also of the paragraph we have just quoted [from Coriol.] and of many 
other prose paragraphs in Shakespeare. Alter or omit a single word, invert a 
sentence, strike out a clause, change in the smallest particular a particle, and you 
would jar the ear of a sensitive critic, as a false note would jar the ear of a mu- 
sician. Now we do not believe that, with the exception of Cranmer and the 
translators of the Bible, any other sixteenth-century prose writer had so fine a 
perception of the native harmony of our tongue, as distinguished from a harmony 
borrowed from Rome. 

61. the Fathers Sonne] E. K. Coamprrs (Warwick Sh.): I think there is a bit 
of symbolism here of a more direct kind than is usual with Shakespeare. Just as 


ACT ¥/SCoiii.] CORIOLANUS 95 


day halfe an houre together : ha’s fuch a confirm’d coun- 63 
tenance. I faw him run after a gilded Butterfly, & when 
he caught it, he let it go againe, and after it againe, and o- 65 
uer and ouer he comes, and vp againe : catcht it again : or 
62-69. A my troth...it] Mnemonic 66. catcht] and caught F,, Rowe,+. 
Warb. catched Var. ’03, ’13, ’21, Sing. i, Knt, 
62. vpon] on Rowe,+. Coll. Del. Dyce, Sta. Hal. Cam. Craig. 
62, 63. Wenf-day] Wednesday F,F,. catch’d Cap. et cet. 
63. ha’s] Ff, Rowe,+. has Dyce, or] and Han. Ktly, Huds. ii, 


Wh. i, Cam.+, Huds. ii, Words. Neils. Words. 
' He has Var. ’73 et cet. 


the child pursues the gilded butterfly, so the father pursues his ideal of honour, 
and in the end, after a check, ‘mammocks’ it. 

63. ha’s] For other examples of the omission of the Nominative with ‘has,’ 
‘is,’ or ‘was,’ etc., see ABBOTT, § 4oo. 

63. confirm’d] C. C. CLarKeE (Sh. Characters, p. 486): In that comprehensive 
term of one word Shakespeare has conveyed the perfect ideal of a self-willed char- 
acter. It has been frequently remarked that we cannot alter a phrase or an epithet 
of his without injuring it. Let any one try to select a word more apt to the pur- 
pose, in this instance, of conveying the idea of a sturdy child, and his success will 
be fortunate—not to say, singular. 

64. I saw him...a gilded Butterfly] TetzLarr (p. 58): This portrayal is so 
characteristic of the boy that from this alone we can judge his whole nature. Here 
pre-eminently has the poet achieved his purpose of presenting the boy as the 
veritable portrait of his father. Just as the proud, lordly nature of the father 
regards the plebs as unconditionally subject to him, so likewise the son looks upon 
the butterfly. As the father at once tramples under foot and destroys any actual 
or imagined opposition of the people whatsoever, in the same manner the son 
tears to pieces the butterfly when it seeks to escape him. [Tetzlaff’s Essay on 
the Child-characters of Shakespeare and Chamber’s edition appeared in the same 
year.—Ep.]|—CourTENAy (ii, 224): The visit of Valeria is from Plutarch, who tells 
us that Virgilia was found with her children in her lap; and the language of the 
ladies is unquestionably characteristic; but the proof afforded of young Marcius 
inheriting the spirit of his father, in his cruelty to a butterfly, is not. I venture 
to suggest, a pleasing or graceful addition by the poet. [In answer to the charge 
of ‘cruelty’ in the foregoing note WorpswortH (Historical Plays, i, 119) says: ‘If 
so, the boyishness of the poet Wordsworth, as recorded by himself, must fall under 
the same condemnation. See his ‘‘Lines to a Butterfly.”’—Ep.] 

64. a gilded Butterfly] E. K. Cuamprers (Warwick Sh.): Does Shakespeare 
mean the pale Sulphur, or the orange and white Orange-tip, or one of the Clouded 
Yellows, of various shades, or one of the orange-brown Fritillaries? ‘Gilded’ 
is not a very happy epithet for any one of them, but, on the other hand, it hints 
at the superficial gloriousness of Coriolanus’s ideal. 

64, 65. when... . after it againe] Case (Arden Sh.): Mr Charles Crawford 
supplies the following interesting parallel from Lord Bacon, Letter to Fulk Grevill, 
1595: ‘For to be as I told you, like a child following a bird, which when he is 
nearest flieth away, and lighteth a little before, and then the child after it again, 
and so ad infinitum, I am weary of it.’ 


96 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iii. 


whether his fall enrag’d him, or how ’twas, hee did fo fet 67 
his teeth, and teare it. Oh, Iwarrant how he mammockt 
it. 
Vol. One on’s Fathers moods. 70 
Val. Indeed la, tis a Noble childe. 
Virg. A Cracke Madam. 
Val. Come, lay afide your ftitchery, I muft haue you 
play the idle Hufwife with me this afternoone. 74 


70. on’s] F,F,, Dyce, Cam. Wh. i, Huds. Words. 0’s F,, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
of’s Theob. Warb. Johns. of his Var. ’73 et cet. 


66, 67. or whether] Asporr (§ 136) gives three other examples of ‘whether’ 
thus used after ‘or,’ where we ‘should now omit one of the two.’ ‘Or whether 
doth my mind being crowned with you, Drink up the monarch’s plague, this 
flattery? Or whether shall I say mine eye saith true,’ Sonnet cxiv. ‘Or whether 
riding on the balls of mine Seem they in motion?’—WMer. of Ven., III, ii, 18. It 
will thus be seen that Hanmer’s reading ‘and whether’—followed by Keightley, 
Hudson ii, and Wordsworth—is needless. Staunton also suggests that and be 
substituted for ‘or,’ apparently unaware that he is therein anticipated.—Eb. 

67, 68. hee did . . . and teare it] Miss Purpson (p. 424): Truly ‘his father’s 
son!’ At the close of the play this childish episode is enacted on a larger scale. 
Coriolanus hotly pursues a painted glory; checked in his career and enraged by his 
fall, he would tear to pieces, in like ruthless fashion, the city he had professed to 
love. [See notes by TETzLAFF and CHAMBERS, line 64 ante.—Ep.] 

68. mammockt] Braptey (NV. E. D., s. v. vb. mammock): To break, cut, or tear 
into fragments or shreds. [The present line quoted as earliest example of the 
verb. Also as later example: Milton, Reform, I, Wks. 1851, III, 17: “The obscene 
and surfeted Priest scruples not to paw and mamock the sacramental bread.’]— 
W. A. Wricut: Major Moor, in his Suffolk Words and Phrases, gives ‘Mammock. 
To cut and hack victuals wastefully—([Scumipr (Coriolanus) and BEECHING 
Urving Sh.) both note that this is the only instance of this use of the verb in 
Shakespeare.] 

71. Indeed la] C. & M. CowpEN CLarkE (Shakespeare): ‘La’ is here an expletive 
giving additional force to the word ‘Indeed,’ as the French occasionally use their 
word /d, and we sometimes use our word there, to give an emphatic and final effect 
to such a sentence as this: ‘I won’t do it, and so I tell you; there!’ ‘La’ is thus 
used by Shakespeare elsewhere. See, for instance, Merry Wives, I, i, 322, Master 
Slender’s flabbily emphatic protest that he will not take precedence of Mistress 
Anne Page: ‘Truly, I will not go first; truly, la, I will not do you that wrong.’ 
And again, ‘You do yourself wrong, indeed, la,’ [l. 326]. 

72. Cracke] Murray (WN. E. D.,s. v. II, 11.): A lively lad; a ‘rogue’ (playfully), 
a wag. (Conjectured by some to be short for crack-hemp, crack-halter, crack-rope, 
used playfully. Cf. also modern Icelandic Krakki, ‘urchin.’) 

74. play ... Huswife] Case (Arden Sh.): The Countess of Rousillon uses prac- 
tically the same expression, perhaps proverbial, when she thus addresses Lavache 
(the Clown) in All’s Well, Il, ii, 62, 63: ‘I play the noble huswife with the time 
To entertain’t so merrily with a fool.” In Rom. & Jul. Capulet says: ‘I'll play 


ACT I, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 97 


Virg. No (good Madam) 75 
I will not out of doores. 
Val. Not out of doores ? 
Volum. She fhall, fhe fhall. 
Virg. Indeed no, by your patience; Ile not ouer the 
threfhold, till my Lord returne from the Warres. 80 
Val. Fye, you confine your felfe moft vnreafonably : 
Come, you mutt go vifit the good Lady that lies in. 
Virg. I will wifh her fpeedy ftrength, and vifite her 
with my prayers : but I cannot go thither. 
Volum. Why I pray you. 85 
Vilug. ’Tis not to faue labour, nor that I want loue. 
Val. You would be another Penelope : yet they fay, all 
the yearne fhe fpun in Vliffes abfence, did but fill Athica 


full of Mothes. Come, I would your Cambrick were fen- 89 
75, 70. As one line Pope et seq. 88. yearne] yarn F3F,. 
80. returne] returns Hal. Vliffes] Vlysses F,F;. Ulysses’s 
81. moft] Om. Rowe ii, Pope, Han. F,,+. Ulysses’ Cap. et seq. 
86. Vlug.] F:F2. Athica] Ithaca F;F,. 


the huswife for this once,’ IV, ii, 43, where huswife=huzzy. Compare Henry V: 
V, i, 85: ‘Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now?’ 

89. full of Mothes| C. & M. CowpEN CrLarkeE (Shakespeare): There is here a 
play upon the word ‘moths,’ as meaning the destructive insects so called, and 
the swarm of persecuting idlers attracted round the light of Penelope’s beauty. 
[This can hardly be said to be a play on the word, since the destructive insect, 
Tinea, and the nocturnal lepidoptera were not differentiated until long after the 
time of Shakespeare. Bacon in the Sylva Sylvarum, 1626, says: ‘The Moath 
breedeth upon Cloth; ... It delighteth to be about the flame of a Candle’ 
(§ 696).—Epb.]—Herrorp (Eversley Sh.): The word was pronounced motts. There 
is thence, apparently, a play upon the cant meaning Jovers, a sense still current 
in Ireland. The Slang Dict. gives mot, a girl of indifferent character. [This is, I 
think, quite impossible. The earliest quotation in Henley & Farmer’s Slang 
Dictionary, s. v. Mot, is 1785, and the only definition is that of @ wench or light 
woman; it could not therefore refer in any way to the suitors of Penelope.—Ep.] 
—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): The suitors who ate up Ithaca during their 
long visit appear under this whimsical image of the moths attracted by Penelope’s 
yarn. This humorous way of alluding to Penelope’s devotion to Ulysses during 
his long wanderings while she kept off these troublesome suitors till the funeral 
vesture was spun, which each night she ravelled out, is one of Shakespeare’s deft- 
est light touches. By this scene and the praise Coriolanus later gives her (V, iii, 
71-74) the influential, clever unmarried woman of Rome’s best days is memorably 
sketched.—SHERMAN (Tudor Sh.): An example of similar levity toward classical 
story may be found in the Tempest, II, i, 76, ‘Not since widow Dido’s time,’ etc. 
In both cases the effect is a touch of realistic characterization. 

89. Cambrick] W. A. Wricut: Cambric, which takes its name from Cambrai, 


7 


98 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iii. 


fible as your finger, that you might leaue pricking it for 90 
pitie. Come you fhall go with vs. 

Vir. No good Madam, pardon me, indeed I will not 
foorth. 

Val. In truth la go with me, and Ile tell you excellent 
newes of your Husband. 95 

Virg. Oh good Madam,there can be none yet. 

Val. Verily I do not ieft with you: there came newes 
from him laft night. 

Uir. Indeed Madam. 

Val. In earneft it’s true; I heard a Senatour fpeake it. I00 
Thus it is : the Volcies haue an Army forth, againft who 
Cominius the Generall is gone, with one part of our Ro- 
mane power. Your Lord, and Zitus Lartius, are fet down 
before their Citie Carioles, they nothing doubt preuai- 
ling,and to make it breefe Warres. This is true on mine 105 
Honor, and fo I pray go with vs. 

Virg- Giue me excufe good Madame, I will obey you 
in euery thing heereafter. 

Vol. Let her alone Ladie, as fhe is now : 

She will but difeafe our better mirth. IIo 

Valeria. In troth I thinke fhe would : 


93. foorth] forth F;F;. Knt. Volsces Coll. et seq. 
99. Madam.] F,F;. Madam— 103. Lartius] Lucius F,. 
Rowe,+. Madam? F, et cet. 104. Carioles] Ktly, Schmidt. Car- 
tol. it is:| Ff, Neils. it is— Rowe iolus F;. Coriolus F3Fy. Rowe. Cor- 
eticet. zolt Pope et cet. 
Volcies] Volfcies F,, Rowe. 105. mine] my Rowe,+. 
Volscians Pope,+, Cap. Volces Var. tog-118. As prose Pope et seq. 


’78, °85, Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, 


might be noted by the hypercritical as an anachronism. [Emboldened by this 
remark by Wright I, too, say that the same critics might justly find fault with 
Valeria’s reference to Penelope and Ulysses, since she could not have had any 
knowledge of the story; both the Iliad and the Odyssey were unknown to the 
Romans at the period of Coriolanus, 480 B. C—Ep.] 

110, disease] RoLre: Dis-ease, trouble; the only instance of the verb in Shake- 
speare unless we read, as we probably should, ‘Will cheer me ever, or disease me 
now,’ Macbeth, V, iii, 21. 

110, our better mirth] W. A. Wricut: That is, our mirth which will be better 
without her company. For this proleptic or anticipatory use of the adjective 
compare Macbeth, I, vi, 3: ‘The air Gently and sweetly recommends itself Unto 
our gentle senses’; that is, to our senses which become gentle thereby. Again in 
the same play, III, iv, 76: ‘Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal’; that is, 
purged the commonwealth and made it gentle. 


ACT I, SC. iv.] 


CORIOLA NUS 99 


Fare you well then. Come good {weet Ladie. II2 
Prythee Virgilia turne thy folemneffe out a doore, 


And go along with vs. 
Virgil. No 


115 


At a word Madam ; Indeed I mutt not, 


I wifh you much mirth. 
Val. Well, then farewell. 


Exeunt Ladies 118 


[Scene IV.| 


Enter Martius, Titus Lartius, with Drumme and Co- I 
lours, with Captaines and Souldiers, as 
before the City Corialus : to them 
a Meffenger. 


Martius. Yonder comes Newes : 5 


A Wager they haue met. 


113. @ doore] o’ door. Theob. et seq. 

118. Exeunt Ladies] Exeunt. Rowe 
et seq. 

SCENE Iv. Rowe et seq. (SCENE VI. 
Pope. Han. Warb. Johns.) 

The Walls of Coriolus. Rowe. The 
Walls of Corioli Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Trenches before Cori- 


oli. Cap. Before Corioli. Var. ’73 et 
seq. 

1. Lartius] Lucius F,. 

3. Corialus] Coriolus Ff. 


3, 4. to them a Meffenger.] Om. 


Coll. ii, Dyce, Sta. Wh. i, Huds. ii, 
Words. 


5, 6. As one line Pope et seq. 


112, 113. Fare you well . . . Prythee] Asporr (§ 235): In almost all cases 
where thou and you appear at first sight indiscriminately used, further considera- 
tions show some change of thought, or some influence of euphony sufficient to 
account for the change of pronoun. [In the present passage the formal ‘you’ 
is, I think, intended to suggest a slight irritation on the part of Valeria at the 
obstinacy of Virgilia; the familiar ‘thee’ indicates a relenting and return to play- 
ful cajolory.—Ep.] 

116. At a word] W. A. Wricut: In one word, in short; a strong expression of 
emphasis. Compare Much Ado, II, i, 118: ‘I know you well enough; you are 
Signor Antonio. At a word, I am not.’ 

Scene IV.] Verity (Student’s Sh.): This and the remaining scenes of this Act 
in which he appears show us Coriolanus at his greatest, 7. e., as a great soldier. 
The picture is necessary to the peculiar pity and pitifulness of his end. And we 
must know him fully in the field before we can grasp the causes of his failure in 
the Forum. He is as detached from the average citizen in the one place as in 
the other. In the very virtues which make him so splendid ‘Before Corioli,’ 
but so unlike others, lie the tragic possibilities that work his downfall. 

1-4. Enter Martius . . . a Messenger] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): 
The Folio stage-directions indicate the arrangement for this scene. Martius and 
Lartius with Drumme Colours, with Captaines and Souldiers, enter from the side 


RUN hil bel) 


100 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iv. 


Lar. My horfe to yours, no. 7; 
Mar. Tis done. 
Lart. Agreed. 9 


9. Agreed.] Agreed. [Entera Messenger. Coll. ii. (MS.), Dyce, Sta. Wh. i, Huds. 
ii, Words. 


on the fore-stage outside the rear-stage, and talk of the horses, from which the 
audience are to be quick to assume they have just dismounted as from a journey. 
The scene then is no longer to be imagined as Rome. And their talk is long 
enough to permit that arrangement of the rear-stage which all the siege-scenes in 
the plays indicate, namely, bare walls, denuded of curtains, presenting the appear- 
ance of gates on a level with the audience and high city walls. On the top of these, 
that is, on the upper-stage, the two Senators of the besieged city with others on the 
Walles of Corialus appear, according to the Folio stage-directions, when, after their 
brief dialogue, Martius and his force turn to the rear-stage, as before the City 
Corialus, and blow their blast, sounding a Parley. The First Senator refers to 
the rear-stage folding-doors below them when he says ‘our Gates Which yet 
seeme shut.’ The call of Lartius for ‘Ladders hoa’ adds to this effect. As in 
Henry V. and other plays depicting a siege scaling ladders to set against the walls 
and climb upon added to the effectiveness of the stage action. In this case much 
play with these ladders was not indulged in, for, as Martius rejoins, the Volscians 
did not ‘feare’ them. They issued forth through the gates, which, as the Senator 
promised, opened ‘of themselves,’ beating the Romans forward on to the fore- 
stage, until Marcius alone, not having been beaten forward with the rest, enters 
as from these gates, charging his men to come on, and then, following the returning 
Volscians, is with them shut in, while the Roman soldiers near him turn back at 
1. 66, Enter the Gati [Gates]. After the stage-direction at 1. 91, all enter the City, 
that is, the rear-stage, many of them, of course, making their exewnt under this 
cover. But at what is now marked scene v. three of the soldiers re-enter, appearing 
with booty they evidently lug from behind the scenes into the rear-stage.—[PROLSS 
(pp. 9-13) discusses at length the probable arrangement and acting of this and 
the following scenes on the Elizabethan stage. His description calls for dividing 
curtains and the use of the fore- and middle-stages, but the whole account is so 
involved that it soon becomes quite incomprehensible, and could only be clearly 
visualised by the aid of a detailed diagram numbered and lettered, which, unfor- 
tunately, Prolss does not provide. Miss Porter’s foregoing remarks on this point 
are, I think, all sufficient—Ep.]—OECHELHAUSER (Kinfiihrungen, etc., i, 301) 
compresses the remaining scenes of this Act into one long scene, beginning, how- 
ever, with the Folio’s second scene, between Aufidius and his lieutenant; for this 
he advises a very deep stage and gives the following description of the scenic 
arrangement: ‘In the background the walls and fortifications of Corioli; diagonally 
left, the gate of the stronghold. The border-space remains quite open for the 
entrance of troops and the conference of the commanders. The middle-stage 
rises gradually towards Corioli; from the level of the border-space the road winds 
up to the gate of Corioli. This middle space is cut off by set pieces (Rocks, mounds, 
etc.), back of which the actions, skirmishes, and fights take place, partly concealed 
to the audience. Corioli is raised to such a height that the figures of Coriolanus 
and the soldiers may be easily seen as they struggle before the gates.’ 


ACT I, SC. iv.] CORIOLANUS IOI 


Mar. Say, ha’s our Generall met the Enemy ? 10 
<Meff. They lye in view, but haue not {poke as yet. 
Lart. So, the good Horfe is mine. 
Mart. Wle buy him of you. 
Lart.No, le nor fel, nor giue him:Lend you him I will 
For halfe a hundred yeares : Summon the Towne. 15 
Mar. How farre off lie thefe Armies? 
Meff. Within this mile and halfe. 
Mar. ‘Then {hall we heare their Larum, & they Ours. 
Now Mars, I prythee make vs quicke in worke, 
That we with fmoaking fwords may march from hence 20 
To helpe our fielded Friends. Come, blow thy blaft. 


They Sound a Parley : Enter two Senators with others on 
the Walles of Corialus. 
Tullus Auffidious, is he within your Walles ? 


1.Senat. No,nor a man that feares you leffe then he, 25 
14. No...him] As one line Han. 17. and halfe] Om. Steev. conj. 
Words. 21. thy] the Rowe, Pope, Han. 
nor fel] not fel F,. not fell F3F,, 22, 23. Enter...Corialus.] Enter, upon 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Varr. the Walls, some Senators, and other 
Ran. Volscians. Cap. 
you him] him you F;F,, Rowe,+. 23. Corialus] Coriolus F,F,. 

15. a] an Rowe,+. 24, 33. Auffidious] Aufidius Ff. 
yeares] years or so Han. 24. Walles| wall Rowe ii, Pope, Han. 
Summon the Towne] As separate 25. nor} but Ktly. 

line Han. that] but Johns. conj. Ran. 
16. lie] lies F,F;. leffe] more Huds. ii. (Johns. 
17. this] a Rowe,+. conj.). 


21. fielded] StEEVENS: That is, our friends who are in the field of battle. [For 
many other examples of this formation of an apparent passive participle from nouns 
and adjectives, see, if needful, ABBoTT, § 294.] 

25. aman... lesse then he] JoHNSON: The sense requires it to be read, ‘nor 
a man that fears you more than he’; or, more probably, ‘nor a man but fears you 
less than he.’—MAtoneE: The text, I am confident, is right, our author almost 
always entangling himself when he uses Jess and more. ‘Lesser’ in the next line 
shows that ‘less’ in that preceding was the author’s word, and it is extremely 
improbable that he should have written ‘but fears you less,’ &c.—CaPE Lt (vol. I, 
pt i, p. 83): This ‘less than he’ must be an error; more is the word requir’d by 
the sense and which the poet intended, but was betray’d into a use of the other 
for the sake of contrasting it with ‘lesser,’ which occurs in the next sentence. 
—Dovce (ap. STEEVENS, 1793): Dr Johnson’s note appears to me unnecessary, 
nor do I think with Mr Malone that Shakespeare has here entangled himself, but, 
on the contrary, that he could not have expressed himself better. The sense is: 
‘however little Tullus Aufidius fears, there is not a man within the walls that fears 
you less.’ —WuitELaw: ‘He is not within our walls, and of all men living xe fears 


102 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iv. 


That’s leffer then a little : Drum a farre off. 26 


26, 27. As one line Pope et seq. Ktly. Drums afar off. Coll. Del. 
26. Drum a farre off.] Alarums far Dyce, Sta. Wh. Huds. 
off. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. 


you least.’ [Dr Johnson’s alteration] is better sense, and perhaps ‘less’ is due 
to a confusion not unlike that in Lear, II, iv, 142: ‘You less know how to value 
her desert Than she to scant her duty.’—C. & M. CowpEN CiarkeE (Shakespeare) : 
The sentence, we think, means: ‘No, he is not within the walls, nor is there there 
a man that fears you less than he, who fears you less than next to nothing.’ No 
man can fear less than one who fears less than a little; and this is one of those 
simple verities which Shakespeare often gives under the form of an apparent an- 
tithesis——T. Pace: We are inclined to accept Clarke’s interpretation here. Prob- 
ably, however, ‘That’s lesser than a little’ is equivalent to ‘which is indeed nothing 
at all. —Scumipt (Coriolanus) objects to Whitelaw’s interpretation on the ground 
that even were it grammatically possible it would furnish not a commendation 
of the absent Aufidius, but an arrogant boast on the part of his advocate. ‘It 
is much better,’ Schmidt adds, ‘to consider this one of those instances, quite 
frequent in Shakespeare, where by the use of negatives the negation is doubled, 
apparently illogically, but not contrary to the character of vivid speech. Thus 
in Richard III, ‘You may deny that you were not the cause.’ In Winter’s 
Tale, ‘wanted less impudence’ = had less impudence. If any alteration is permis- 
sible we might write, ‘nor a man that fears you—less than he,’ etc., and thus 
interpret: “Nor a man that fears you—even less than he (are we frightened); witha 
natural ellipse for which parallels may easily be found.’—W. A. Wricut: ‘That 
fears you less than he’ is probably what Shakespeare wrote, though, as Johnson 
pointed out, he ought to have said ‘more than he.’ But there is a similar mistake 
in Tro. & Cress., I, i, 28: ‘Patience herself, what goddess e’er she be, Doth lesser 
blench at sufferance than I do.—Berrcuine (Falcon Sh.): A confusion of ‘nor a 
man that fears you more than he’ with ‘and no man fears you less than he.’ 
Confusion in the use of the comparatives is not uncommon in the best writers. 
See, e. g., Paradise Lost, i, 257, ‘And what I should be, all but less than he’ (a 
confusion of less with all but equal).—CuamBERS (Warwick Sh.): Johnson would 
read ‘more than he’; but it is Aufidius’s contempt for Coriolanus on which stress 
is being laid, not that of the other Volsces.—VeERiry (Student’s Sh.): Two ideas 
struggle for expression because the speaker is thinking simultaneously but differ- 
ently of the citizens inside Corioli and of Aufidius—thus: (1) There is no man in 
the city who fears you more than Aufidius does, i. e., the besieged are not afraid 
of you at all; (2) ‘Aufidius is not here, and (if he were) there is no man who fears 
you Jess than he does.’ Neither Jess (the Folio’s reading) nor the suggested 
alteration more can cover both ideas. ‘Less’ is undoubtedly right; cf. lesser in 
the next line. Moreover, ‘less’ agrees with that tendency to intensify a negative 
idea which we get so often in Shakespeare; compare the frequent use of the double 
negative. The tendency to repeat a negative is a general principle of language and 
may be illustrated not from Shakespeare alone. 

26. lesser then a little:] P. Smmpson (Shakespearian Punctuation, p. 70) quotes 
this as an example of the use of the colon to mark an emphatic pause; comparing 
also, ‘He will come straight: Looke you lay home to him,’ etc., Hamlet, ITI, iv, 1, 2. 

26. Drum a farre off] Cow Linc (p. 38): In this stage-direction the drums were 


ACT I, SC. iv.] CORIOLA NUS 103 


Hearke, our Drummes ay 
Are bringing forth our youth : Wee’l breake our Walles 
Rather then they fhall pound vs vp our Gates, 
Which yet feeme fhut, we haue but pin’d with Ruthes, 30 
They’le open of themfelues. Harke you, farre off 
cAlarum farre off. 
There is Auffidious. Lift what worke he makes 
Among’ft your clouen Army. 
Mart. Oh they are at it. 35 
Lart. Their noife be our inftruction. Ladders hoa. 


Enter the Army of the Volces. 
Mar. They feare vs not, but iffue forth their Citie. 


Now put your Shields before your hearts, and fight 39 
29. vp] F.. up, F;. up. Coll. up; Volfcies. F,. Enter the Volscies. 
F, et cet. Rowe. Enter the Volscians. Pope,+. 
32. Alarum farre off.] other Alarums. The Volcians enter and pass over. 


Cap. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. Cap. Dyce. The Volces enter and 
Ktly, Huds. Distant Alarum. Coll. iii. pass over the Stage. Mal. Steev. Varr. 
34. Among’ft]} Among Theob. ii, Sing. Knt. Enter the Army of the 


Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. Volsces. Cam.+, Neils. The Volsces 
36. Lart.] Luc. F, (throughout). enter and pass over the Stage. Coll. 
37. Enter...Volces] F2, Var. ’78, ’85, et cet. 

Ran.  Enter...Volcies. F;. Enter... 38. forth] forh F,. 


supposed to be within Corioli rousing the Volscians, and they beat during the 
Roman attack. The whole back-stage represented Corioli. The balcony was 
‘the walls’ upon which the Volscians came to parley with the Romans. A side- 
door represented ‘the gates.’ Through it the Volscians made a sortie and drove 
back the Romans. Through it again Marcius drives them back and is shut in 
with them. 

28. Wee’l breake our Walles] Casr (Arden Sh.): There is a possible but not 
very probable alternative to the ordinary sense here. ‘Break’ may be used in 
the sense of break cover, escape from, issue out of, which, perhaps, also occurs in 
Timon, IV, iii, 354: ‘How has the ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the city?’ 
The NV. E. D. gives an instance of ‘break’ in the sense of to break cover, from 
The Returne from Pernassus, Il, 5, ‘the Buck broke gallantly.’ See also the ex- 
amples of to break prison or jail, e. g., 1674, J. [Brian], Harv. Home, viii, 52: ‘Who 
is himself; and breaks the jayl must die.’ 

36, Their . . . our instruction] Casr (Arden Sh.): Schmidt (Lex.) explains 
‘instruction’ here as information, citing Ant. & Cleo., V, i, 54, but Lartius’s words 
signify, Let the sound of their activity teach us to play our own part without 
delay. Nor is the usual sense of instruction necessarily absent from the passage 
adduced from Ant. & Cleo., ‘The queen... Of thy intents desires instruction, 
That she preparedly may frame herself To the way she’s forced to.’ 

38. forth their Citie] For other examples of ‘forth’ thus used as a preposition = 
from, see ABBOTT, § 156. 


104 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT I, SC. iv. 


With hearts more proofe then Shields. 40 


Aduance braue Titus, 


They do difdaine vs much beyond our Thoughts, 
which makes me fweat with wrath. Come on my fellows 
He that retires, Ile take him for a Volce, 


And he fhall feele mine edge. 


45 


Alarum, the Romans are beat back to their Trenches 
Enter Martius Curfing. 


Mar. 


All the contagion of the South, light on you, 


You Shames of Rome : you Heard of Byles and Plagues 49 


40, 41. With...Titus] As one line 
Pope et seq. 

43. makes] maks F;. 

fellows] follows F>. 

44. Volce] F., Var. 778, ’85, Mal. 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt. Volcie 
F;. Volfcie F,, Rowe. Volscian Pope. 
Volcian Cap. Volsce Coll. et seq. 

46. Alarum...are beat back... 
Trenches] Alarum...beat back... 
Trenches Pope ii, Theob. Warb. 


Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. 

47. Curfing] Ff. enraged Coll. Om. 
Rowe et cet. 

49. Rome: you Heard of] F2. Rome: 
you Herd of F3F,, Rowe i. Rome: 
you herds of Rowe ii. Rome; you herds; 
of Popei. Rome, youl—herds of Theob. 
(Sh. Rest.), Pope ii, Warb. Cap. Var. 
73, 778, ’85. Rome, you herds, youl 
Han. Rome, you. Hoards of Mal. conj. 
(withdrawn). Rome! Unheard of Coll. 


Johns. Varr. Ran. Exeunt as to the 
Fight. Cap. Alarum, and exeunt 
Romans and Volces, fighting...are 
beaten back...Trenches Mal. et seq. 
ScENE vit. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 
47. Enter...] Re-enter Pope,+, Cap. 


ii, iii. (MS.). Rome! you herd of— 
Johns. et cet. 

49-52. you Heard...a mile] Om. 
Words. 

49. Byles] Ff. 
boils Pope et cet. 


biles Rowe, Del. 


49. You Shames . . . you Heard of] THEOBALD (Shakespeare Restored, p. 151), 
referring especially to Pope’s strange pointing of this line, ‘You shames of Rome; 
you herds; of boils and plagues,’ etc., says: ‘Here the old copies are defective in 
the pointing, by which the sense is so maim’d that this too must be a passage which 
either was not revised by Mr Pope, or in which he would not indulge his private 
sense to make it intelligible. Mr Dennis, who has alter’d this Play, was obliged, 
by a different disposition of the Fable, to leave out this passage, otherwise, I am 
persuaded, there would have been no room for my making a correction upon it. 
The meanest judges of English must be aware that no member of any sentence 
can begin with a genitive case, and a preceding nominative be wanting to govern 
that and the verb. Where, therefore, is the nominative to of boils and plagues 
plaster you o’er? Or what sense or syntax is there in the passage as it now stands? 
Restore it without the least doubt, ‘You shames of Rome, you! Herds of boils 
and plagues,’ etc. It is not infrequent with Shakespeare to redouble his pro- 
nouns, as in this place. So, ‘I am no baby, I; that with base pray’rs I should 
repent the evil I have done,’ Titus And., [V, iii, 185]. So, Rom. & Jul., ‘I will not 
budge for no man’s pleasure, I,’ [III, i, 58]—Matonr: This passage, like almost 
every other abrupt sentence in these plays, was rendered unintelligible in the old 
copy by inaccurate punctuation. ‘You herd of cowards!’ Marcius would say, but 
his rage prevents him. Ina former passage he is equally impetuous and abrupt: 


ACT Ey SGrtva| CORIOLA NUS 105 


[49. You Shames . . . you Heard of ] 
‘—one’s Junius Brutus, 
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not—’death, 
The rabble should have first,’ &c. 


Speaking of the people in a subsequent scene he uses the same expression: 
‘Are these your herd? Must these have voices,’ &c. Again: ‘More of your 
conversation would infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians.’ 
—{Malone in his edition, 1790, thus regulates this line: ‘You shames of Rome! 
you herd of—Boils and plagues,’ etc., remarking in his note that for this regulation 
he is answerable. Johnson had, however, thus given the line in his text twenty- 
five years before Malone’s appeared; an unfortunate betrayal of the fact that 
Malone had not examined the texts of all his predecessors, since he ascribes to 
them, without exception, the punctuation suggested by Theobald in his Shake- 
speare Restored, see Text. Notes ——Ep.]—Co er (Notes & Emendations, p. 348): 
This mode of spelling ‘Heard’ leads us to the corruption which was detected 
(possibly by mere conjecture, but more probably with the aid of some extraneous 
authority) by the MS. Corrector; and when pointed out it must, we apprehend, 
be admitted without an instant’s controversy: ‘You shames of Rome! Unheard 
of boils and plagues Plaster you o’er,’ &c. The whole difficulty seems to have 
been produced by a strange lapse on the part of the old printer.—[The chal- 
lenge conveyed in the whole tone of this presentation of the emendation by his 
MS. Corrector is unfortunately characteristic of Collier’s Notes on these correc- 
tions. A challenge which Collier’s opponents, Singer and Dyce, accepted at 
once, armed with rancor and bitterness. Singer (Sh. Vindicated, p. 210) thus 
replies: ‘I do not hesitate to prefer the reading universally adopted to the very 
improbable reading proposed, “Unheard of boils and plagues”; why wnheard of? 
Heard is the way in which herd is spelt in other places. Marcius is in a vehement 
passion, and the interruption in his invective marks his impatient anger. He thus 
breaks off from hasty indignation elsewhere; and every one must see the superior 
effect this would have in representation to what it is now proposed to substitute. 
The corrector of my second folio has, however, substituted A for “ You” and reads, 
“A herd of byles and plagues,” etc.’—Dvycer hits both Singer and Collier. Damning 
with faint praise the MS. correction with the remark that he does not think it 
‘very improbable,’ and turning on Singer with the remark that ‘the “boils” might 
be termed “‘unheard of” if those on whom they fell were consequently to “be 
abhorr’d Further than seen.”’ See Appendix, extract from Collier’s Trilogy, for 
his opinion of his opponents.—Ep.]—Hupson (ed. i.): Both changes [that of 
Collier’s MS. Corrector and Singer’s], it seems to us, are far from improvements. 
As the text stands Marcius is characteristically seized with a transport of passion, 
and the break in his speech finely marks his sudden explosion of rage. [Hudson is 
here, of course, referring to Johnson’s regulation of the line. In his ed. ii. he 
modifies his opinion of Collier’s MS. Corrector’s change, saying that he is ‘by no 
means sure that it ought not to be preferred,’ though he does not go so far as 
to adopt it in his text—Ep.]—R. G. Wuire: Collier’s MS. correction is a very 
acceptable reading both for its fitness and its conformity to the original text. 
—INGLEBY (Sh. Hermeneutics, p. 22): From Johnson to Collier every editor under- 
stands by ‘Heard,’ armentum, save the latter, who reads ‘unheard-of’; a con- 
jecture which, like so many other candidates for admission into the text, is good 


106 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 1, SC. iv. 


[49. You Shames . . . you Heard of ] 
per se as a probable misprint, but bad in this place as a substitute for the sus- 
pected words. The reason is this: Passion takes concrete forms and avoids 
generalities. Martius would, in the hands of a master, have been made to de- 
nounce a specific malady on the Romans rather than have weakened the force 
of his substantives by the prefix ‘unheard-of.’ But there is yet another reason. 
We cannot part with ‘heard’ in the sense of Avmentwm. Twice in this play the 
people are so designated, and once in Jul. Ce@s.; in all with the same contemptuous 
usage as in the passage under consideration. We adduce this passage not be- 
cause the difficulty admits of removal, but because it does not. It is just one of 
those which we must be content to take and leave as we find it. A score of sup- 
positions may be made to account for the presence of the preposition ‘of.’ We 
might treat that preposition as governing ‘boils and plagues,’ with the sense of 
with; or as governed by ‘you herd,’ followed by an aposeopesis; or we might treat 
‘of’ asan adverb, equivalent to ‘off!’ and so forth; all these expedients being equally 
unsatisfactory, and there are still other possibilities to consider. But in such a 
case it is not decision that is required, but faith. We must stand by the text 
and wait. The passage resembles one in Timon: ‘Of man and beast the infinite 
malady Crust you quite o’er.’—III, vi, 108.—Scumipt (Coriolanus) is unwilling to 
accept unreservedly the regulation of this line as printed by Johnson, since it would 
be more in character for Coriolanus to apply to the retreating soldiers the worst 
epithet he could utter. Schmidt therefore gives the line as in the Folio, placing 
an exclamation point after ‘Plagues’ and taking the verb ‘plaster’ as reflexive. 
—W. A. Wricar in reference to this interpretation says: ‘Although Shakespeare’s 
vocabulary of terms of abuse was most copious, I do not think he would employ 
so violent a figure as to designate by the names of diseases those who were the 
subjects of them. It is true that in I, i, 171 ‘scab’ is a term of contempt, but this 
is rather the result of disease than the disease itself. And similarly, when Stephano 
says in The Temp., V, i, 286, ““O touch me not; I am not Stephano, but a cramp,” 
he uses the word of the contortions and soreness which are the result of cramp. 
Hence I cannot regard “boils and plagues” in the present passage as descriptive of 
the cowardly soldiers, and therefore connected with the preceding ‘“‘herd of,” but 
rather as the subject of “plaster” and the beginning of Coriolanus’s curse. ‘‘Byle” 
or “Bile” is the old spelling of boil in the early copies of Shakespeare as well as 
in the Authorised Version, and represents the pronunciation of the word.’—|F. A. 
Lro (Jahrbuch, xv, p. 48) in a review of Schmidt’s edition objects to the editor’s 
elucidation and his regulation of this passage on grounds almost similar to those 
set forth by Wright, but at greater length. It is, I think, sufficient to record this 
without entering more fully into Leo’s arguments, which are comments on Schmidt 
rather than on Shakespeare’s Coriolanus.—Ep.]—R. M. Spence (N. & Q., Dec. 1, 
1877, p. 423): I cannot believe that Coriolanus would have stopped short at ‘You 
herd of—.’ He would have had no difficulty in completing the invective with 
‘hinds’ or some such word. Like the grand old lady, his mother, from whom he 
had inherited at once the nobility of his nature and the impetuosity of his temper, 
he was never at a loss for words, and least of all when his passion was roused. I 
venture to suggest a reading which involves the change only of a single letter in 
the passage as it stands in the Folio, where ‘herd’ is found in its old form ‘Heard.’ 
“You shames of Rome, you! Hoard of boils and plagues,’ etc. The contemptuous 
repetition of ‘you’ is quite in Shakespeare’s manner. The play upon words in 


ACT 1, SC. iv.] CORIOLANUS 107 


Plaifter you o’re, that you may be abhorr’d 50 
Farther then feene, and one infeét another 

Againft the Winde a mile : you foules of Geefe, 

That beare the fhapes of men, how haue you run 

From Slaues, that Apes would beate ; Pluto and Hell, 

All hurt behinde, backes red, and faces pale 55 
With flight and agued feare, mend and charge home, 

Or by the fires of heauen, Ile leaue the Foe, 


And make my Warres on you : Looke too’t: Come on, 58 
51. Farther] Further Sing. Knt, Coll. 55- behinde,] behind. Johns. 

Dyce, Hal. Huds. 57- heauen] Heav’n Rowe. 
52. you foules of Geefe] You coward 58. too’t] to’t F3F,. 


souls! Words. 


‘hoard’ and ‘abhorred’ is also quite inhis manner. And, lastly, we find the word 
‘hoard’ in a similar invective in this very play: ‘O ye’re well met: the hoarded 
plague of the gods Requite your love!’—IV, ii, 17.—[As recorded in the Text. Notes 
Malone (Supplementary Obs., i, 218) proposed a nearly similar change, viz., hoards, 
but as it was not repeated in any subsequent edition it may be considered with- 
drawn.—PERRING (p. 292) also made the same suggestion. The similarity between 
e and o in the handwriting of the period is strongly in favor of this emendation. 
—Ep.]—Venrity (Student's Sh.), following Johnson’s regulation, says: ‘The break 
well suggests Coriolanus’s overmastering passion and contempt, as if no word of 
abuse were sufficient to express his angry scorn. Compare his abruptness in I, 
i, 226; 1, vi, 54. That herds is the word Shakespeare wrote may be inferred from 
III, i, 44; cf. also III, ii, 43.’ [The reading herds is, however, an emendation by 
Rowe; and in the line III, ii, 43 herd is Warburton’s reading, generally accepted, 
for ‘heart’ of the Folio.—Ep.]—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): The attempt to 
make Martius in his wrath and Shakespeare in his Elizabethan freedom entirely 
bookish and coherent after the manner of the eighteenth century still remains 
evident in the change of punctuation here. A characteristic reflexive use of the 
verb, as pointed out by Schmidt, is thus effaced. The sense is, You heard of 
Byles and Plagues (may Byles and Plagues) Plaister you o’re, etc. The same 
economy of diction, swiftly re-applying, without repetition, the words just used, as 
subject, also, for what follows, appears later in the same battle-speech (1. 64), 
which in sense runs thus: ’77%s for the followers (of) Fortune (that Fortune) widens 
them. 

52. you soules of Geese] Krevssic (ed. ii, i, 490): This whole passage seems 
exactly like an ancient Shakespearean paraphrase of the outburst with which 
Frederick rallied his faltering soldiers before Turgan: ‘Ihr Kerle, wollt ihr denn 
ewig leben!’ 

57, 58. Ile leaue . . . on you] Boas (Sh. & His Predecessors, p. 489): Here, in 
the extremity of his rage, Marcius threatens that desertion to the enemy which 
he afterwards carries out, and this is not the only hint that patriotism is far from 
being the main incentive to his unparalleled feats of arms.—{I hold no brief for 
Coriolanus; I can, in fact, admire him up to a certain point only—his intense 
virility; but I feel called upon to defend him in this present instance, at least. 


108 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iv. 


If you’l ftand faft, wee’l beate them to their Wiues, 
As they vs to our Trenches followes. 60 
Another Alarum,and Martius followes them to 


60. Trenches followes.] Ktly. trenches follow. Coll. i, Huds.i. trenches. Follow! 


Coll. ii, iii. trenches. Follow me! Lettsom conj. Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. Beech- 
ing. Trenches. Cla. Trenches followed. Fi, Rowe et cet. 


Is it not almost an exaggerated patriotism that causes his rage at those who hold 
back from the defense of their country? On the other hand, he considers his own 
defection not as treachery, but as an action justified by the ingratitude of his 
own countrymen.—ED.] 

60. As they ... Trenches followes] Cotter (ed. ii.): The Folio has ‘follows,’ 
a typographical error, perhaps, for Follow us! The ordinary reading is in the past 
tense, but it should most likely be in the present—an invitation from the hero to 
his soldiers —WALKER (Cyit., iii, 207): The structure of the verse shows that some- 
thing is wrong, the lines must have run somewhat on this wise, ‘—we’ll beat them 
to their wives, as they Us to our trenches follow’d.’ As to the rest of the arrange- 
ment, non liquet. [Letrsom, Walker’s editor, in a foot-note on this, remarks: 
‘I cannot agree with Walker here. The received reading (followed) is a sophis- 
tication by the editor of the Second Folio. The first gives “‘followes,” which I 
suspect to be a mere misprint for follow me. I would, therefore, read and 
point, “As they us to our trenches: follow me.” For the accentuation com- 
pare Rom. & Jul., IV, iii, 23: “No, né! this shall forbid it.” The old stage- 
direction [ll. 61, 62] probably caused the error. The four words, “and is shut 
in,” belong to the next direction, ]. 66, Enter the Gati. What a cluster of blunders 
in the authentic edition! Since writing the above I have found that Collier pro- 
poses, “Follows us,” but the singular is requisite; see the context.’]—W. A. 
Wricut: The word ‘followes’ is superfluous and has probably crept into the text 
from the stage-direction, ‘Martius followes them to the gates.’ I have therefore 
omitted it—Anon. (Times Literary Supplement, 27 July, 1922, p. 482): It is 
important to note that this stage-direction [ll. 61, 62] is altered in the modern 
editions [see Text. Notes, Malone]. Whether the new direction is better is of no 
moment; the point is that it is different. The real question at issue is whether 
Shakespeare wrote ‘As they us to our trenches followes.’ The rhythm is appalling 
in itself, and doubly appalling as a desperate appeal in battle. Nor is it improved, 
save in a purely mechanical sense, by reading ‘followéd.’ The dramatic force is 
frittered away by the rhythmical debility. The same incident is referred to a 
little further on by a Messenger (‘I saw our party to their trenches driven’) and 
by Cominius (‘Where is that slave which told me they had beat you to your 
trenches?’). Nothing so weak as ‘followes’ there. Is it conceivable that the 
prime actor in the heat of the battle should have used the flabby word? At all 
events, no one will deny that ‘We’ll beat them to their wives, As they us to our 
trenches’ is better poetry, better Shakespeare, and better drama. Have we the 
right to improve the Folio? If we take the Folio stage-direction, we find the 
suspect word in it. If we count spaces as letters the distance from ‘As’ to ‘fol- 
lowes’ in the text is twenty-seven letters; while the distance from ‘Another’ to 
‘followes’ in the stage-direction is also twenty-seven letters. Surely the conclu- 
sion is that in the copy from which the play was set up ‘followes’ came immedi- 
ately after ‘trenches,’ but in the line below. The change of the stage-direction 


ACT I, SC. iv.] CORIOLA NUS 109 
gates, and 1s fhut in. 62 

So, now the gates are ope: now proue good Seconds, 

’Tis for the followers Fortune, widens them, 64 


61, 62. Another... fhut in] Ff, 
Rowe, Pope. Another... to the gates. 
Theob.+, Varr.’78,’85,Ran. Alarums: 
the Fight renew’d. Enter, in retire 
towards their City, the Volscians; 
Marcius, and the Romans, pressing 


Alarum. The Volscians and Romans 
re-enter, and the fight is renewed. The 
Volscians retire into Corioli and 
Marcius follows them to the Gates. 
Mal. et cet. 

62. gates] the gates F;F,, Rowe et 


them. Cap. Another Alarum. The seq. 
Volsces fly, and Marcius follows them 64. followers Fortune,] followers, 
to the gates. Cam.+, Neils. Another Fortune Ff. 


has concealed the process of the corruption. [Reference to the Cambridge Ed. 
Textual Notes would have shown the writer that he was anticipated in this omis- 
sion. For its explanation also see preceding note by Wright—Ep.]—VeRrity 
(Student’s Sh.): [The 2™4 Folio reading] seems a certain correction, only a single 
letter being changed; presumably the termination of ‘trenches’ was still in the 
printer’s thoughts. The suggestions ‘As they us to our trenches follow’ and ‘As 
they us to our trenches. Follow!’ (or Follow me!) involve a needlessly drastic 
alteration. 

61, 62. Another Alarum .. . shut in] R. C. Ruopes (Siagery of Sh., p. 47): 
This double direction to enter the gate [l. 66]—one (at the time of action) theat- 
rical and imperative, and one (as a preparative summary) literary and descrip- 
tive—is the sign of an edited text as distinct from an unaltered prompt-book.— 
[In his later work, Shakespeare’s First Folio, Rhodes discusses this same passage 
at greater length. In reviewing the changes proposed in I. 60 it is, however, to be 
regretted that Rhodes has not made better use of the Text. Notes in the Cambridge 
Ed. He attributes to modern editors the reading followed of F, and to Dyce the 
omission of the word ‘followes,’ which is the reading of the Clarendon editor, 
Wright. Rhodes acknowledges the correctness of this omission, but says (p. 
133) a plainer explanation than that offered by its proposer is: ‘that the book first 
contained two curt instructions for Martius Coriolanus, ‘“Followes” and ‘‘ Enter 
the Gate,” neither of which was deleted when the comprehensive direction [ll. 
61, 62] was inserted by some reviser. It is not till the surviving direction that, 
after a skirmish, he ‘‘enters the gate.” A reviser making a text clear for readers 
would not have restricted his work to making additions without deletions. . . . 
“Enter the Gate” and ‘‘Followe”’ may easily have been written in the player’s part, 
which conjecture justifies the assertion that Coriolanus was an assembled text. 
The notes like “‘Alarum,”’ however, indicate that the reviser was converting his 
text into a prompt-book, and not merely revising it for printing, “Alarum” 
being an instruction for trumpets and drums.’—In a letter to the Editor of The 
Times Literary Supplement for August 31, 1922 Rhodes gives in slightly different 
form this theory regarding the confusion occasioned by these different stage- 
directions. This is doubtless the first draught of the passage, as quoted above, 
from the later work.—Ep.] 

63. the gates are ope] AsBorr (§ 343): ‘Ope’ in this passage seems to be the 
adjective open without the m, and not a verb. [Compare, III, i, 164: ‘Breake 
ope the Lockes a’ th’ Senate,’ etc.—Ep.] 


IIo THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iv. 


Not for the flyers : Marke me, and do the like. 65 
Enter the Gatt. 


1.Sol. Foole-hardineffe, not I. 
2.Sol. Nor I. 
1.Sol. See they haue fhut him in. cAlarum continues 


All. To th’pot I warrant him. 


66. Enter the Gati.] Enter the 
Gates. Ff. He enters the Gates. 


Enter Titus Lartius 70 


68. Nor I] Nor I—Nor I Ktly conj. 
[The gates are closed. Sta. 


Rowe, Pope, Johns. Varr. Ran. Sta. 
Cam.+, Wh. i, Dyce ii. charges the 
flying enemy: Enters the Gates with 
them; and is shut in. Cap. He enters 
the Gates and is shut in. Theob. et cet. 

67-69. Foole-hardineffe...him in.] As 
two lines ending: See, they...him in. 


[Marcius is shut in. Cam.+, Dyce ii, 
iii. 

69. Alarum continues] He is shut in. 
Alarum continues. Johns. Var. ’73, 
Dyce, Wh. i. 

70. pot] port Coll. ii. (MS.). 

Lartius] Lucius F, (throughout). 


Steev. Var. ’o3, ’13, Sing. Hal. 


70. To th’pot I warrant him] Cottier (Notes and Emend., etc., p. 349): This 
is an expression that nobody has attempted to elucidate; it is explained at once 
by the MS. Corrector: ‘Sold. See, they have shut him in. All. To the port, I war- 
rant him.’ They finish the sentence the soldier has begun. The enemy had 
shut Marcius into the port or gate; and very shortly Lartius directs: ‘Let the 
ports be guarded.’—SIncEr (ed. ii.): As doubts have been thrown upon this reading 
of the old copy, it may be as well to observe that the phrase is put into the mouth 
of characters of a much higher grade by Shakespeare’s contemporaries; Whetstone 
in his poem to the memory of Sir Nicholas Bacon, does not disdain to use it: 
‘When death doth come all pleasures goe to pot.’—Ism. (Sh. Vindicated, p. 210): 
What possible meaning ‘to the port’ could have I am at a loss to imagine, not- 
withstanding Mr Collier’s attempt to reconcile it to sense as the continuation of 
an interrupted sentence. I therefore hold this to be another perfectly unnecessary 
interference with the text.—StauntTon: ‘To the pot,’ as Mr Collier better than 
anyone else ought to know, was one of the most familiar expressions in our early 
dramatists. Take the following examples from plays which that gentleman must 
be familiar with: ‘Thou mightest sweare, if I could, I would bring them to the 
pot,’ New Custome, II, ili; ‘For goes this wretch, this traitor, to the pot,’ Peele, 
Edward I., ed. Dyce, i, 115; ‘They go to the pot for’t,’ Webster, White Devil, ed. 
Dyce, i, 117.—Mommsen (Der Perkins-Shakespeare, p. 246): If reference be not 
made to the fact that the common phrase fo go to pot is used without the verb 
and with the article we must accept the excellent reading to the port. Since the 
soldiers who have seen it speak to the others running past: ‘Inside the gate, 
only think of that!’ pointing to the gate. That is very life-like and natural. 
Dyce (Sirictures, etc., p. 155): It is lamentable that Mr Collier should cover 
himself with ridicule by thus labouring to defend the worst vagaries of the MS. Cor- 
rector. A quotation from a drama which Mr Collier himself formerly edited 
(in Dodsley’s Old Plays, vol. xi.) is alone sufficient to show the atrocity of the 
alteration, ‘To the port.’ [Dyce then quotes the line from Peele’s Edward I. 
which Staunton has already given in illustration ante; Dyce acknowledges, in 
parentheses, that since writing the foregoing he has read Staunton’s note ad loc., 
wherein not only this line from Edward I. is given, but other passages in illus- 


ACTH, (SCHive| CORIOLA NUS Ill 


Tit. What is become of <Aartius ? 71 
All, Slaine (Sir) doubtleffe. 
1.Sol. Following the Flyers at the very heeles, 
With them he enters : who vpon the fodaine 
Clapt to their Gates, he is himfelfe alone, 75 
To anf{wer all the City. 
Lar. Oh Noble Fellow ! 


Who fenfibly out-dares his fenceleffe Sword, 78 
75. Clapt to] Clapp’d-to Mal. et seq. Wh. i, Cam. Glo. Clar. Neils. Who 
Clap Anon. ap. Cam. sensible, outdoes Theob. (Thirlby), 
78, 79. Om. Words. Han. Warb. Who, sensible, outdares 


78. Who fenfibly out-dares] Ff, Rowe, Johns. et cet. 
Pope, Knt, Coll. Del. Sing. ii, Ktly, 


tration Ep.]—W. A. Wricut, after quoting Staunton’s illustrative passages from 
Peele and Webster, adds, ‘The phrase is taken from the melting-pot.’—Sxrat (Notes 
on English Etym., s. v. Pot, p. 226): I have (hitherto) adopted Wright’s note to 
Coriolanus, I, iv, to the effect that ‘the figure is taken from the melting-pot.’ I 
now believe that the figure was taken from the much more common cooking-pot. 
Whoever looks at the word pot in Littré will see how many French phrases refer 
to the cooking-pot, and Dr Schmidt, in his Shakespeare-Lexicon, seems to take the 
same view, for he quotes the German parallel phrase which Fliigel gives as ‘in 
die Pfanne hauen, to put to the sword,’ lit. to hew into the pan. The reference 
is here to the shredding of vegetables before they are thrown into the pot to be 
cooked. I venture to think this expression is far more graphic when we thus refer it 
in the natural way to the ordinary cooking-pot. Without arguing the point further 
I add an unmistakable example from King’s Art of Cookery, first printed in 1708: 


‘In days of old, our father’s went to war, 
Expecting sundry blows, and hardy fare; 

Their beef they often in their murrions stew’d, 
And in their basket-hilts their beverage brew’d. 
Some officer perhaps might give consent 

To a Jarge cover’d pipkin in his tent, 

Where everything that every soldier got, 

Fowl, bacon, cabbage, mutton, and what not, 
Was all thrown into bank, and went to pot.’ 


With this graphic and simple explanation I can rest satisfied. Hence, when the 
soldiers remark that Coriolanus has gone ‘to the pot,’ they mean that he will be 
cut in pieces. ‘The weaker goeth to the pot’ occurs in Heywood’s Proverbs 
(1562). And still more clearly, in Udall’s translation of the Apophthegmes of 
Erasmus (1564), bk i, Diogenes, § 108: ‘by the said tyranne Dionisius, the ryche 
and welthy of his subiectes went daily to the potte and were chopped vp.’—[CAsE 
(Arden Sh.) gives several other examples of the use of this phrase, all tending, 
as he says, to confirm Skeat’s deduction that reference is to the cooking pot. The 
N. E. D. follows Wright’s interpretation.—Ep.] 

78. Who sensibly out-dares] Matone: ‘Sensible’ is here, having sensation. 
So before: ‘I would your cambrick were sensible as your finger.’ Though Corio- 


112 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, sc. iv. 


And when it bowes, ftand’ft vp : Thou art left -Wartius, 79 


79. ftand’ ft] stands Rowe et seq. ii, iii, Sing. ii, Dyce ii, Huds. Wh. 
art left] art lost Coll. i. conj. Coll. worthiest G. Binz (Jahrbuch, xliii, 227). 


lanus has the feeling of pain like other men, he is more hardy in daring exploits 
than his senseless sword, for after it is bent he yet stands firm in the field.— 
STEEVENS: The thought seems to have been adopted from Sidney’s Arcadia: 
‘Their very armour by piece-meale fell away from them: and yet their flesh abode 
the wounds constantly, as though it were less sensible of smart than the senselesse 
armour,’ &c., ed. 1633, p. 293; [ed. 1593, p. 317-—Ep.]—Heatn (p. 411): J think 
the common reading, ‘out-dares,’ that is, feels less fear, has less apprehension 
of danger, though it be an hyperbolical expression, hath greater propriety than 
Dr Thirlby’s emendation [see Text. Notes]. It is the sense, and not the deed, 
which is the point of the present comparison. For where would be the wonder, 
that a sensible agent should do more than a senseless instrument, which is incapable 
of doing anything, further than it is employed by that, or some other, agent? 
—W. A. Wricut: Johnson unnecessarily changed this [adverb to the adjective]. 
But this use of the adverb is of frequent occurrence in Shakespeare. Compare, 
for instance, Jul. Ca@s., III, iii, 2, where modern editors substitute the adjective: 
‘And things unluckily charge my fantasy.’ Similarly Temp., III, iii, 2; As You Like 
It, I, ii, 162; and Sonnet xi, 3: ‘And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestowest,’ 
etc. [Scummpr (Coriolanus) likewise follows and defends the Folio reading.—Eb.] 
79. Thou art left Martius] Cottier: Possibly we ought to read Jost for ‘left,’ 
a very easy misprint, when in MS. both the s and the f were carried below the line. 
‘Thou art left,’ however, affords a very clear sense.—[{Singer in his ed. ii. adopted 
Collier’s conjecture in his text, with a short note to the effect that s and f were 
easily confounded, but without any acknowledgement as to the source of this new 
reading. Collier had been more than human had he let this pass without remark. 
Accordingly in his ed. ii. he likewise adopts his former conjecture, commending 
Singer for so doing, and adding that he might at least have mentioned whence 
this reading was derived, since ‘it would not have materially lengthened his note; 
and his unwillingness to give credit to others may do him some wrong by leading 
to the supposition that he has a much smaller claim to credit for himself than he 
really possesses.—R. G. WurTeE also adopts Collier’s reading, but, equally as 
blameworthy as Singer, does not give Collier the credit, merely remarking that 
in the handwriting of the time s and f and also e and o were frequently con- 
founded; adding in conclusion: ‘“Thou art left,” although it is not nonsense, yet 
has not a sense suited to the context.’ Hupson and Dyce (in his ed. ii.) accept 
the reading Jost, the former without any mention of his authority, which omission 
he rectifies in his ed. ii, but the latter ascribes it to White —Ep.]—Bapuam (Criti- 
cism, etc., p. 12): It does not appear from the context that Lartius has given up all 
hope of Coriolanus’s escape from Corioli; at all events ‘Thou art left Marcius’ is 
a very strange expression. It would not be very far from Shakespeare’s own text 
if we read ‘Thou priceless Marcius!’—Scumipt (Coriolanus, p. 62) arrives quite 
independently at the same conclusion as Badham, for which he states his reasons 
as follows: ‘Even if the words thou art left in the sense thou art forsaken, abandoned 
were accordant with grammar, they do not harmonize with the situation, and 
further do not agree with the succeeding words of Lartius, which imply that 
Coriolanus is dead. For this reason the emendation thou art lost was substituted. 


ACT I, SC. iv.] CORIOLANUS 113 


A Carbuncle intire : as big as thou art 80 
Weare not fo rich a Iewell. Thou was’t a Souldier 
Euen to Calues with, not fierce and terrible 82 
80. intire] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 81. Weare] Were F;F,. 
Warb. Johns. entire Han. et cet. 82. Calues] Calvus Rowe. Calvus? 
art] are Pope i. Pope. Cato’s Theob. et seq. 


The structure of the verse indicates that an adjective stood in place of “art left,” 
either aweless or peerless.’ (Schmidt, thus in doubt of the right word, prints in 
place of ‘art left’ the symbol { ¢ t, with an exclamation point after ‘Martius.’— 
Ep].—KEeIcutLey (Expositor, p. 360): A line at least has, I think, been left out after 
‘Marcius’; or there may be an aposiopesis. 

80, 81. A Carbuncle intire . . . a Iewell] Matone: So in Othello: ‘If heaven 
had made me such another woman Of one entire and perfect chrysolite, I’d not 
have ta’en it for her.’—[V, ii, 145. As Case (Arden Sh.) points out, Malone is 
here apparently quoting from memory. WricuT gives the passage correctly: 
‘Tf heaven would make me such another world Of one entire and perfect chrysolite 
T'ld not have sold her for it.’ On ‘carbuncle’ in the present passage Wright says: 
‘The carbuncle here must be the ruby; for the garnet, to which the term is now 
most commonly applied, is a stone of no great value. The carbunculus of Pliny 
was a generic name for “every kind of red transparent, fiery stone: the Pyrope, 
the Almandine, and the Red Jacinth, equally with our Ruby”’ (King, Natural 
History of Precious Stones, p. 225).—ED.] 

82. Euen to Calues wish] THEOBALD: T. Lartius is here summing up his friend’s 
character, as a warrior that was terrible in his strokes, in the tone of his voice, 
and the grimness of his countenance. But who was this Calvus, that wish’d these 
three characteristics in a soldier? I’m afraid Greek and Roman History will be 
at a loss to account for such a man and such circumstances join’d to signalize 
him. I formerly amended the passage and prov’d that the poet must have wrote, 
‘Even to Cato’s wish.’ The error probably arose from the similitude in the manu- 
script of to to Jv, and so this unknown wight, Calvus, sprung up. I come now to 
the authorities for my emendation. Plutarch in the Life of Coriolanus, speaking 
of this hero, says: ‘He was a man (that which Cato requir’d in a warrior) not only 
dreadful to meet with in the field, by reason of his hand and stroke, but insup- 
portable to an enemy, for the very tone and accent of his voice, and the sole terror 
of his aspect.’ This again is confirm’d by the Historian in the Life of Marcus 
Cato, the Censor: ‘In engagements’ (says he) ‘he would use to strike lustily, 
with a fierce countenance stare upon his enemies, and with a harsh threatening 
voice accost them. Nor was he out in his opinion whilst he taught that such 
rugged kind of behaviour sometimes does strike the enemy more than the sword 
itself.’ Mr Pope owns I have clearly prov’d this point, but he seems inclin’d 
to think the blunder should rather have continued than I should have discover’d 
the Author guilty of such a terrible anachronism. But is Mr Pope conscious of 
no other anachronism committed by our Poet in this play? Menenius in one 
passage talks of Alexander the Great, tho that Prince was not born till 130 years 
after Coriolanus’s death; nay, in another he mentions Galen, whose birth was 
above 420 years later than that of Alexander.—[In the foregoing note there are 
two statements which it may be interesting to elucidate. The first is where 

8 


114 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iv. 


[82. Euen to Calues wish] 


Theobald says that he had ‘formerly amended’ the passage as it stands in 
his text; this refers, not to his Shakespeare Restored which appeared in 1726, 
but to a letter written by him to Mr Matthew Concanen that was subsequently 
communicated to Mist’s Journal, March 16, 1727, and there printed without 
Theobald’s permission. The second point is Theobald’s reference to Pope. 
Pope’s ed. ii. appeared in 1728, and in vol. viii. he added as an Appendix an 
article entitled: Various Readings or Conjectures on Passages of Shakespeare. 
This is, in reality, a venomous attack on Theobald’s Shakespeare Restored. Pope, 
nettled by this demonstration of the many faults in his first edition, belittles and 
discounts the value of certain corrections. The reading Cato’s for ‘Calvus’ is, 
however, the only one from the present play to which Pope refers, and in almost 
the very words Theobald quotes; Pope evidently is referring to the communication 
in Mist’s Journal of the preceding year, which corresponds almost word for word 
with the note as it later appears in Theobald’s own edition. (See Nichol’s J/lus- 
trations, etc., vol. ii, p. 200.) It is to this passage in the Appendix of Pope’s vol- 
ume that Theobald refers when he says that Pope accepts his emendation.—ED.] 
—M. Mason (Comments, etc., p. 247): Theobald’s alteration has been adopted 
by all the subsequent editors, who silently admit the charge preferred by Theobald 
against our author, of great chronological impropriety, in quoting a saying of 
Cato’s in the days of Coriolanus; but the impropriety is to be imputed to the edi- 
tors themselves and not to Shakespeare, who though he may have been guilty, 
upon other occasions, of crimes as great as that which he is now accused of, is 
certainly innocent of this, and has with some degree of art avoided the impro- 
priety with which he is charged. He liked this saying of Cato’s, and wished to 
apply it to Coriolanus, but in order to avoid the anachronism in question, he 
puts it into the mouth of a certain Calvus, who might have lived at any time. 
This is, I believe, the first time that an editor ever amended an author merely to 
make him commit a blunder.—MAtong, in answer to the foregoing remark of 
Mason, says: ‘Had Shakespeare known that Cato was not born till the year of 
Rome 5109, that is, 253 years after the death of Coriolanus (for there is nothing in 
the foregoing passage to make him even suspect that was the case), and in conse- 
quence made this alteration, he would have attended in this particular instance to 
a point of which almost every page of his works shows that he was totally negli- 
gent; a supposition which is so improbable that I have no doubt the correction 
that has been adopted by the modern editors is right. In the first Act of this play 
we have Lucius and Marcius printed instead of Lartius in the original copy.’ 
Malone concludes his note with an explanation of the misprint ‘Calves’ for Catoes 
which, as it is substantially identical with that by Theobald (to whom he does 
not refer), need not be repeated. He mentions that usually the possessive case of 
nouns ending in a vowel was formed by adding es. It is, however, somewhat 
curious that in the three other passages wherein the name ‘Cato’ appears in the 
possessive in the Folio it is uniformly spelt Cato’s—Ep.—Kwicut: We quite agree 
with Malone that the manuscript was Catoes; easily mistaken and rendered by 
the printer ‘Calves.’ But we do not agree with him that Shakspere committed 
the anachronism in ignorance. Shakspere puts nearly the same words [as in North’s 
Plutarch} in the mouth of Lartius; feeling that Lartius, in thus conveying the 
sentiment of Plutarch, was to the audience as a sort of chorus. He had no vision 
of a critic before him, book in hand, calling out that Cato was not born until two 


ACT I, SC. iv.] CORIOLANUS II5 


Onely in ftrokes, but with thy grim lookes, and 83 
The Thunder-like percuffion of thy founds 
Thou mad’{t thine enemies fhake,as if the World 85 


Were Feauorous, and did tremble. 


Enter Martius bleeding,affaulted by the Enemy. 
1.Sol. Looke Sir. 
Lar. O’tis Martius. 
Let’s fetch him off, or make remaine alike. 90 
They fight, and all enter the City. 


84. thy] the Rowe i. 87. Enter...] Re-enter... Cap. 


hundred and fifty years after the death of Coriolanus. Now Malone, with his 
exact chronology of the death of Coriolanus, commits in the eyes of modern 
learning as great a blunder as Shakspere commits in his eyes.—Miss C. PoRTER 
(First Folio Sh.): Since Niebuhr and other modern historians question the histor- 
icalness of Coriolanus himself, whose story is based only on Plutarch, who died 
circa A. D. 120, and Livy, who was born only fifty-eight years before Christ, neither 
historian being regarded, by modern scrutiny, as unimpugnable authority for 
what occurred in the third century after the founding of Rome, the modern 
reader may be justified in caring even less than the Poet that Cato, the Censor, 
followed Martius Coriolanus and his associates by a mere century and a half. 
—GERVINUS (p. 768): Shakespeare must have known the time when Cato lived 
from Plutarch’s Cesar. But it is possible that as he found several republican 
Brutuses, so he must have concluded there were several severe Catos. It is cer- 
tain that he was not so early schooled in Eutropius as we are, nor had he any 
chronological dictionary to refer to in order to set himself right in his dates. Never- 
theless we ought to consider how valuable to the poet was the brevity and suggest- 
iveness of such an intimation as he puts in the mouth of Titus Lartius; it is doubt- 
ful whether, if the mistake had been pointed out to him, he would have corrected 
it, seeing it was so serviceable; nay, it is doubtful whether it was a mistake at all, 
and not rather a license like Goethe’s when he made Faust mention Luther. There 
is a passage in Lear which ought to make us cautious—a passage where the ob- 
servance of chronology constitutes a much greater license than the neglect of it— 
a passage which looks like a capital stroke of satire addressed to all self-opinionated 
and pedantic censors (a set of people not lacking even at the poet’s time); the 
passage where the poet says: ‘This prophecy Merlin shall make; for I live before 
his time,’ [TII, ii, 95]—W. A. Wricut: The readers of Westward Ho will remember 
the famous Sir Richard Grenville and his terrible lion voice. 

85, 86. as if the World Were Feauorous] Stervens: So in Macbeth: ‘Some 
say, the earth Was feverous and did shake,’ [II, iii, 66]. 

87. Enter Martius... the Enemy] Drerius: The entrance of Martius bleeding 
must be imagined as within the town and therefore does not correspond with the 
stage-direction, Before Corioli, which editors place at the beginning of this scene. 
—Uteici (Zusitze und Berichtigungen, p. 175): The stage-direction of the Folio 
evidently does not mean that Coriolanus comes out of the Gate on to the stage, 
since then there would be no need of Lartius and the Romans to enter the town in 


116 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT I, SC. v. 


[Scene V.] 


Enter certaine Romanes with fpoiles. I 
1.Rom. This will I carry to Rome. 


2.Rom. And I this. 


3.Rom.A Murrain on’t, I tooke this for Siluer. exeunt. 
Alarum continues fill a-farre off. 5 
Enter Martius,and Titus with a Trumpet. 
MarSee heere thefe mouers, that do prize their hours 7 
ScENE v. Cap. et seq. (SCENE VI. 5. Alarum...off.] Alarum afar off. 
Var. 73.) Cap. (after 1. 6). 
Within the Town. Varr. Ran. 6. Titus] Titus Lartius Rowe,+. 


Within Corioli. A Street. Dyce, 
Cam. Wh. Coll. iii, Huds. ii. Within 
the Town. A Street. Cap. et cet. 

4. exeunt.] Om. Theob.-+, Varr. Mal. 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. 


Titus, Officers, etc. Cap. 

7. mouers| spoilers Words. soldiers 
G. Gould. 

7, 8. that...Drachme] Om. Words. 

7. hours] honours Rowe ii,+. 


Dyce. 


order to assist him. It seems to me that, according to Shakespeare’s intention, 
Coriolanus, assaulted by the Volscians, in order to defend his back, fights his way 
to the walls,and that the top of these was accessible. From here he is visible 
to the Romans. With this view I have modified the old stage-direction (Marcius 
appears upon the walls, bleeding, attacked by the enemy). 

4. Murrain] W. A. Wricut: Murrain, which is properly a cattle plague (see 
Mid. N. Dream, II, i, 97), is used in such execrations like ‘plague’ itself. See Temp., 
III, ii, 88: ‘A murrain on your monster!’ and Tro. & Cress., II, i, 20: ‘A red 
murrain o’ thy jade’s tricks!” The word was also used of human diseases. In 
Stow’s Summarie (1565), fol. 28a, under the date 1094, is a marginal note, ‘Great 
morein of men.’ [According to SkEat (Dict., s. v.) the word is closely allied to Old 
French morine, a dead carcass.—ED.] 

7. mouers] WHITELAW: These clamourers for their rights, these disturbers 
of the State-—Scumipt (Coriolanus), for this use of ‘mover’ in the sense of a 
living, moving creature, compares: ‘O fairest mover in this mortal round.’—Ven. 
& Ad., |. 368.—W. A. Wricut: That is, these active stirring fellows; contemptu- 
ously used of the loiterers for plunder. Others take it as equivalent to ‘these 
agitators.’ Shakespeare elsewhere uses ‘mover’ as he does ‘liver’ in the sense of 
living creature, a human being simply. See Ven. & Ad., 1. 368. There is probably 
a play upon all these senses in the present instance. 

7. hours] Jounson, who follows the reading honours of Rowe ii, says: ‘I know 
not who corrected it. A modern editor who had made such an improvement 
would have spent half a page in ostentation of his sagacity.—Matone: Mr Poye 
arbitrarily changed the word ‘hours’ to honours, and Dr Johnson, too hastily I 
think, approves of the alteration. Every page of Mr Pope’s edition abounds with 
similar innovations. [This last statement is somewhat of an exaggeration, and, 
in the present instance at least, Pope is not to blame.—Ep.]—Cape tz (vol. I, pt i, 
p. 88): ‘Hours’ has a very good meaning, and should not have been chang’d into 
honours, as it is in the four last editors; the speaker could never think of applying 


ACTIN SCievel CORIOLANUS TSE, 


At a crack’d Drachme : Cufhions, Leaden Spoones, 8 
Irons of a Doit, Dublets that Hangmen would 
Bury with thofe that wore them. Thefe bafe flaues, Ke) 


Ere yet the fight be done, packe vp, downe with them. 

And harke, what noyfe the Generall makes: To him 

There is the man of my foules hate, Auffidious, 

Piercing our Romanes : Then Valiant Titus take 

Conuenient Numbers to make good the City, 15 
Whil’ft I with thofe that haue the f{pirit, wil hafte 

To helpe Cominius. 


Lar. Worthy Sir, thou bleed’ft, 18 
8. Drachme] F.F;. drachma Badham, 12. him] him; Pope,+. 
Sing. ii, Ktly, Cam. Cla. Neils. dram 13. Auffidious] Auffidius F,F;. Au- 
Sta. drachm F, et cet. fidius F,. 
10. them.] them, F,, Rowe et seq. 16. hafie] haffe F.. 
11. vp,] up. Johns. 18. Lar.] Luc. F, (throughout). 


that word to the men he is rating; their loss of time in this pilfering was what 
engag’d his thoughts most, as is evident from all he says afterwards.—STEEVENS: 
Coriolanus blames the Roman soldiers only for wasting their time in packing up 
trifles of such small value. So, in North’s Plutarch, ‘Martius was marvellous 
angry with them, and cried out on them, that it was no time now to look after spoil 
and to run straggling here and there to enrich themselves,’ etc.—WoRDSWORTH 
(Historical Plays, i, 118) justifies his omission of this and part of the next line on 
the ground that ‘If the reading be correct, the sentiment is awkwardly and harshly 
expressed.’ 

8. Drachme] Apgortr (§ 486) and BRowneE (p. 16) mark drachm, as in modern 
texts, as a dissyllable. Smita (Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities) gives 
the value of the drachma as about od 3 farthings.—Ep. 

g. of a Doit] W. A. Wricut: That is, of a doit in value, worth but a doit. A 
doit was the smallest piece of money (German deut, Dutch duit), and was worth 
half a farthing. For ‘of’ with the price of anything compare Meas. for Meas., 
II, i, 95: ‘A dish of some three pence.’ See IV, iv, 23. 

9, 10. Dublets . . . that wore them] Matone: Instead of taking them as their 
lawful perquisite—W. A. Wricut: Shakespeare dressed his ancient Romans like 
the English of his own day. (See Jul. Ces., I, ii, 264.) In the same way he makes 
the English custom of giving to executioners the clothes of their victims as a 
perquisite prevail in Rome.—{‘And of universal custom, also, it may be,’ adds 
Miss C. Porter, ‘the Roman custom, being indicated when the soldiers of Rome, 
who executed Christ, cast lots for his vesture.’] 

14. Then Valiant] WorpswortH (Historical Plays, i, 118): Shakespeare uses 
‘valiant’ as either dissyllable or trisyllable. Here, if it is to stand at all, the 
metre seems to require the omission of the preceding ‘then,’ which perhaps is 
otherwise desirable, to mark the abruptness with which Marcius would here 
naturally address Titus. Accordingly, I have left it out. 

18. thou bleed’st] In dialogue as sharp and forceful as is here intended it is, I 
think, needless to require absolute consistency in the use of ‘thou’ and ‘you.’ 


118 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACTITAESCav. 


Thy exercife hath bin too violent, 

For a fecond courfe of Fight. 20 
Mar. Sir, praife me not : 

My worke hath yet not warm’d me. Fare you well : 

The blood I drop, is rather Phyficall 

Then dangerous to me : To Auffidious thus, I will appear 
Lar. Now the faire Goddeffe Fortune, (and fight. 25 

Fall deepe in loue with thee,and her great charmes 

Mifguide thy Oppofers fwords, Bold Gentleman : 

Profperity be thy Page. 


Mar. Thy Friend no leffe, 29 
19, 20. Thy...For] As one line Cap. ending thus...and fight Cap. et cet. 

23. drop] dropt Han. 24. To Auffidious] T’Aufidius Pope,-+. 
24. Then...and fight] Ff, Rowe. As 27. fwords, Bold Gentleman:] Ff, 


two lines, ending me....and fight Pope, Schmidt. Swords: bold Gentleman! 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. 773. As Rowe, Pope. swords! bold gentleman! 
two lines, ending will...and fight Theob. Han. Warb. swords! Bold 
(omitting to me) Han. As two lines, gentleman, Johns. et cet. 


It will, however, be noticed that Lartius uniformly addresses Martius with ‘thou’; 
Martius says, ‘Fare you well’ (1. 22), but in 1. 29 says, ‘Thy friend.’ Shake- 
speare’s use of the two forms is in many cases quite consistent with the situation 
of the characters and the incident, as is shown by AxBport, §§ 232, 233, 234. 
—ED. 

20. a second course] DricuHton: As though fighting were as a feast to him, 
with an allusion to the second or principal course of viands at a dinner; compare 
Macbeth, I, ii, 39: ‘Sleep that knits up the ravell’d sleave of care. . . great nature’s 
second course, Chief nourisher in life’s feast’; and below, I, ix, 14: ‘Yet cam’st 
thou to a morsel of this feast Having fully dined before.—Casr (Arden Sh.), in 
reference to the foregoing note by Deighton, says: ‘It more probably means bout, 
encounter of fight; see Tragedy of Hoffman, 1631, Act II. ad init., ‘Well Ile trie one 
course with thee at the halfe pike,” etc. The N. E. D. gives Course, The rush 
together of two combatants in battle or tournament; charge, onset; a passage at 
arms, bout, encounter. In King Lear, III, vii, 54, Gloucester says: ‘‘I am tied to 
the stake, and I must stand the course,” 7. e., I must endure a second relay of dogs 
set upon me.’ 

21. praise me not] Case (Ibid.): ‘Praise’ is possibly here as in Twelfth Night, 
I, v, 268, = estimate; do not thus estimate my powers, do not set yourself as a 
judge of what I can do. In the passage in Twelfth Night Olivia says: ‘I will 
give out divers schedules of my beauty: . . . Were you sent hither to praise me?’ 
[It seems hardly necessary to find any meaning for ‘praise’ here other than its 
usual one. Marcius deprecates any commendation yet, as he is but at the begin- 
ning of what he intends doing.—Eb.] 

27. thy Opposers] WALKER (Cyit., ii, 233): ‘The opposers’—i. e., the enemies’ — 
ut passim apud S. The metre (as it seems to me) and the sense both require this; 
for ‘thy opposers’ would properly mean Coriolanus’s personal enemies, not the 
Volscians. Also Love’s Labour’s, I, i, 235: ‘I did commend the black-oppressing 


ACT T,1SC. val CORIOLANUS 119 


Then thofe fhe placeth higheft : So farewell. 30 
Lar. Thou worthieft Martius, 

Go found thy Trumpet in the Market place, 

Call thither all the Officers a’th’Towne, 

Where they fhall know our minde. Away. Exeunt 34 


31. Martius,] Ff, Rowe, Pope i, Theob. i. Cla. Herford, Dtn, Cam. ii. 
Theob. Han. Warb. Marius, Pope ii. Go, sound Theob. ii. et cet. 


Martius. Heath, Johns. Martius! Cap. 32. place,| place, [To the Trumpet. 
et seq. Han. 
[Exit Martius. Cap. Mal. et seq. 33. ath’| o’th’ Fy, Rowe,+. of the 


32. Go found] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Cap. et seq. 
34. Where] There Lettsom. 


humour to the most wholesome physic of thy health-giving air.—Dvcz (ed. ii.), in 
reference to the foregoing remark, says: ‘I believe that “thy opposers”’ is what 
the author wrote—meaning “thy opponents—those of the enemy who shall oppose 
thee.” In II, ii, 103 Cominius mentions that Coriolanus, when only a stripling, 
slew “three opposers” in battle; and in IV, iii, 33 we have “his great opposer, 
Coriolanus.”’ 

30. those] ORGER (p. 58): There are many passages in Shakespeare which seem 
to indicate that he used ‘those’ for a genitive plural, as their or theirs, which use in 
these places might be marked by an apostrophe, those’. This has not been observed 
by Dr Abbott in his account of his pronouns, but deserves, I think, consideration 
as affording an easy solution of constructions otherwise exceedingly irregular, 
e. g., II, ii, 25, ‘his ascent is not by such easy degrees as those, who,’ etc., 7. ¢., 
as theirs who. Again, Rich. IIT: I, iii, 217: ‘If heaven have any grievous plagues 
in store Exceeding those that I can wish on thee,’ z. e., exceeding ‘theirs,’ the plagues, 
viz., which she had been imprecating on the others, which might seem to have 
exhausted her power of cursing, and the line should be read: ‘Exceeding those’ 
that I can wish on thee.’ [Does not ‘those’ there refer directly to the ‘plagues,’ 
and not to any previous imprecations of Anne?—Ep.] Again, in Mer. of Ven., 
I, i, 97: ‘would almost damn those ears Which hearing them would call their 
brothers fools.’ And in Henry VIII: II, i, 152: ‘To stop the rumour and allay 
those tongues That durst disperse it.’ ‘Those ears’ and ‘those tongues’ may 
mean those hearers and those speakers, as in French they call a person a mauvaise 
langue who speaks evil of others. But it will be scarcely possible to understand 
on the same principle Pericles, I, iv, 39, “Those palates, who,’ and I, iv, 34, ‘These 
mouths, whom.’ 

32. Go sound] W. A. Wricut: The comma after ‘Go,’ which has been inserted 
in most modern editions, has no right to be there. Compare Temp., I, ii, 301, ‘Go 
make thyself like a nymph o’ the sea’; and in the same play, II, i, 190, ‘Go sleep, 
and hear us.’ 

34. Away] WALKER (Vers., p. 273) arranges this line ending with the word 
‘minde,’ and places the single word ‘Away’ in a line by itself, for the reason that 
‘lines of eight or nine syllables, as they are at variance with the general rhythm 
of Shakespeare’s poetry, so they scarcely ever occur in his plays—it were hardly 
too much to say, not at all.’ Besides the present line, among other examples, 
Walker gives from Cymb., IV, iii, near the end: ‘We grieve at chances here. Away,’ 
which he treats as here, placing ‘Away’ in a line by itself. 


120 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT I, SC. vi. 


[Scene VI.] 


Enter Cominius as it were in retire,with Soldiers. I 
Com. Breath you my friends, wel fought, we are come 
Like Romans, neither foolifh in our ftands, (off, 


Nor Cowardly in retyre : Beleeue me Sirs, 


We fhall be charg’d againe: 


Whiles we haue ftrooke 5 


By Interims and conueying gufts, we haue heard 


The Charges of our Friends. 


SCENE vi. Cap. et seq. SCENE VI. 
Var. ’73. SCENE Ix. Pope,+. 

The Roman Camp. Pope,+, Var. 
78, 8s. Near the Camp of Cominius. 
Cap. et cet. 

I. as...retire] Ff, Ktly, Cam.-+. 
retreating Rowe,+, Var. ’78, 785, 


The Roman Gods, 7; 


treat, Coll. Del. Wh. i. and forces, re- 
treating Mal. et cet. 

1. with foldiers.] and his forces. Cap. 

2. Breath] Breathe Pope et seq. 

5. firooke] firuck Fy. 

7. The Roman] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt, 
Ye Roman Han. Coll. 


Coll. 1, Del: 
MS. et cet. 


Craig. as in retire, Cap. as in re- 


1. Enter . . . with soldiers] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Scene vi. is 
marked by the entrance of Cominius as it were in retire, with soldiers. This ap- 
pearance may have been given by a withdrawal as if with their faces still half 
turned whence they came from the side of the fore-stage. There later, scene x, 
it appears that some property-trees screened off the back of the stage, which 
Aufidius, who had been fighting with Cominius before then and afterwards with 
Martius, calls ‘the Cypress grove.’ If Cominius so entered at scene vi, the Mes- 
senger and, later, Martius may have entered toward him from the opposite side. 

2. we are come off] CAsE (Arden Sh.): That is, we quit the fight. The Romans 
temporarily retire, but this is not necessarily implied in ‘come off,’ which can be 
used by the side which has the advantage. See King John, V, v, 4, when Lewis 
speaks of the English as ‘In faint retire,’ and goes on: 


‘O bravely came we off, 
When with a volley of our needless shot, 
After such bloody toil, we bid good night; 
And wound our tattering colours clearly up 
Last in the field, and almost lords of it!’ 


7. The Roman Gods] WarzBurtoN: This is an address or invocation to them, 
therefore we should read, ‘Ye Roman gods!’—HeatuH (p. 412): It is so; but no 
reason requires that it should be a direct invocation rather than an oblique one 
in the third person, as in the common reading —Dvycr (Remarks, etc., p. 160): 
The word ‘you’ in |. ro shows that ‘the Roman gods’ is wrong. Read ‘ye’; the 
original compositor mistook ‘ye’ for ‘y°’ (the).—KerIcHTLEY (Expositor, p. 160): 
It is evident from the context that the poet wrote Ye, not ‘The,’ as in Ant. & 
Cleo., V, ii, 171, [The gods! it smites me Beneath the fall I have’].—W. A. WricHt: 
This has usually been changed to ‘Ye Roman gods,’ but Shakespeare in other 
passages uses the definite article with the vocative in such a manner as to render the 


ACT I, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 121 


Leade their fucceffes,as we wifh our owne, 8 
That both our powers, with fmiling Fronts encountring, 
May giue you thankfull Sacrifice. Thy Newes ? fe) 


Enter a Meffenger. 
Meff. The Cittizens of Corioles haue yflued, 
And giuen to Lartius and to Martius Battaile : 
I faw our party to their Trenches driuen, 
And then I came away. I5 
Com. ‘Though thou fpeakeft truth, 
Me thinkes thou fpeak’ft not well. How long is’t fince ? 
Mef. Aboue an houre, my Lord. 
Com.’Tis not a mile: briefely we heard their drummes. 
How could’ft thou in a mile confound an houre, 20 
And bring thy Newes fo late ? 


9. encountring| Ff, Rowe,+. Wh. i, 14. Trenches] Trenbhes F,. 
Neils. encountering Var. ’73 et cet. 16. fpeakeft] speak’st Rowe ii. et seq. 
12. Corioles] Ktly, Schmidt. Corio- truth] true Cap. 
lus Ff, Rowe. Corioli Pope et cet. 19. briefely] briefly, Theob. Warb. 
13. Lartius] Lucius F, (throughout). Johns. Var. ’73, Huds. 
14. their] the Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. 21. thy] the Rowe,+. 
Varr. Ran. 


correction not absolutely certain. For instance, in II, iii, 55; IV, i, 44, and Lear, 
I, i, 271: ‘The jewels of our father, with wash’d eyes Cordelia leaves you.’ Jul. 
C@s., V, iii, 99: ‘The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!’ In z Henry IV: I, 
ii, 177, the old copies read: ‘Farewell, the latter spring,’ and in 3 Henry VI: V, v, 
38, the Folios have: ‘Take that, the likeness of this railer here.’ Again in Pericles, 
III, i, 1, the early copies read: ‘The god of this great vast, rebuke these surges.’ 
It may be said that all these instances are misprints, but the number of them is 
against such an explanation.—BrEEcuinc (Henry Irving Sh.) : For the definite article, 
where we should rather use the pronoun ye, compare IV, i, 44. The awkwardness 
in the present passage is that there is nothing until the pronoun ‘you’ in |. 10 to 
decide whether ‘the Roman gods’ is the second or third person; where there is 
no ambiguity, as in Jul. Ces., V, iii, 99, ‘The last of all the Romans, fare thee 
well!’ the difference from modern usage hardly attracts attention. 

16. speakest] W. A. WricuT: So printed in the Folios, which have ‘speak’st’ 
in the next line. There is nothing in the metre to necessitate the abbreviation to 
‘speak’st’ in the first instance, for in these broken lines it is not uncommon to 
have a redundant syllable. 

19. briefely] ABBorr (§ 35): That is, a short time ago, instead of (as with us) 
in a short space of time. Similarly we use the Saxon equivalent shorily to signify 
futurity. 

20. confound] MAtone: ‘Confound’ is here used not in its common acceptation, 
but in the sense of to expend. Conterere tempus.—STEEVENS: So, in 1 Henry IV: 
I, iii, 100, ‘He did confound the best part of an hour In changing hardiment with 
great Glendower.’ 


122) THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. vi. 
Mef. Spies of the Volces 22 

Held me in chace, that I was fore’d to wheele 

Three or foure miles about, elfe had I fir 

Halfe an houre fince brought my report. 25 


Enter Martius. 
Com. Whofe yonder, 
That doe’s appeare as he were Flead ?O Gods, 
He has the ftampe of Martius,and I haue 
Before time feene him thus. 30 
Mar. Come I too late ? 
Com.The Shepherd knowes not Thunder fro a Taber, 
More then I know the found of Martius Tongue 
From euery meaner man. 34 
22. Volces] F., Mal. Ran. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Knt. Volcies F;. Volfcies 
F,, Rowe. Volscians Pope,+. Vol- 
cians Cap. Volsces Coll. et seq. 
26. Enter Martius.] After 1. 34 
Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cla. Huds. ii, Words. 


Craig, Neils. Enter Marcius bloody 
and breathless. Coll. iii. 


30. Before time] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Before-time Han. 
eicet. 

31. Mar.] Mar. (within). Dyce, Glo. 
Cla. Huds. ii, Words. Wh. ii, Craig, 
Neils. Mar. (without). Sta. 

32-34. Mnemonic Warb. 

33. Martius] Martius’s F,, Rowe. 


27. Whofe| Who’s Rowe et seq. 

28. Flead| F.F;, Johns. Var. ’73, ’78, 
85. Flea’d F,, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Cap. flay’d Mal. et seq. 


Martius’ Pope et seq. 

34. man| man’s Han. Cap. Varr. 
Ran. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Sing. Hal. 
Ktly. 


29. flampe] stand Wh. i. (misprint). 


23. Held me in chace] MApDEN (p. 54, foot-note): To ‘hold in chase’ was a 
phrase in common use—King John, I, i, 223; Lucrece, 1. 1736; Sonnet cxliii; [also 
the present line cited]. 

23. that] For other examples of ‘that’ equivalent to so that, see, if needful, 
ABgBort, § 283. 

31. Mar.] Brecutne (Falcon Sh.): Notice how much the scene is improved 
[by Dyce’s stage-direction (within)]. Cominius’s beautiful lines become a soliloquy. 

32, 33. The Shepherd . . . Martius Tongue] THEOBALD: This has the air of an 
imitation, whether Shakespeare really borrow’d it or no, from the original. I 
mean what Ulysses says in the Greek poet of being able to distinguish Minerva’s 
voice, tho’ he did not see her. Sophocles in Ajace, [ll. 14-16, Theobald gives the 
Greek original, which is thus rendered in the Oxford translation: ‘O voice of Mi- 
nerva, my best beloved of deities, how well known do I hear, and grasp with my 
mind, even though thou be unseen, thy voice like that of the brazen-throated 
Tuscan trump!’—Ep.]. 

34. From euery meaner man] Martone: That is, from that of every meaner 
man. This kind of phraseology is found in many places in these plays; and as 
the peculiarities of our author, or rather the language of his age, ought to be scru- 
pulously attended to, Hanmer and the subsequent editors who read here ‘every 
meaner man’s’ ought not, in my apprehension, to be followed, though we should 


* ACT I, SC. vi.] CORIOLA NUS 123 


Martius. Come I too late ? 35 
Com. I, if you come not in the blood of others, 

But mantled in your owne. 
Mart. Ohl! let me clip ye 

In Armes as found, as when I woo’d in heart; 


As merry, as when our Nuptiall day was done, 40 
And Tapers burnt to Bedward. 
38. ye] you Cap. Var. ’78, ’85. Mal. 39. I wood in heart;| I wood; in 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Hal. heart Theob. (Thirlby) et seq. 
Huds. i. 40, 41. our...Bedward] I wedded 
39. In Armes] I Armes F,. I am Words. 
Long MS. (ap. Cam.). 41, 42. As two lines, ending War- 


riors...Lartius? Pope et seq. 


now write so. So in Cymbeline: ‘Thersites body is as good as Ajax, When neither 
are alive,’ [IV, ii, 252]. Again in Timon, ‘Friend or brother, He forfeits his own 
life that spills another,’ [II], v, 88]—Srervens: When I am certified that this, 
and many corresponding offences against grammar, were common to the writers 
of our author’s age, I shall not persevere in correcting them. But while I sus- 
pect (as in the present instance) that such irregularities were the gibberish of a 
theatre, or the blunders of a transcriber, I shall forbear to set nonsense before my 
readers, especially when it can be avoided by the insertion of a single letter, which, 
indeed, might have dropped out at the press.—Dvyce (ed. ii.): Who does not see 
that in the first of the passages [quoted by Malone] we ought to print Ajax,’ just 
as in a passage of Tro. & Cress., “were your days As green as Ajax,’ and your brain 
so temper’d,” &c., [II, iii, 265]? And with respect to the passage of Timon, ‘He 
forfeits his own blood (M. misquotes it life) that spills another,’ it need not be 
defended on the plea that the necessity of a rhyme occasioned an offence against 
grammar, for ‘another blood’ may certainly mean another blood than his own.— 
W. A. Wricut: The idiom is not peculiar to English. For instance, in Psalm xviii, 
33, He maketh my feet like hinds’ feet,’ the translators have supplied the word 
‘feet’ in italic to show that it is not in the original. Similarly in Psalm xcii, 10, 
‘But my horn thou shalt exalt like the horn of an unicorn,’ where the italic words 
have nothing corresponding to them in the Hebrew. See also Esther, iii, 8, ‘And 
their laws are diverse from all people.’—Verity (Student’s Sh.): The change to 
man’s, corresponding with Marcius’, is certainly wrong; such uniformity is not 
Shakespearian at all. Compare Macbeth, III, i, 55-57: ‘Under him My Genius is 
rebuked; as, it is said, Mark Antony’s was by Cesar,’ i. e., Cesar’s. 

39. as when I woo’d in heart;] THEoBALD: Dr Thirlby advised the different 
regulation in the pointing of this passage [see Text. Notes], which I have embraced, 
as I think it much improves the sense and spirit, and conveys, too, the Poet’s 
thought that Marcius was as sound in limb as when he went a wooing; and as 
merry in heart as when going to bed to his bride.-—Capett (vol. I, pti, p. 83): The 
semicolon at ‘woo’d’ in this line is very foolishly put after ‘heart’ in all editions 
preceding the third modern [Theobald]; as the speech is now regulated no reader can 
be at a loss for its sense, though the expression be somewhat clouded by the im- 
proper application of ‘clip’ to the latter member of it, [I]. 40, 41]. 

41. to Bedward] SrrEvENs: So, in Albumazar, 1615: ‘Sweats hourly for a dry 


124 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. vi. 


Com.Flower of Warriors, how is’t with Titus Lartius? 42 
Mar. As with a man bufied about Decrees : 
Condemning fome to death, and fome to exile, 
Ranfoming him, or pittying, threatning th’other ; 45 
Holding Corioles in the name of Rome, 
Euen like a fawning Grey-hound in the Leafh, 
To let him flip at will. 
Com. Where is that Slaue 
Which told me they had beate you to your Trenches ? 50 
Where is he? Call him hither. 
Mar. Let him alone, 


He did informe the truth : but for our Gentlemen, 53 
42. 18°] vt Fo. Coriolus F,, Rowe. Corioli Pope et 
Lartius] Lucius F;,. seq. 
45. threatning] threatening Varr. Ran. 48. flip] fhip F>. 
Coll. Del. Dyce, Cam.+, Huds. Craig, 53. truth: but...Gentlemen,] truth but 
Neils. ...gentlemen. Anon. ap. Cam. truth. 


46. Corioles] F.F;, Ktly, Schmidt. But,...gentlemen, Huds. i, Neils. 


brown crust to bedward,’ [Hazlitt’s Dodsley, xi, 333]—MALoNE: Again, in Peach- 
am’s Compleat Gentleman, 1627, ‘Leaping .. . Upon a full stomacke or to bedward 

. . is very dangerous, and in no wise to be exercised,’ [ed. 1634, p. 216.—Ep.]— 
W. A. WricHT: That is, towards bedtime. In the Authorised Version we have 
many instances of this splitting up of the preposition ‘to-ward.’ For example, 
“to us-ward’ (Psalm xl, 5), ‘to thee-ward’ (r Sam., xix, 4), ‘to you-ward’ (Eph., 
iii, 2), ‘to the mercy seat-ward’ (Exod., xxxvii, 9), ‘to God-ward’ (2 Cor., iii, 4). 
Compare r Henry VI: III, iii, 20: ‘Their powers are marching unto Paris-ward.’ 
See also Chaucer, Knight’s Tale, 1. 882: ‘To Thebes-ward with olde walles wyde.’ 

44. exile] W. A. Wricut: In Shakespeare the accent on this word is variable. 
See V, iii, 106. In The Passionate Pilgrim, Two Gentlemen, As You Like It, and 
Richard II. it is always on the first syllable. In 2 Henry VI: III, ii, 382, it is on 
the last; in Rom. & Jul. it is three times on the last and twice on the first; while 
in Cymb. it is once only on the last and twice on the first. 

45. Ransoming him] Jounson: That is, remitting his ransom. [For this use 
of ‘ransom’ in the sense of release, DEIGHTON compares, Love’s Labour’s, I, ii, 
65: ‘I would take Desire prisoner and ransom him to any French courtier for a 
new devised courtesy’; for ‘him,’ thus used indefinitely, ABBort (§ 217) compares 
Macbeth, IV, iii, 80: ‘Desire his jewels and this other’s house’; also Sonnet Xxix, 
6: ‘Featured like him, like him with friends possessed.’| 

47, 48. Grey-hound . . . Leash . . . slip] W. A. Wricut: Shakespeare has 
observed minute accuracy in his use of this hunting language. In the Gentle- 
man’s Recreation (1721), p. 11, among the ‘Different Terms for Hounds and Grey- 
Hounds’ we read: ‘We let slip a Grey-Hound, and cast off a hound. The string 
wherewith we lead a Grey-Hound is called a Lease; and for a Hound, a Lyome.’ 
Compare 1 Henry IV: I, iii, 278: ‘Before the game is afoot, thou still let’st slip.’ 

53. but for our Gentlemen] W. A. Wricut: That is, had it not been for our gen- 
tlemen. With characteristic impetuosity Coriolanus does not finish his sentence. 


ACT I, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 125 


The common file,(a plague-Tribunes for them) 
The Moufe ne’re fhunn’d the Cat,as they did budge 55 
From Rafcals worfe then they. 

Com. But how preuail’d you ? 


Mar. Will the time ferue to tell, I do not thinke : 58 
54. plague-Tribunes] F2. plague 58. tell,] tell? FF, et seq. 
Tribunes F3F;. plague! Tribunes Rowe, thinke:| F.F;. think: F,, Knt, 


Pope, Theob. Warb. Cap. Var. ’78, Del. think. Dyce, Sta. Cam.+, Wh. 
85, Ran. Ktly, Cam.+, Craig, Neils. Words. think it Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), 
plague on’t! tribunes Han. plague!— Ktly. think so Huds. ii. (Lettsom). 
Tribunes Johns. et cet. think— Rowe et cet. 


—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Although the speech is impatient, reckless 
of formal words as the speaker is of details, we think Martius is less apt to be 
disjointed than to be at once swift and compact. For this reason it seems to us 
more in keeping with the whole to heed the sharp pelt of the reply closed with 
the colon after ‘truth.’ He exonerates the Messenger at once, whom Cominius 
has just called ‘that Slave’ and was going to reprimand for bringing false news. 
Then Martius goes on naturally in thought to the action that did in truth turn the 
tide from retreat to victory. Instead of telling this, however, which would 
amount to praising himself as one equal to the desperate situation, he blames with 
scorn and irony those who were not, namely, the would-be Gentlemen, who, in his 
sense of what nobility exacts, showed they were unworthy to be trusted. As 
for this gentry, they ran like the mouse from the cat. 

54. a plague-Tribunes for them] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Rowe’s 
arrangement is objectionable because it makes a halting instead of a swift paren- 
theses [see Text. Notes]. Martius, in character and speech alike, isa flame. This 
side flare of imprecation suffers, also, in the modernised text from being taken out of 
the parentheses. His thought recurs to the battle-charge, when he stemmed the flight 
of the ‘common file,’ cursing them as ‘you heard of Byles and Plagues.’ So here, 
between breaths, as it were, he wishes these unworthy clamorers for the privileges 
of the worthy Tribunes bringing down a plague. He says it in the quickest 
way possible—‘(a plague-Tribunes for them).’ The play shows, of course, that 
the ‘Tribunes for them’ did, indeed, bring down ‘a plague’ in a peculiar sense 
when they caused the people to banish Valor in his person later. Surely the 
formalisms of the eighteenth century have not so deadened the minds of this 
century that they cannot see how feeble in comparison is the modernised text: 
‘a plague! Tribunes for them!’ Martius, as his poet makes him talk, hated the 
small words carrying no weight in the sentence as he hated the mob of weak men 
making up the ‘common file’ in number, not in valor. 

55. budge] That is, give way, flee. Compare ‘Here pitch our battle; hence 
we will not budge,’ 3 Henry VI: V, iv, 66; also Mer. of Ven., II, ii, 20.—W. A. 
Wricut: Coriolanus puts all his contempt for the mob into this colloquial word. 

58. I do not thinke] Dyce (ed. ii.): If right, this means ‘I do not think the time 
will serve to tell. Mr W.N. Lettsom proposes ‘—think so.’—Axport (§ 64) 
quotes the present line in illustration of the omission of so after ‘I think,’ and as 
another instance, Meas. for Meas., I, ii, 24: ‘G. What in metre? Luc. In any 
proportion or language. G.I think, or in any religion.—Miss C. PORTER (First 


126 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACIiIsSC savas 


Where is the enemy? Are you Lords a’th Field ? 

If not, why ceafe you till you are fo? 60 
Com. Martius, we haue at difaduantage fought, 

And did retyre to win our purpofe. 


Mar. 


How lies their Battell? Know you on w fide 


They haue plac’d their men of truft ? 


Com. As I gueffe Martius, 


65 


Their Bands i’th Vaward are the Antients 
Of their beft truft : O’re them Auffidious, 


Their very heart of Hope. 


59. ath] F.F;. oth’ F,, Rowe,-+. 
o’the Cap. et seq. 

60, 62. If not...purpofe.| As three 
lines, ending Martius...did...purpofe. 
Cap. Steev. Varr. Sing. Dyce, Walker 
(Vers. 290), Sta. Ktly, Cam.+, Huds. 
Neils. 

62. purpofe] propofe F.. purposes 
Coll. ii. (MS.). 


68 


63, 64. How...They] As one line 
Rowe ii. et seq. 
63. w] what Ff, Rowe,+, Varr. Ran. 
which Mal. et seq. 
66. Their] The Krueger (Jahrbuch, | 
XXXVili, 236). 
Bands| hands Knt i. (misprint). 
Antients] Ancients F3F,, Rowe. 
Antiates Pope et seq. 


Folio Sh.): This is an example of his swift, compressed, but not disjointed diction. 
He does not break off. . . . The words he has already used serve to complete his 
sentence, which if fully expanded will run thus: Will the time serve to tell, I do 
not think the time will serve to tell, what Cominius asks—how they prevail’d. 
So he turns to the next business. 

63-66. Know you . . . the Antients] STEEVENS: So, in the old translation of 
Plutarch: ‘Martius asked him howe the order of the enemies battell was, and on 
which side they had placed their best fighting men. The consul made him aunswer 
that he thought the bandes which were in the vaward of their battell, were those 
of the Antiates,’ etc. The old copy reads ‘Antients,’ which might mean veterans; 
but a following line, [I]. 74], as well as this quotation, seems to prove Antiates to be 
the proper reading. Our Author employs Antiates as a trisyllable, as if it had been 
written Antiats. 

66. Vaward] That is, the advance guard, the Vanguward—Casr compares 
Henry V: IV, ili, 130: ‘My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg The leading of 
the vaward.’ 

68. heart of Hope] Matone: The same expression is found in Marlowe’s 
Lust’s Dominion: ‘Your desperate arm Hath almost thrust quite through the 
heart of hope.’ [WricHt, who furnishes the missing reference for this line, IV, 
ii, and Casr, who gives its further location as in Hazlitt’s Dodsley, xiv, p. 151, 
both call attention to Malone’s wrong assignment of the play to Marlowe; but 
Malone was doubtless influenced by the fact that the earliest printed copy of the 
play, 1657, bore Marlowe’s name upon the title-page. It has been shown, how- 
ever, that the play is first mentioned several years subsequent to Marlowe’s death. 
Collier tentatively ascribes it to Dekker, Haughton, and Day. Wright compares 
Ant. & Cleo., IV, ii, 29, ‘Beguiled me to the very heart of loss.’ Also, Timon, 
I, i, 286, ‘He outgoes The very heart of kindness.’ ‘In the same sense,’ adds 
Wright, ‘of that which is the essential principle of anything “soul” is also used 


ACT I, SC. vi.] CORIOLA NUS 127 


Mar. 1 do befeech you, 
By all the Battailes wherein we haue fought, 70 
By th’Blood we haue fhed together, 
By th’Vowes we haue made 
To endure Friends, that you direétly fet me 
Againft Affidious, and his Antiats, 
And that you not delay the prefent (but 75 
Filling the aire with Swords aduanc’d)and Darts, 
We proue this very houre. 
' Com. Though I could with, 
You were conducted to a gentle Bath, 
And Balmes applyed to you, yet dare I neuer 80 
Deny your asking, take your choice of thofe 
That beft can ayde your action. 
Mar. Thofe are they 
That moft are willing; if any fuch be heere, 


(As it were finne to doubt)that loue this painting 85 
Wherein you fee me fmear’d, if any feare 
Leffen his perfon, then an ill report : 87 
71-73. Lines end, Vowes...direcily... 77. houre.| hour— Rowe,+. 
Antiats, Pope et seq. 84. moft are] are most Cap. 
71, 72. we haue] w’ave Pope, Theob. 87. Leffen...then] F.. Less for...than 
Han. Warb. Johns. Rowe i+, Badham. Less for...that 
74. Affidious] F;. Rowe ii. Leffer...than F3F, et cet. 


See r Henry IV: IV, i, 50: ‘For therein should we read The very bottom and the 
soul of hope.’—Eb.] 

71-74. By th’Blood .. . Antiats] W. A. Wricut: [With Pope’s arrangement 
of these lines] the metre is not perfect, and the advantage of substituting for 
halting lines others which are irregular is very doubtful. Probably the two short 
lines (71, 72) are to be read as one. 

75. delay] WARBURTON interprets ‘delay’ here in the sense Jet slip, but MURRAY 
(NV. E. D.) does not include such among the various meanings of this verb. Under 
1. trans., ‘To put off to a later time; to defer, postpone,’ Murray quotes: 14809, 
Caxton Faytes of A., I, xxii, 68, ‘To delaye the batayle vnto another day’; 1586, 
B. Young, Guazzo’s Civ. Conv., IV. 181b, ‘Delaie the sentence no longer.’—Ep. 
(For other examples of the omission of the auxiliary do before ‘not’ with certain 
verbs, see ABBOTT, § 305.) 

86. if any feare] Scummr (Coriolanus): ‘Fear’ is here used in its two mean- 
ings—to be afraid of, and to fear for. That is, If any man thinks less of his person 
than he fears evil report, let him, etc. [Thus also W. A. Wright. Although 
Malone did not refer to this use of the word ‘fear’ in two senses, it will be seen 
that Schmidt’s paraphrase is almost identical with Malone’s.—Ep.] 

87. Lessen . . . an ill report] Matonr (Variorum, 1785): I suspect the author 
wrote, ‘Less in his person than in ill report.’ That is, if anyone here esteems his 


128 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. vi. 
If any thinke, braue death out-weighes bad life, 88 
And that his Countries deerer then himfelfe, 

Let him alone : Or fo many fo minded, 90 


Waue thus to expreffe his difpofition, 


And follow Martius. 


They all fhout and waue their words, take him vp in their 
Armes ,and caft vp their Caps. 
Oh me alone, make you a {word of me : 95 


89. Countries] Country’s F;. 

go-92. Two lines, ending 
Martius. Ktly. 

90. him alone:] him, alone, Pope,+, 
Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. i, Coll. Del. Hal. Wh. Huds. 

Or fo many] or many, if Pope,+, 
Cap. or so many, Varr. Mal. Ran. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Hal. 

ot. [Waving his hand. Johns. Varr. 
Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt, 
Hal. [Waving his sword. Sing. ii, Sta. 
Ktly. 


thus... 


(ap. Cam. ii.). 

95. Oh me alone,| Fi, Rowe, Page. 
Oh! me alone, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Oh! Me alone! Johns. Var. ’73. O me, 
alone! Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Ran. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt, Coll. i, Del. 
Sta. Wh. i, Huds. i. O, me alonel 
Dyce, Cam. Glo. Cla. Rife, Chamb. 
Herf. Verit. Come! along! Sing. ii. 
Of me alone? Coll. ii. O mel alonel 
Ktly. O, me alone! Whitelaw. Go we 
along; Huds. ii. (Whitelaw conj.). O, 


me alone, Wh. ii, Neils. O’ me alonel 
Beeching. O/ me alone? Craig. 
of me:] of me? Cap. et seq. 


Om. Words. 
Style conj. 


95. Oh me...of me] 
Spoken by the Soldiers. 


So, in Tro. & Cress., ‘If there be one among the fair’st 
of Greece That holds his honour higher than his ease,’ [I, iii, 265]. If lesser be 
admitted, regard or some synonymous word is required instead of ‘fear’ to make 
the passage sense. [In his own edition five years later Malone adopts the reading 
of the Third Folio, which he strangely ascribes to Steevens, and thus paraphrases, 
‘If this reading be right, his person must mean his personal danger. If anyone 
less fears personal danger, than an ill name, &c. If the fears of any man are less 
for his person than they are from an apprehension of being esteemed a coward, 
&c.’ To the lines from Tro. & Cress., which he again gives in illustration, Malone 
adds from 3 Henry VI: ‘But thou prefer’st thy life before thine honour’ (I, i, 
246). ‘In this play,’ he concludes, ‘we have already had, sc. iv, 1. 26, “lesser” 
for less.’ Since Malone does not repeat this conjecture in his own edition and as it 
does not appear in the Variorum of 1821, it may be considered withdrawn.—Ep.] 

88, 89. thinke . . . And that] For other examples where ‘that’ conjunctional is 
omitted and then inserted, see Abbott, § 285. 

95. Oh me alone, . . . a sword of me] HEATH (p. 412): This is undoubtedly 
nonsense. I conceive we should read, ‘Zet me alone; make you a sword of me?’ 
—CAPELL (vol. i, pt i, p. 83): The first part of this line should be utter’d in a tone 
of surprise expressive of the speaker’s taking shame upon himself for having thought 
that but one man might offer; the latter part of it changes to another of pleasantry, 
and is address’d to the soldiers who have got him up in their arms and are shout- 
ing; neither of these meanings are visible in the punctuation of former copies, to wit, 
a colon at ‘me’ and a comma after ‘alone.’—S1ncER (ed. ii.): The old copy misprints 
‘Oh me alone’ for O, come along! So Brutus says in the first scene, ‘Let’s along,’ and 
the poet’s frequent use of the word in the same manner confirms this reading. 


reputation above his life. 


ACT i, SC. vi.] CORIOLA NUS 129 


[95. Oh me alone, make you a sword of me] 


[Through inadvertence, possibly, Singer’s text reads ‘Come! along!’ and not as 
he asserts it should read in his note——Ep.]—C. & M. Cowpen Crarke (Shake- 
speare): Marcius has said, ‘Let him alone, or so many so minded, wave thus’; and, 
seeing them all wave their swords in reply and then take himself up in their arms, 
which leaves him solely waving his sword, he rapturously exclaims, ‘Oh take me 
alone for weapon among you all! make yourselves a sword of me!’—WuITELAW 
(p. 23): The reading of the Folios has been explained: (1) Let me alone. Set 
me down. (2) Oh me! that I should have said ‘alone!’ Both explanations seem 
inadmissible. Two emendations deserve notice: (1) that proposed by Collier ‘of me 
alone?’—adopting which it would be better to punctuate ‘O’ me alone make youa 
sword? ©’mer’ (When everyone of you is as good as four Volscians, why am I 
your only sword? What so great need have you of me?); that of Singer, ‘O come 
along’ (more Shakespearian would be ‘Go we along’). The sense is then—con- 
necting ‘Make you a sword of me’ with what follows—‘Use me for your sword, 
as now you use me’ (in a literal sense they had taken him in their arms), ‘and 
every man of you (such men with such a leader) will be worth four Volscians.’— 
Scummpt (Coriolanus, p. 71): Both Collier’s emendation (‘Of me alone’) and 
Singer’s (‘O come along’) are of slight probability, since according to the former 
we do not understand why Coriolanus finds so strange what has happened to him 
when it should occur to any other; according to the latter the order ‘go we along’ 
has no agreement with the rest of the sentence. Perhaps the verse runs thus: 
‘Oh me! all one; make you a sword of me,’ . e., ‘What are you doing?’ (since oh 
me is always an exclamation of painful or at least unpleasant surprise). ‘Yet it 
is all one to me; make a sword of me and wave me as I order you to wave your 
swords.’ Make is thus the imperative, and the pointing of the Folio correct.— 
W. A. Wricut: I do not think any of the proposed emendations is less obscure 
than the original reading. Coriolanus is taken by surprise at the eagerness with 
which the soldiers rush forward in answer to his appeal. Instead of waving their 
swords in the air as he had directed, they make a sword of him. Instead of vol- 
unteers coming forward singly the whole mass would follow Coriolanus only; none 
would stay behind. When he saw this he exclaimed, ‘Oh, me alone!’ and then 
when they raised him aloft, ‘make you a sword of me? brandish me as if I were a 
sword?’—Ro Fe: Of the various conjectures, that of Collier seems most probable, 
especially if we put it ‘O’ me alone!’ but possibly we might get the same meaning 
out of the original reading: ‘What, me alone! do you make me your sword?’ 
Any interpretation of the first clause which makes it independent of the second 
seems to us inadmissible.—Hunpson (ed. ii.): [The reading suggested by Whitelaw] 
gives about the same meaning as Singer’s, and is, I think, more in the Poet’s 
manner. That meaning is, of course, ‘Let us proceed to the work; use me as your 
sword’; and, as they already have the speaker in their arms, the language is not 
strained. We have repeated instances of me and we confounded, and also of along 
misprinted alone.—PERRING (p. 293): I take these words to be partly a sort of gentle 
protest against the hero-worship which they were paying him, partly a preface 
to the remarks which immediately after he addresses to them. Who were these 
men who were now so eager for the fray? They were the very men who under 
Cominius had failed to beat the enemy; yet now that Coriolanus was to captain 
them, they made sure that they had a very engine of war, a talisman of victory— 
they made a sword of him—they regarded him as their sword, him as their confidence 


9 


130 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. vi. 


[95. Oh me alone, make you a sword of me] 
—him and him alone. Coriolanus says not a word to damp this newly kindled 
ardour; he credits them with it, and shifts the power from himself to them; or 
rather he shares it with them; if they were the men inwardly which they showed 
outwardly, no need to set their hopes on him, and him alone; they themselves 
were equally with him swords—terrors to the foe; not one but could be a match 
for four Volsci; not one but could front the redoubtable Aufidius himself, and 
push his shield with shield as hard.—Brrcuine (Falcon Sh.): The first words 
have been variously amended, best by Collier, ‘Of me alone,’ from which White- 
law, ‘O’ me alone,’ i. e., ‘Am I your only sword?’ The comma may be placed 
either after ‘alone’ or after ‘sword.’ [Beeching accordingly adopts Whitelaw’s 
conjectural reading both in the Falcon and Henry Irving editions.—Ep.]— 
Pace: The reading and meaning of this line are very uncertain. We print it 
as it stands in the old copies. We think it may give words supposed to be shouted 
by the soldiers: ‘Take me if you take no one else’; make me one of your soldiers. 
Only ‘a certain number’ are to be selected. In the next line Coriolanus goes on 
with his speech. [Such an arrangement as this is credited to SryLE by the Cam. 
Epp. in the ed. ii.; and Tucker Brooke (Yale Sh.) apparently independently arrives 
at the same conclusion. In his text he assigns this line to Soldiers and gives the 
next and following lines to Marcius, offering as the reason that ‘The Folio prints 
the line without indication of speaker, but it is difficult to explain it as part of 
Martius’s speech.’ This is, I think, hardly a sufficient reason for an alteration so 
drastic; when a stage-direction interrupts a speech the name of the original speaker 
is rarely if ever repeated in the Folio; see, for example, the next scene, Il. 17-20, 
where Aufidius’s speech is broken by the entrance of the Volces; 1. 20 is addressed 
to them by Aufidius without a repetition of his name. Also scene iv, ll. 60-64. 
CasE, however, regards such a distribution as possible, since ‘Marcius had spoken 
of “filling the air with swords advanc’d,” and had said “Let him, alone.” ’—Ep.] 
—Herrorp (Eversley Sh.): The soldiers, called upon to ‘wave’ their swords, have 
proceeded to ‘wave’ him. He plays on the fact. ‘Yes, make me your weapon 
indeed! Follow me up as strenuously as the hand the sword!’ This is more in 
keeping with the situation than to put a (?) at ‘me,’ as if he jocularly asked whether 
they took him for a sword.—E. K. CHAMBERS (Warwick Sh.): All emendations are 
quite unnecessary. Coriolanus protests good-humouredly against his ‘chairing.’ 
He says: ‘Is it me alone you “advance”? Advance your swords rather.’—VERITY 
(Student’s Sh.): Where a line is taken in several ways it is seldom that any one 
is convincing; and that is the case here. First, why ‘alone’? It must, I 
think, imply, ‘Why not Cominius also?’ As an old comrade in arms, Coriolanus 
deprecates the enthusiasm shown for himself at the expense of his superior officer. 
Then, what does he mean by their ‘making a sword’ of him? He refers, of course, 
to the fact that the soldiers are holding him aloft—‘advancing’ him—as if he were 
a sword; and, on the whole, I think that his remark has no underlying reference, 
but is simply a light way of dismissing the incident and cutting short the situa- 
tion. Such renderings [as those of Clarke and Herford] convey a note of self- 
assertion, almost of pomposity, inconsistent with Coriolanus’s soldierly modesty. 
The pronoun me in ‘O, me alone!’ may surely be referred to a verb easily under- 
stood from the whole context as defined by the preceding stage-direction. Con- 
structions ‘according to the sense,’ especially where the sense may be eked out by 
a gesture, are an essential part of elliptical dramatic utterance. And we must 


ACT I, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 131 


If thefe fhewes be not outward, which of you 96 
But is foure Volces? None of you, but is 

Able to beare againft the great Auffidious 

A Shield, as hard as his. A certaine number 

(Though thankes to all) muft I fele&t from all : 100 
The reft fhall beare the bufineffe in fome other fight 


97. But is foure] But’s fore the 100, 101. (Though...The reft] As one 
Bulloch. line (omitting from all) Han. Cap. 
Volces] Fz. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Leo, Huds. ii, 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt. Volcies Words. As one line Var. ’21, Sing. 
F;. Volfcies F,, Rowe. Volscians Knt, Coll. Del. Dyce, Hal. Ktly, 
Pope,+. Volcians Cap. Volsces Coll. Cam.+, Wh. Huds. Craig, Neils. 
et seq. tor. fight] sight Var. ’21 (misprint). 
99. Shield] Shiels F,. 


always remember that Shakespeare’s plays were written to be acted.—Miss C. 
PortTER (First Folio Sh.): This line has had a hard fate in tame minds. Martius is 
enraptured when he finds picked men willing to be served by their leader instead of 
needing to be goaded by him. Finding men with mettle like his own, he offers him- 
self as their sole weapon to use—himself bodily to make a sword out of. As the rest 
of the excited speech goes, hurried with business, too, as to the selection out of these 
picked men of a smaller guard to go with him, he imagines them as forming a 
shield, as he himself will be a sword against Auffidius. This almost poetic battle- 
ecstasy in a man whose eminence in daring has made him know loneliness is 
excited by a feeling, for once, of peership in the fellows who are his companions 
at arms. The speech is completely Shakespearian, owing nothing to Plutarch. 
The text [of the Folio] best expresses it without any change, even of punctuation. 
—Gorpon: The meaning is, What are you for me alone? is it me alone that you 
will follow? And do you drop your swords to make me your sword instead, that 
you lift me thus in the airp—SHEerman (Tudor Sh.): Many editors have considered 
this line obscure and in need of emendation. It makes, however, excellent and 
spirited sense as it stands in the Folio: Oh me alone, make you a sword of me; 
with a sense of exaltation excited by the instant response of the soldiers to his 
personal appeal, Coriolanus thinks of himself, borne on the shoulders of the 
troops, as an animated blade, singly invincible against the enemy. ‘Take me 
alone,’ the line means as printed in the Folio, ‘and use me like a sword.’ The 
introduction of the interrogation mark, proposed by Capell, slightly alters the 
mood, but not the meaning.—DeEtcuTon: I have followed Singer in reading Of for 
‘Oh,’ though to give a stronger emphasis I have put a note of interrogation after 
‘sword’ and repeated it after ‘me.’ The meaning seems to be: Do you by thus 
raising me in your arms, brandish me as it were your sword, the only sword you 
would use?-—Casr (Arden Sh.): If we accept Capell’s note of interrogation at the 
end of this line it would appear that the soldiers’ answer to ‘Wave thus’ was to 
uplift Marcius, leading him to say: ‘What, you wave me only? You make me your 
sword?’ There is one objection, perhaps, in the fact that the stage-direction is 
old and shows that the stage-practice was to wave swords as well as to shout and 
take up the leader. 

100, 101. Though thankes . . . The rest] Apsorr (§ 499) includes this among 


132 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT 1, SC. vi. 


(As cause will be obey’d:) pleafe you to March, 102 

And foure fhall quickly draw out my Command, 

Which men are beft inclin’d. 104 
102, 103. to March, And foure] march some...my...best Sing. conj. we...my... 

before; And I Coll. ii, iti. (MS.). best Lettsom. J...my...best Huds. ii. 
103. And foure shall] Ardour shall (Cap. sug.). forestal quickly;...my... 

Anon. ap. Cam. best Bulloch. forth I’ll...my...best 
103, 104. foure...my...beft] fear...of Crosby ap. Rlfe. 

my...least Johns. conj. so I...my.. Dest 104. Which...inclin’d.| | Which...in- 


Heath. forth...my...best Tollet, Ktly. clin’d? Sing. conj. 


other examples of apparent Alexandrines wherein ‘regular verses of five accents 
are sometimes followed by a foot, more or less isolated, containing one accent’; 
Abbott has failed to note the fact that in the present case Boswell, and not Shake- 
speare, is responsible for the extra foot.—Eb. 

102-104. As cause . . . best inclin’d] Jounson: I cannot but suspect this pas- 
sage of corruption. Why should they march that four might select those that were 
best inclined? How would their inclinations be known? Who were the four 
that should select them? Perhaps we may read, ‘And fear shall quickly draw 
out of my command Which men are /east inclin’d.’ It is easy to conceive that 
by a little negligence fear might be changed to ‘four’ and Jeast to ‘best.’ Let 
us march, and that fear which incites desertion will free my army from cow- 
ards. [This is Johnson’s note as in his own edition and Variorums 1773, 778, 
85. In the Variorum of 1821 it is evidently misprinted, as Johnson’s conjec- 
tural of is there omitted—Ep.]—CapeLt (vol. I, pt i, p. 84): ‘Cause’ is us’d here 
for contingency, a contingency of moment, such as must be look’d after; ‘my 
command’ is the party I would command, namely, such as are ‘best inclin’d’ to 
be under it, most dispos’d to go with me; and ‘four’ in that line is made to stand 
for four men, four of my officers, by a license that is not commendable, and which 
might have been avoided by putting J in its stead —HeraTu (p. 412): What sense 
the word ‘four’ can have here is difficult to guess. Perhaps the poet wrote, ‘And 
so I shall quickly draw out,’ etc. That is, As the troops march by I shall readily 
draw out such as are fittest to make up the party which is to act under my com- 
mand, according as I shall find them most eager to be employed in this service. 
—STEEVENS: Coriolanus may mean as all the soldiers have offered to attend him 
on this expedition, and he wants only a part of them, he will submit the selection 
to four indifferent persons that he himself may escape the charge of partiality. 
If this be the drift of Shakespeare, he has expressed it with uncommon obscurity. 
The old translation of Plutarch only says: ‘Wherefore, with those that willingly 
offered themselves to followe him, he went out of the cittie. —M. Mason (Com- 
ments, etc., p. 248): Coriolanus means only to say that he would appoint four 
persons to select for his particular command or party those who were best inclined; 
and in order to save time he proposes to have this choice made while the army is 
marching forward. They all march towards the enemy, and on the way he chooses 
those who are to go on that particular service—J. Mirrorp (Gentleman’s Maga., 
Nov., 1844, p. 48): The word ‘four’ under all explanation appears to us, as it 
did to Johnson, to be corrupt. We therefore, with attention equally devoted to 
the sense and to the form of the word we propose to alter, read, ‘An hour shall 
quickly draw out my command.’ So Marcius in his preceding speech said, ‘Filling 


ACT I, sc. vi.] CORIOLANUS 133 


[102-104. As cause . . . best inclin’d] 
the air with swords advanced, and darts We prove this very hour.’—CoLi1ER (Notes 
& Emend., etc., p. 349): Here a difficulty has arisen why ‘four’ were to draw out 
his command. We print the passage as we find it amended, which shows that 
the scribe or the compositor (most likely the former in this instance) was to blame: 
‘Please you march before, And I shall quickly draw out my command,’ etc. Who- 
ever made the copy for the printer must have understood before as by four, and 
put it in the wrong place, curing the defect in the metre of the first line by arbi- 
trarily inserting #0. Nothing could be more natural than for Marcius to direct 
the soldiers to march in front of him that he might himself make the selection of 
such as he was to lead. [This reading Collier adopts in both his 2™4 ed. and his 34. 
—Ep.]—SINcER (Sh. Vindicated, &c., p. 211): To say the least of it, this is a very 
unlikely conjecture indeed. That ‘And foure’ should not only have been mis- 
printed for before but also have jumped out of its place; that to should have been 
inserted without reason in the first line; and J omitted in the second, what an accu- 
mulation of errors!—ANon. (Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p. 320): But why ‘four’? 
Surely four men would not be sufficient for the force which he meditated. The 
second line [l. 103, as given by the MS. Corrector] is unintelligible, and not to be 
construed on any known principles of grammar. We would suggest, ‘And those 
shall quickly draw out,’ etc.; that is, And my command shall quickly draw out, 
or select, those men which (men) are best inclined to be of service to me. The 
construction here is awkward, but less awkward, we think, than that of the other 
emendations.—LEo (Coriolanus, p. 120): Generally it was the word ‘four’ [in this 
passage] which puzzled the critics. And indeed, when Steevens says, ‘he will 
submit the election to four indifferent persons,’ it is a poor and rather indifferent 
sense, and not at all Shakespeare-like. But there is one word more, which must be 
regarded otherwise than it has been hitherto, if we want to understand it—the 
word ‘command.’ It is impossible for Coriolanus to ‘command which men are 
best inclin’d,’ for inclination does not depend upon command; it acts without 
external influence. But if we understand ‘command’ as subject, and change ‘and 
four’ into before, the sense of the phrase seems very clear: ‘Before you march my 
command shall quickly draw out those which are best inclined.’—[Since Leo does 
not refer to Collier’s MS. Corrector it is to be presumed that he was unaware that 
he is anticipated in a portion of his emendation. Ulrici, in his Notes on Her- 
wegh’s translation, wherein the translator adopts Leo’s reading, speaks in com- 
mendation of the change since it departs so little from the original text, although 
the words ‘Please you march before’ seem to be in slight agreement with what fol- 
lows. Ulrici is therefore in favor of Johnson’s reading in spite of its divergence, 
since the order for them to march is in strict accord with the reason as given by 
Johnson.—Ep.]—KE1cHTLEy (Expositor, p. 361) reads with Tollet forth for ‘four,’ 
taking the word ‘command’ as the subject of the verb ‘draw.’—Lerrsom (ap. 
Dyce ii.): Qu. we [instead of ‘four’], 7. ¢., Cominius and I. ‘Four’ may have 
been derived. from the sixth line above—Grant WuitE: Why four? The number 
is a strange one, considering the object in view. The integrity of the passage has 
been long suspected, but no emendation worthy of notice has been proposed unless 
‘foure’ is a misprint for fome, as Singer conjectured——Hunson (ed. i.): [Singer’s 
change] is indeed plausible; but the passage, though something awkward, seems 
intelligible enough as it stands. Of course the meaning is, that Marcius, in order 
to save time, will delegate to certain men the office of selecting, for the body he 


134 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. vi. 


[t02-104. As cause . . . best inclin’d] 

is to command, such as have most heart for a post of special danger.—[In his 
2d ed. Hudson is apparently not so sure as to the meaning of this line. He says, 
‘I cannot imagine—it seems that nobody can—what business “four” has there.’ 
In regard to Singer’s substitution Hudson declares that it is ‘better than 
“four,” but far from satisfactory’; and of Lettsom’s proposal we that it is “better 
than some,’ yet, on the whole, he prefers J, which was proposed by Capell.—Ep.] 
—Bartey (ii, 51): Dr Johnson saw clearly enough that ‘four’ in 1. 103 was an 
intruder, and he proposed fear in its place, which, in my opinion, makes the 
matter worse. The next line [104] can hardly be correct, since all the soldiers 
had just enthusiastically expressed their eagerness to go on the required service. 
There could consequently be no question raised by the general as to which mea 
were ‘best inclin’d.’ A suggestion that occurred to me, after a long pause on these 
difficulties, presents, if I mistake not, an easy solution of the puzzle. I propose 
to read: ‘Fortune shall quickly draw out my command Which men are best 
included.’ By these alterations, with what goes before, Martius in fact says: ‘I 
must select a certain number; but as all are equally willing, it would be invidious 
in me to make a personal choice, and I therefore commit the affair to fortune, 
who shall decide which troops it will be best to include in my command. The 
matter shall be quickly determined by lot.’ It may be added that the first emenda- 
tion is not at all dependent on the second (which I conceive is more doubtful), but 
may be adopted without it. The latter, indeed, is scarcely superior to several 
others, especially to this: ‘Which men she best inclines to.’ A passage in King 
John, which has nothing, however, to do with drawing lots, is worth citing for the 
similar cast of expression: 


‘Then in a moment fortune shall call forth 
Out of one side her happy minion, 
To whom in favour, she shall give the day.’—II, i, 391-393. 


Here we have fortune similarly selecting and favouring —Scumipt (Coriolanus, p. 
72): That the selection may proceed quickly several must undertake it, and 
wherefore not four? These four are not named, but Coriolanus, on account of 
the foregoing demonstration and the nature of their friendly acclamations, sub- 
mits all to the free choice: ‘which men are best inclined’ (to refer it to four, not 
to the command). ‘Command’ here means the company who shall be under the 
command of Coriolanus.—W. A. Wricut: It has been generally assumed that this 
line is corrupt and many efforts have been made to emend it. But is it so cer- 
tain that there is a corruption? Coriolanus deputes to four officers the task of 
selecting the men who are to go with him. And why four? To which question 
the only answer is, why not? ‘Four’ is elsewhere used of an indefinite small num- 
ber. See Hamlet, II, ii, 160: ‘You know sometimes he walks four hours together 
Here in the lobby.’ It is hardly likely that Coriolanus would leave. to volunteers 
the selection of the picked men [as suggested by Schmidt].—Worpsworts (His- 
torical Plays, i, 118) omits these lines, from ‘Please you to march’ to ‘best inclin’d,’ 
as ‘no good explanation of them has been given, the text being probably corrupt.’ 
Wordsworth in quoting the lines introduces, however, a new reading, ‘And force 
shall quickly draw out my command,’ an expression for which, indeed, no good 
explanation could be given.—Ep.—KINNEAR (p. 305): The speech of Marcius ends 


AGTEVWSCs Vals) CORIOLANUS 135 


Com. March on my Fellowes : 105 
Make good this oftentation, and you fhall 
Diuide in all, with vs. Exeunt 107 

[Scene VII.] 
Titus Lartius, hauing fet a guard vpon Carioles, going with I 
Drum and Trumpet toward Cominius,and Caius Mar- 

SCENE vil. Cap. et seq. SCENE x. 1. Lartius] Lucius F, (throughout). 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Carioles] Corioli. Pope, Theob. 
SCENE vill. Var. ’73. Han. Warb. Johns. Corioles, Ktly. 


Corioli. Pope,+. The Gates of Coriolus. Ff et cet. 
Corioli. Cap. et seq. 


with ‘obey’d.’ ‘Please you,’ &c., is addressed solely to Cominius, who, as gen- 
eral, best knew who were the fittest men. Marcius acts also with propriety, for 
he had no command. He had previously addressed Cominius, |. 69: ‘I do beseech 
you’... ‘that you directly set me,’ etc. [Kinnear accordingly reads ]. 103, ‘And 
you shall quickly,’ etc.|}—PERRING (p. 294): I rather look for an explanation of the 
difficulty [as regards the word ‘four’] in the notion which Shakespeare entertained 
of the organization of the army. He speaks of the ‘centuries’—the ‘centurions’ 
—of the Volsci; there cannot be a doubt that he conceived the Roman army as 
similarly divided; the number ‘four’ indicates with sufficient exactness the modest 
number that Coriolanus was content should accompany him on his errand of 
danger—four hundred men and their four officers—Voila tout, Soldiers would 
understand, if scholars cannot.—PacrE: That is, four officers appointed by me. 
Those who object to the particular number four might with equal reason object 
to any other Coriolanus thought fit to name. To save time the men are to be 
selected as they march along.—E. K. CuampBers (Warwick Sh.): There seems no 
reason for altering the Folio text. The ‘four’ are the subordinate officers to 
whom Coriolanus assigns the duty of picking out his command.—[The majority 
of modern editors follow Mason’s interpretation as regards the meaning of 1. 
103, 7. e., that Marcius will depute to four men the selection of those fittest to 
accompany him. At first sight this would seem the simplest interpretation of the 
words as they stand in the Folio text—as regards the many emendations we need 
not concern ourselves at present—but if it be the simplest is it of necessity the 
best? To me, at least, it is quite out of character with the speaker. Why should 
he leave to others a task which he has just announced that he himself would 
undertake? ‘A certain number must I select from all’ are the words preceding 
this announcement. In making ‘command’ and not ‘four’ the subject to the 
verb ‘draw’ Keightley and Leo were, I think, nearer a correct interpretation: 
that is, My command will quickly draw out four of those who are best suited 
to the purpose—or rather: March past; and four of those best fitted to my 
purpose will very quickly determine my choice. The certain number which he 
needed was but four men. With this interpretation there is no need of any 
change of the text.—Ep.] 

106, 107. you shall . . . with vs] BeEcuine (Falcon Sh.): Cominius, who is 
less of an idealist than Coriolanus, and knows the men better, adds a promise 
of spoil. Compare Cassius in Jul. Ce@s., IL, i, 177. 


136 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. Viii. 
tius, Enters with a Lieutenant, other Souldiours, and a 3 
Scout. 

Lar. So,let the Ports be guarded; keepe your Duties 5 


As I haue fet them downe. 


If I do fend, difpatch 


Thofe Centuries to our ayd, the reft will ferue 
For a fhort holding, if we loofe the Field, 


We cannot keepe the Towne. 


Lieu. Feare not our care Sir. 10 
Lart. Hence;and fhut your gates vpon’s : 
Our Guider come, to th’Roman Campe conduct vs. Exit 
Alarum, as in Batiatle. 13 
[Scene VIII.| 
Enter Martius and Auffidius at feueral doores. I 
Mar. Ile fight with none but thee, for I do hate thee 
Worle then a Promife-breaker. 2 
3. a Lieutenant...Souldiours,] an Of- 13. Alarum, as in Battaile. Trans- 


ficer of the Guard, his own Party, Cap. 
a lieutenant, a party of Mal. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Dyce, Sta. Hal. 
Ktly, Wh. i, Huds. 

7. Centuries] Centries Theob. Warb. 
Sentries Johns. 

g-11. We...Hence] As one line Ktly. 

to-12. Feare not...vs.| Lines end: 

Hence...come...vs Walker (Crit. iii, 208), 
Bayfield. 

11. Hence;| Hence then, Ktly. Hence, 
get you in, Words. 

vpon’s] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Wh. 
i, Neils. «pon us Cap. et cet. 

12. Our Guider come,| Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Our guider, come! Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. Our guider, 
come, Han. Cap. Our guider, come; 
Var. ’78 et seq. 


ferred to |. 1, scene viii. Pope et seq. 

SCENE vu. Cap. et seq. SCENE XI. 
Pope,+. ScENE Ix. Var. ’73. 

The Roman Camp. Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. The Field of 
Battle. Varr. Ran. Field of Battle, 
between the Roman and _ Volcian 
Camps. Cap. et cet. 

1. Enter...doores.| Alarum as in 
Battel. Enter...doors. Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. Neils. Alarums as 
of a Battle join’d: Enter from opposite 
sides Martius and Aufidius. Cap. 
Alarum. Enter, from opposite sides, 
Marcius and Aufidius. Dyce, Sta. Wh. 
i, Craig. Alarum as in battle, enter 
from opposite sides, Marcius and 
Aufidius. Cam.-+. Alarum, Enter 
Marcius and Aufidius. Var. ’73 et 


Exit.| Exeunt. Pope ii. et seq. cet. 


7. Centuries] STEEvENS: That is, companies consisting each of a hundred 
men.—W. A. Wricut: So in King Lear, IV, iv, 6, ‘A century send forth.’ Com- 
pare Holland’s Livy, Book i, p. 11, ‘At the same time were enrolled and ordained 
three centuries of gentlemen or knights.’ 

1. Enter Martius and Auffidius] Verity (Student's Sh.): This scene of per- 
sonal encounter recalls the meeting of Macbeth and Macduff in the last scene 
in Macbeth and the single combats between the heroic figures of epic poetry, espe- 
cially of the liad and Aineid. In epic pictures of battle the dominating element 
is the personal, the individual, prowess of leaders. The germ of the present scene 


ACT I, Sc. viii] CORIOLANUS 137 


Auffid. We hate alike : 
Not Affricke ownes a Serpent I abhorre 5 
More then thy Fame and Enuy : Fix thy foot. 


5. ownes] holds Cap. Craig, Neils. J envy. Coll. ii, ili. (MS.), 
6. Fame] fame, Theob.+, Knit, Dyce ii, Huds. Words. Dtn. and 

Beeching (Falc. Sh.). envy ’t Kinnear. 
and Enuy:] and envy. Johns. Cap. 6, 7. Fix thy foot. Mar. Let...) Mar. 


Var. ’73, Coll. Del. Dyce, Ktly, Wh. i, Fix thy foot. Let... Nicholson ap. Cam. 


lies in Plutarch’s bare reference to (not description of) the encounters and _per- 
sonal rivalry of Coriolanus and Aufidius. 

5. Affricke] W. A. Wricut: This form of the word occurs three times in Shake- 
speare, while ‘Africa’ is found but once—in 2 Henry IV: V, iii, 104. The two 
forms were used interchangeably. Compare Shakespeare’s Plutarch (ed. Skeat), 
p. 69: ‘For he had two provinces, all Spain and Affrick, the which he governed by 
his lieutenants.’ And Holland’s Pliny, viii, 16: ‘From hence it is also, that the 
Greekes have this common proverbe, That Affricke evermore bringeth forth some 
new and strange thing or other.’ For Africa as the country of serpents see Hey- 
wood’s Silver Age (Works, iii, 125): ‘Fly unto Affricke, from the mountains there 
Chuse me two venemous serpents.—Casr (Arden Sh.): The reason why Africa 
(Lybya) so teemed with serpents is given in Golding’s Ovid, Metam., iv, ll. 756- 
763 (Danter’s 1593 ed., sig. H 4): 


‘And Persey bearing in his hand the monster Gorgons head, .. . 
Doth beat the aire with waning wings. And as he overflew 

The Lybicke sandes the drops of bloud that from the head did sew 
Of Gorgon being new cut off, vpon the ground did fall, 

Which taking them (and as it were conceiuing therewithall), 
Engendred sundry snakes and worms: by means whereof that clime 
Did swarme with serpents euer since, to this same present time.’ 


6. More then thy Fame and Enuy] Capett (vol. I, pt i, p. 84): Meaning 
the envy excited by it; thy envy’d fame; the fame which all other men by my- 
self view with envy; the expression is figurative and of the same nature with 
one in Ant. & Cleo., {IV, ii, 44, ‘Where rather I’ll expect victorious life Than death 
and honour.’ Where ‘death and honour’ is equivalent to honourable death.|— 
Matone: ‘Envy’ here, as in many other places, means malice-—STEEVENS: The 
phrase death and honour being allowed, in our author’s language, to signify no 
more than honourable death, so ‘fame and envy’ may only mean detested or odious 
fame. The verb ‘to envy,’ in ancient language, signifies to hate. Or the construc- 
tion may be, ‘Not Africk owns a serpent I more abhor and envy than thy fame.’ 
—COoLLiER (Notes & Emend., etc., p. 350): This cannot be right, inasmuch as, 
taking ‘envy’ even in the sense of hate, Aufidius could hardly mean that he 
abhorred the fame and the hate of Marcius; the printer made a slight error by 
mistaking the pronoun J for the contraction of the conjunction; therefore the 
MS. Corrector reads, ‘More than thy fame J envy.’ —S1ncer (Sh. Vindicated, etc., 
p- 212) thus comments on the foregoing remark by Collier: ‘All that is required, 
without interpolation, is to understand the passage properly as an inversion: Not 
Afric owns a serpent I abhor—More than thy fame—and envy. Afric owns not 
a serpent I abhor and hate more than thy fame. Shakespeare’s meaning of 


138 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. viii. 


Mar. Let the firft Budger dye the others Slaue, 7 
And the Gods doome him after. 

Auf. If I flye -Atartius, hollow me like a Hare. 

Mar. Within thefe three houres Tullus 10 


9. If...Hare] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Han. Holla Dyce. Holloa Cam.+, 
As two lines, ending Martius...Hare. Neils. Halloo Theob. ii. et cet. 
Theob. et cet. to. Tullus] Om. Steev. conj. 

hollow] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, 


“envy” may be understood from Baret, who explains “to envie, to have spite at 
another man’s prosperitie.”” From the tenour of the dialogue the speech requires 
an expression of more than “envy”—fierce hatred.’ [It will be noticed that this 
is substantially Steevens’s explanation, whose note on this Singer prints, without 
acknowledgement, in his editions —Ep.]—Staunron: There is probably some cor- 
ruption in this line, which would better read, ‘More than thy fame I hate and 
envy.’ So, in Plutarch, ‘Martius knew very well that Tullus did more malice and 
envy him than he did all the Romans besides.’—Dvyce (ed. ii.): Collier is probably 
right in observing that ‘the compositor mistook J for the contraction for “and.’’’ 
Whether Malone’s or Steevens’s explanation of the Folio reading be the most ridic- 
ulous is doubtful. Staunton’s suggestion would make the line over-measure. Here 
‘envy’ means hate, bear ill will to—Hupson: The construction commonly put upon 
the passage is: ‘Not Afric owns a serpent that I more abhor and envy than I do 
thy fame, ‘envy’ being interpreted in the old sense of hate. But why should 
Aufidius profess to abhor and hate the fame of Marcius? when the plain truth is 
that he desires or covets his fame, and therefore envies him the possession of it. We 
adopt, with little hesitation, a correction from Collier’s second folio —C. & M. 
CowDEN CLaRKE (Shakespeare): It appears to us that the sentence means ‘Not 
Africa owns a serpent I abhor more than thy fame and hatred of me’—that hatred 
which Marcius has just professed.—Rev. JOHN HUNTER: Thy renown in connection 
with thy malice towards me.—Scumipt (Coriolanus, p. 73) asks what could have 
forced the poet to adopt any such construction as that suggested by Steevens in 
his alternative explanation, and therefore considers that the proper view of the 
case is that ‘fame and envy’ here mean odious fame.—W. A. WricutT: Steevens 
rightly explains this as an instance of the grammatical figure, hendiadys, in 
which one idea is expressed by two different words. His second thoughts are 
not best. The First Folio prints ‘fame’ and ‘envy’ with initial capitals to show 
that they were both regarded as substantives.—Miss C. PortreR (First Folio Sh.): 
That is, thy fame and envy of mine. Each being fixed by the consciousness that 
the other was the most valiant leader on his side must hate both this eminence 
and its discount of his own supremacy. Hence the double expression —BEECHING 
(Henry Irving Sh.) quotes Steevens’s explanation, but adds that ‘more probably 
“envy” is a verb parallel to “‘abhor.””’ Beeching does not repeat this alternative 
explanation in his later edition (The Falcon Sh.) —Ep.—Dericuron follows Collier’s 
MS. correction, I envy, since ‘Marcius says of Aufidius, ‘“‘I sin in envying his 
nobility,” I, i, 245; and it is not so much his hatred as his jealousy that he here 
expresses.’ 

7, 8. Let the first ...doome him after] Strrvens: So, in Macbeth, ‘And 
damn’d be him who first cries, Hold, Enough!’—V, viii, 34. 


ACT I, SC. viii.] CORIOLANUS 139 


Alone I fought in your Corioles walles, II 
And made what worke I pleas’d:’Tis not my blood, 
Wherein thou feeft me maskt, for thy Reuenge 
Wrench vp thy power to th’higheft. 

Auf. Wer’t thou the Heétor, 15 
That was the whip of your bragg’d Progeny, 


11. Corioles] Ktly, Schmidt. Coriolus Ff, Rowe. Corioli Pope et cet. 


11. Corioles walles] Compare II, i, 162, and, for other examples of like construc- 
tion, ABBOTT, § 430. 

15, 16. Wer’t thou the Hector . . . bragg’d Progeny] Jonnson: The Romans 
boasted themselves descended from the Trojans; how then was Hector the whip 
of their progeny? It must mean the whip with which the Trojans scourged the 
Greeks, which cannot be but by a very unusual construction, or the author must 
have forgotten the original of the Romans; unless ‘whip’ has some meaning which 
includes advantage or superiority, as we say ‘he has the whip hand’ for ‘he has the 
advantage.’—MatoneE: Dr Johnson considers this as a very unusual construction, 
but it appears to me only such as every page of these plays furnishes; and the 
foregoing interpretation is undoubtedly the true one. An anonymous correspondent 
justly observes that the words mean, ‘the whip that your brage’d progeny was 
possessed of. —STEEVENS: ‘Whip’ might anciently be used, as crack is now, to 
denote anything peculiarly boasted of, as the crack house in the county, the crack 
boy of a school, &c. Modern phraseology, perhaps, has only passed from the 
whip to the crack of it. [The foregoing is, I think, an instance of Steevens’s love 
of mischief, and is hardly to be taken as meant seriously. In the Variorum 
editions of ’78 and ’85 Malone’s only note on this passage is: ‘Schoolboys at this 
day use a similar expression, ‘‘He is the crack of the school.”’ It is not repeated 
in any subsequent edition; and Steevens is thus, with mock seriousness, supply- 
ing a derivation for Malone’s inappropriate illustration.—Ep.]—Mason (Comments, 
etc., p. 248): The whip is a New-Market phrase. I am not much versed in sport- 
ing terms, but I believe the owner of the best horse of his year is said to hold 
the whip, and has actually a whip consigned to his keeping. [It is somewhat 
unusual for Mason to display such a complete lack of sagacity as in the foregoing. 
The use of ‘whip’ in any such sense as he suggests is utterly unknown before the 
end of the eighteenth century—Ep.]—KericutTtrey (Expositor, p. 361): Here 
‘brage’d’ is bragged of, that you brag of; ‘progeny,’ progenitors; and ‘whip,’ the 
implement with which they scourged their foes.—Utrici (Zusdtze und Berichti- 
gungen): Shakespeare assuredly well knew that the Romans boasted their descent 
from the Trojans, therefore ‘whip’ can here be meant only in the same sense as 
in Love’s Labour’s Lost, ‘love’s whip’ (III, i, 176), and in All’s Well, ‘his presence 
must be the whip of the other’ (IV, iii, 42); that is, Aufidius calls Hector the scourge 
with which the Trojans lashed the Greeks.—W. A. Wricut: This must mean, unless 
Shakespeare had entirely forgotten about Hector, the whip with which the Trojans 
flogged the Greeks. ‘Progeny’ is used for race generally, as in r Henry VI: V, 
iv, 48: ‘Not one begotten of a shepherd swain, But issued of a progeny of kings.’ 
—E. K. Cuampers (Warwick Sh.): The ‘bragg’d progeny’ is, of course, the Trojans, 
from whom the Romans claimed descent. Hector was the Trojan ‘whip’ or 
champion. But the taunt would be more effective if Aufidius swore ‘by him who 


140 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. viii. 


Thou fhould’ft not fcape me heere. 17 
Heere they fight, and certaine Volces come in the ayde 
of Auffi. Martius fights til they be driuen in breathles. 19 


18. Heere] Om. Cap. et seq. Mar. and Auf. fighting. Han. (after 1. 

Volces] Volcies F;. Volfcies Fy, 21). Exeunt fighting driven in by 

Rowe. Volscians Pope,+, Sing. Knt. Martius. Alarum. Retreat. Cap. 

Volsces Coll. et seq. (after 1. 21). Exeunt fighting. Varr. 

in the...] to the... Rowe et seq. Ran. (after ]. 21). Exeunt fighting, 

19. Martius...breathles.] Ff, Rowe, driven in by Martius. Mal. et cet. 
Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Exeunt (after |. 21). 


whipped your ancestors.’ Has he confused Hector and Achillesp—KINNEAR (p. 
306) reads hope instead of ‘whip,’ furnishing several examples from other plays 
wherein Hector and others are spoken of as the hope of their country or party. Kin- 
near boldly maintains that the Folio reading is a misprint which must mean here 
‘the whipper of,’ as in 1 Henry VI: I, ii, 129: ‘Assign’d am I to be the English 
scourge.’ Again, Jbid., II, iii, 15: ‘Is this the scourge of France, Is this the Talbot?’ 
‘The exception is,’ he adds, ‘when applied to heaven. So Timon, V, i, 64, ‘all 
the whips of heaven”’; or to deities and personified powers, as Hamlet, III, i, 70, “the 
whips and scorns of time.’’ So Attila is “The Scourge of God,” but Edward I, 
“ Malleus Scotorum.”’—VeErRity (Student? Sh.): The natural sense would be ‘the 
scourge of your progeny’ (z. e., he by whom they were scourged), but here the 
meaning must be either ‘the whip possessed by your ancestors’ or (less precisely) 
‘the champion of.’ It is very improbable that Shakespeare confused Hector with 
any Greek hero such as Achilles; for Tro. & Cress., without doubt, preceded Corto- 
lanus, and in Tro. & Cress. all the great figures of the Trojan War, on either side, 
are introduced—Achilles, Hector, Agamemnon, and other of the Homeric heroes. 
The story of the Fall of Troy was the most popular of all classical legends, and 
had called into being a vast cycle of medieval poems, romances, and ‘histories’ 
such as the 12‘ century Roman de Troyes and its English counterparts the Troy- 
Book of Lydgate and Caxton’s Destruction of Troy. No tolerably educated Eliz- 
abethan (and the old conception of Shakespeare as an inspired ignoramus is surely 
extinct) could possibly have mixed up Hector and Achilles——Dricuron: This 
must mean, as Johnson says, ‘the whip with which the Trojans scourged the 
Greeks.’ But the expression is a very strange one; and it looks, if one dared 
to say so, as though Shakespeare had confounded Hector and Achilles, for Aufidius 
would ‘hardly compliment Coriolanus on the prowess of his ancestor.—CAsE 
(Arden Sh.): The sense must be as Johnson put it, ‘the whip with which the 
Trojans scourged the Greeks’ or, the primitive weapon of your boasted fore- 
fathers. Chambers’s remark [as to greater effectiveness in the taunt] is beside the 
mark. Aufidius does not swear by anybody; he says, If you were the most famous 
and formidable warrior of the race you brag of you should not escape me now. 
{I do not believe that Shakespeare was in the least confused as to the identity 
of Hector; have we not sufficient proof of his complete understanding on this point 
in the fact that in scene iii. he puts into the mouth of Volumnia the reference to 
Hector’s contending against Grecian swords? That the word ‘contending’ has 
been questioned is not to the purpose here; it is the word ‘Grecian’ that shows that 
Shakespeare recognised Hector as one of the Trojan warriors.—Eb.] 

18, 19. Heere they fight . . . in breathles] There is here that confusion in stage- 


ACTIIESCH Ix 


CORIOLA NUS I4I 


Officious and not valiant, you haue fham’d me 20 


In your condemned Seconds. 


[Scene LX.] 


Flourifh. Alarum. A Retreat is founded. Enter at I 
one Doore Cominius, with the Romanes: At 
another Doore Martius, with his 
Arme in a Scarfe. 


Com. 


If I fhould tell thee o’re this thy dayes Worke, 5 


Thou’t not beleeue thy deeds : but Ile report it, 
Where Senators fhall mingle teares with {miles, 
Where great Patricians fhall attend, and fhrug, 8 


20. valiant,| valiant!— Rowe et seq. 

21. In your condemned] In your con- 
demnéd Dyce, Huds. ii, Words. Be- 
gone, contemned Wellesley. 

Seconds] seconding Han. second 

Mason. 

ScENE Ix. Cap. et seq. (SCENE Ix. 
misprint for SCENE x. Var. ’73.) 

The Roman Camp. Cap. et seq. 

1-3. Alarum...another Doore...] 
Enter from opposite sides Cominius 


and Romans; Cap. Alarum...Flourish. 
Enter at one side, Cominius, and Ro- 
mans; at the other side... Mal. et seq. 
(subs.). 

4. Scarfe] Ff, Rowe,+, Var. ’78, ’85, 
Cam.+. scarf, and other Romans. 
Cap. et cet. 

6. Thowt| F.F;, Cla. Thou’dst Wh. 
i. (Cap. conj.). Thou’ldst Cam. i, Glo. 
Thow’lt F , et cet. 

8. Where] Were Rowe ii. 


direction which so often appears in the Folio, when a prolonged action is indi- 
cated, due possibly to the fact that the compositor is working from a play-house 
copy interlined with descriptive directions. The word ‘they’ in 1. 19 must refer to 
Aufidius and his aiders, but if they be ‘driven in breathles,’ how is Aufidius to make 
his final remark? and where is Martius while this is being spoken; there is no 
direction for his exzt.—Ep. 

21. condemned] Jonnson: For ‘condemned’ we may read contemned. You 
have, to my shame, sent me help which I despise —STEEVENS: Why may we not as 
well be contented with the old reading, and explain it, ‘You have to my shame sent 
me help, which I must condemn as intrusive, instead of applauding it as necessary’? 
So, in Lear, ‘No seconds? all myself,’ IV, vi, 198.—MALoNE: We have had 
the same phrase in sc. iv. of this play, ‘Now prove good seconds,’ [l. 63]. 

6. Thou’t] Dyce (ed. ii.), in reference to the reading Thow’dst (see Text. Notes), 
cites as an example of construction similar to the Folio reading, Henry VIII: 
I, ii, 134: ‘That if the king Should without issue die he’ll carry it so To 
make the sceptre his.’ He also compares: ‘And if I should say, I know him not, 
I shall be a liar like unto you’—John, viii, 55——-W. A. Wricut: No doubt 
Thow’ldst is more strictly grammatical [than ‘Thou’t’], but instances of ‘should’ 
being followed by ‘will’ are not uncommon in Shakespeare. Com. of Errors, I, 
ii, 85: ‘If I should pay your worship those again, Perchance you will not bear 
them patiently.’ As ‘thou’t’ is for thou wilt, ‘woo’t’ (Hamlet, V, i, 298) is for 
wilt thou. In Hamlet, V, i, 297, where the Folios have ‘thou’lt,’ the Quartos read 
‘th’owt,’ ‘th’out,’ or ‘thou’t,’ as here. 


142 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AGP ESC ix: 


I’th’end admire : where Ladies fhall be frighted, 

And gladly quak’d, heare more : where the dull Tribunes, 10 
That with the fuftie Plebeans, hate thine Honors, 

Shall fay againft their hearts, We thanke the Gods 

Our Rome hath fuch a Souldier. 

Yet cam’ft thou to a Morfell of this Feaft, 

Hauing fully din’d before. 15 


Enter Titus with his Power, from the Purfuit. 


Titus Lartius. Oh General: 
Here is the Steed, wee the Caparifon : 


Hadft thou beheld 19 
11. Plebeans| Plebeians F;. 18. Caparison:| caparisons! Cap. 
14, 15. Yet...before] Om. Words. Varr. Ran. 

16. with his] and Cap. 19. beheld] behold F,. 


17. Lartius] Lucius F, (throughout). 


to. gladly quak’d] SrrEveNs: That is, thrown into grateful trepidation. To 
‘quake’ is used likewise as a verb active by Heywood, Silver Age, 1613: ‘We'll 
quake them at the bar Where all souls wait for sentence,’ [ed. Pearson, iii, 145]. 

11. Plebeans] WALKER (Vers., p. 161): ‘Plebeian’ is pronounced plébi’an, as 
it still is by the common people. [In proof of this Walker quotes, besides the 
present passage, V, iv, 35: ‘The Plebeians have got your Fellow Tribune,’ etc.; 
II, iii, 124: ‘Let them have Cushions by you. You are Plebeians.’ ‘We read, 
indeed,’ adds Walker, Tit. And., I, i: ‘““With voices and applause of every sort 
(Patricians and Plebeians, we create) Lord Saturninus Rome’s great emperor.” 
But this act, at least, is not Shakespeare’s. It is true that in Henry V: Chorus, 
he has: 

“Like to the senators of the antique Rome 
With the Plebeians swarming at their heels.”’] 


14. a Morsell of this Feast] Scammrt (Coriclanus): This cannot here mean a 
morsel of this feast, but rather, thou hadst in this feast only a morsel, this feast 
was to thee but a morsel. The use of ‘of’ is therefore similar to other Shake- 
spearian expressions: ‘We lost a jewel of her,’ [AJl’s Well, V, iii, 1], we lost a jewel 
in her; ‘You shall find of the king a husband,’ [All’s Well, I, i, 7]—W. A. 
Wricut: Cominius appears to mean that the previous reputation of Marcius was 
so little increased by his present achievement that he was like one who took but 
a morsel of a feast, having fully dined before. 

18. wee the Caparison] JoHNSON: This is an odd enconium. The meaning is, 
‘this man performed the action, and we only filled up the show.’—KRuEGER 
(Jahrbuch, xxxviii, p. 236) suggests that, since in Plutarch’s account we are told 
that Cominius presented to Martius ‘a goodly horse with a caparison,’ there is 
nothing left for us but to read with the instead of ‘we the.’ ‘According to the 
Folio reading,’ Krueger concludes, ‘we must accept it, that Lartius employs a 
cold similitude; since he would probably have said: Thou art the steed, we 
(are) the caparison, and in no case will the sense of this be quite clear; ‘with 


ACT TerSCa xe] CORIOLA NUS 143 


Martius. Pray now, no more: 20 
My Mother, who ha’s a Charter to extoll her Bloud, 
When fhe do’s prayfe me, grieues me : 
I haue done as you haue done, that’s what I can, 
Induc’d as you haue beene,that’s for my Countrey : 
He that ha’s but effected his good will, 25 
Hath ouerta’ne mine A&. 
Com. You fhall not be the Graue of your deferuing, 
Rome muft know the value of her owne : 
’Twere a Concealement worfe then a Theft, 
No leffe then a Traducement, 30 
To hide your doings, and to filence that, 
Which to the {pire,and top of prayfes vouch’d, 


Would feeme but modeft : therefore I befeech you, 33 
20-22. Mnemonic Warb. 24. haue beene] have also been Han. 
20, 21. Pray...My Mother] As one Cap. 

line Pope et seq. 27-31. You Jhall...that,] Lines end: 
22-24. When...my Countrey| Lines be...know...Concealment...Traducement... 

end: I have done...Induc’d...Countrey. that, Pope et seq. 

Han. Cap. Mal. et seq. 31-33. and to...modefi] Om. Words. 


the’ is as easily mistaken either by eye or ear for ‘we the.’—[See Note by 
MacCatium, |. 74 below.—Ep.] 

20. Pray now, no more] E. K. Caampers (Warwick Sh.): The humility of 
Coriolanus only covers a subtler pride. He will not be praised for his valour, for 
that praise implies that he has done something exceptional and surprising; and he 
does not wish brave deeds to be thought exceptional and surprising in him. 

21. a Charter to extoll] Jonnson: A privilege to praise her own son. 

24. Countrey] Here, metri gratia, pronounced as a trisyllable. For other 
examples of this lengthening of a syllable after the letter r, see ABBOTT, § 477. 

25, 26. He that . . . mine Act] Protss (p. 69): If this and other remarks, as 
Cominius has it [l. 66], be likewise modesty, it is yet indeed a proud modesty. It 
may annoy a great and noble nature to be openly and fulsomely praised. It may, 
however, be asked whether the deprecation of such praise does not afford a greater 
satisfaction to the self-consciousness. It may well be that what Marcius here 
says is truly meant—and assuredly he is not one to seek praise, or is in the least 
as the Tribune Brutus and, later, Aufidius call him, a braggart—but he would 
perhaps have felt wounded in his self-love had his deeds and deserts remained 
quite unnoticed. At all events his behaviour on this occasion throws a very clear 
light on his bearing later in the Senate and on his candidature for the Consulate. 
Here once again he allows to the soldiers of the people a certain recognition and 
reference to their own feelings, which is contrary to Plutarch, who makes no refer- 
ence to this at all. 

25. He that ha’s, etc.] Caprtt (vol. I, pt i, p. 84): Intimating that he him- 
self had come short of effecting it; that what he had done were trifles compar’d 
with what he wish’d to have done. [MALone, without referring to Capell’s in- 
terpretation, gives substantially the same explanation; adding, in illustration of 


144 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. ix. 


In figne of what you are, not to reward 

What you haue done, before our Armie heare me. 35 
Martius. I haue fome Wounds vpon me, and they {mart 

To heare themfelues remembred. 
Com. Should they not: 

Well might they fefter ’gainft Ingratitude, 

And tent themfelues with death : of all the Horfes, 40 

Whereof we haue ta’ne good, and good ftore of all, 


37. remembred] Ff, Rowe,+. remem- 41. flore of all] store, of all Rowe et 
b’red Neils. remember’d Cap. et cet. seq. 
41. we haue] we've Han. Dyce, Huds. il. 


1. 26, ‘The flighty purpose never is o’ertook Unless the deed go with it,’ Mac- 
beth, IV, i, 145. Eb] 

34, 35. not to reward What you haue done] STEEvENS: So, in Macbeth, 
‘Only to herald thee into his sight, Not pay thee,’ [I, iii, 102. With all deference 
to Steevens I must say that the parallelism between these two passages is of the 
slightest, and the idea conveyed is totally different; here Cominius remonstrates 
with Marcius for his modesty, and asks that he be allowed to tell the army the 
real state of affairs before Marcius rewards, or praises, what he himself has done. 
For ‘reward’ we might, perhaps, read re-word, that is, repeat, as in Hamlet, II, 
iv, 142, ‘bring me to the test And I the matter will re-word,’ etc. With this 
meaning, Cominius begs Marcius not to repeat his detractions as his deeds, but to 
allow him first to tell the army exactly what occurred.—Eb.] 

38. Should they not] Jonnson: That is, not be remembered. 

39. ’gainst Ingratitude] W. A. WricutT: That is, when exposed to ingratitude. 
Compare Numbers, xxv, 4: ‘Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up 
before the Lord against the sun.’ And see King John, V, iv, 25: ‘Which bleeds 
away, even as a form of wax Resolveth from his figure ’gainst the fire.’ Com- 
bined with this sense of ‘against’ there is also the other idea of the wounds closing 
themselves against external aid and becoming their own deadly surgeons. 

40. tent themselues with death] W. A. Wricut: A ‘tent’ is a roll of lint which 
was used by surgeons for probing wounds and introducing into them the means 
of healing. Hence ‘to tent’ is first to probe, and in a secondary sense to cure. 
See III, i, 286. The wounds having closed themselves against external influences 
are filled with deadly festering matter instead of the health-giving surgeon’s tent. 
For the substantive ‘tent,’ see Tro. & Cress., II, ii, 16, ‘doubt is call’d The 
beacon of the wise, the tent that searches To the bottom of the worst.’ [In Notes 
& Queries, Ap. 30, 1881, p. 344, J. D. quotes the present passage, and defines 
‘tent’ as here used in the sense of a liniment or embrocation, quoting in support 
of this from Migne’s Ducange, s. v. tenta: ‘linamentum quod vulneribus apponitur; 
compresse, bande de lin, olim tente.’ But here ‘linamentum’ is merely the Latin 
word for lint, as may be seen by the French paraphrase—Murray (JN. E. D.) does 
not include the meaning liniment or emollient among the various meanings of ‘tent.’ 
—Ep.] 

41. good, and good store of all] W. A. Wricut: That is, good in quality and 
plenty of them. Compare 2 Henry IV: IV, iii, 131: ‘Husbanded and tilled with 
excellent endeavor of drinking good and good store of fertile sherris.’ 


ACT I, SC. ix.] CORIOLA NUS 145 


The Treafure in this field atchieued, and Citie, 42 

We render you the Tenth, to be ta’ne forth, 

Before the common diftribution, 

At your onely choyfe. 45 
Martius. I thanke you Generall : 

But cannot make my heart confent to take 

A Bribe,to pay my Sword : I doe refufe it, 

And ftand vpon my common part with thofe, 

That haue beheld the doing. 50 


A long flourifh. They all cry, Martius, Martius, 
caft vp their Caps and Launces : Cominius 


and Lartius ft and bare. 


Mar.May thefe fame Inftruments, which you prophane, 54 


42. Treafure] Threafure F,. 45. onely] own Han. Cap. 
this] the Rowe,+, Varr. Ran. 50. beheld] upheld Cap. 
44, 45. Before...Ai] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 52. caft] casting Coll. iii. 
Han. Cap. Coll. Del. Sing. ii, Sta. 53- Lartius] Liartius Rowe i. Titus 
Ktly, Wh.i, Craig. As one line Theob. Lartius Cap. 
eticet. 


54-59. May these same Instruments . . . for th’Warres] THEOBALD: Many 
of the verses in this really fine passage are dismounted, unnumerous and imperfect. 
For this reason I have ventured to transpose them to their measure; and the sense, 
’tis plain, has been no less maimed than the numbers. To remedy this part I 
have had the assistance of my ingenious friend Mr Warburton; and with the 
benefit of his happy conjectures, which I have inserted in the text, the whole, I 
hope, is restored to that purity which was quite lost in the corruptions. I shall 
now subjoin his comment in proof of the emendations: ‘The meaning that sense 
requires in the antithesis evidently designed here is this: If one change its usual 
nature to a thing most opposite, then let the other do so too. But Courts and Cities, 
being made all of smooth-fac’d soothing, remain in their proper nature. In the 
second part of the sentence the antithesis between steel and the parasite’s silk 
does not indeed labour with this absurdity, but it labours with another equally 
bad, and that is, Nonsense in the expression. The Poet’s whole thought seems to 
be this: If drums and trumpets change their nature preposterously, let Camps do 
so too. And in the latter part of the sentence the emendation seems to give a 
particular beauty to the expression. He had said before, If drums and trumpets 
prove flatterers; now here, alluding to the same thought, he says, Then let Hymns, 
soft music destined to the praises of gods and heroes, be an overture for the wars; 
where the overture is used with great technical propriety. I should observe one 
thing, that the members of these two antitheses are confounded one with another, 
which is a practice common with the best authors; and it is a figure Rhetoricians 
have found a name for.’ [In his own edition, fourteen years later, Warburton 
has apparently completely re-written the note on this passage. The main drift 


sme) 


146 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACDuE SC ix 


[54-59. May these same Instruments . . . for th’ Warres] 
is similar, but it is much less verbose. His revision may be read in the Variorum 
of 1821, ad loc., p. 50.—Ep.]—Upron (ed. ii, p. 170): Marcius Coriolanus says 
this after a flourish of drums and trumpets, and the acclamations of the people. 
The whole difficulty of the passage (if any) consists in the line, ‘Let Hm, &c.,’ 
which he speaks striking his hand upon his heart—6éelxrixws, as the Grammarians 
term it. The editors, not seeing this, have strangely altered the whole.—CAPELL 
(vol. I, pt i, p. 84): All the middle lines of this speech—from the words ‘When 
steel grows’ down to ‘shout me forth,’ inclusive—are disjointed and rang’d amiss 
in the folios and the two elder moderns [Rowe and Pope], but have nothing else 
that is wrong in them except the word ‘him,’ rightly altered to hymns in the other 
moderns, the word overture plainly demanding it. The censure that is contain’d 
in a part of them has two distinct aspects, the tendency of which may be seen in 
the following paraphrase: When flattery shall creep into camps, let it be no shame 
for cities and courts to use it; let the practice be general there, be they ‘all made 
of false-fac’d soothing’; and when this happens, that soldiers shall have the soft- 
ness of parasites, let them be consistent and do other soft things; forgo the drum 
and the trumpet and march to battle to the sound of soft musics, let the overture 
to fight be a hymn.—Tyrwaurtt: The first part of the passage has been altered, 
in my opinion, unnecessarily by Dr Warburton; and the latter not so happily, I 
think, as he often conjectures. In the latter part, which only I mean to consider, 
instead of ‘him’ (an evident corruption) he substitutes hymns; which perhaps may 
palliate, but certainly has not cured, the wounds of the sentence. I would propose 
an alteration of two words: ‘When steel grows Soft as the parasite’s silk, let 
this (i. e., silk) be made A coverture for the wars!’ The sense will then be apt and 
complete. When steel grows soft as silk, let armour be made of silk instead of steel. 
—STEEVENS: It should be remembered that the personal pronoun ‘him’ is not 
unfrequently used by our author and other writers of his age instead of 7#, the 
neuter; and that overture, in its musical sense, is not so ancient as the age of 
Shakespeare. What Martial has said of Mucius Scevola may, however, be 
applied to Dr Warburton’s proposed emendation: ‘Si non errasset, fecerat ille 
minus,’ [Bk I, Epigram, xxi—Ep.]—Matone: Bullokar, in his English Expositor, 
1616, interprets the word ‘overture’ thus: ‘An overturning; a sudden change.’ 
The latter sense suits the present passage sufficiently well, understanding the word 
‘him’ to mean zt, as Mr Steevens has very properly explained it. When steel grows 
soft as silk, let silk be suddenly converted to the use of war. We have many 
expressions equally licentious in these plays. By ‘steel’ Marcius means a coat 
of mail. So, in 3 Henry VI: ‘Shall we go throw away our coats of steel And wrap 
our bodies in black mourning gowns,’ [II, i, 160]. Shakespeare has introduced a 
similar image in Rom. & Jul., ‘Thy beauty hath made me effeminate, And in 
my temper soften’d valour’s steel,’ [III, i, 120]. ‘Overture,’ I have observed 
since this note was written, was used by the writers of Shakespeare’s time in the 
sense of prelude or preparation. It is so used by Sir John Davies and Philemon 
Holland. So, in Twelfth Night, Viola says, ‘I bring no overture of war,’ [I, v, 225]. 
—SINGER (ed. i.): I think, with Tyrwhitt, we should read coverture. Notwithstand- 
ing Malone’s ingenious argument, it is impossible to extract sense from the word 
‘overture,’ which anciently, as now, meant ‘a motion, or offer made, an opening 
or entrance.’ [Singer does not, however, adopt Tyrwhitt’s reading either in his 
rt or 2°4 editions. In 1853 he published his volume The Text of Shakespeare 


ACTH SCL CORIOLA NUS 147 


a NRE BEAD! AER Se PRE Oe eke 8 eet Bane Ne ee BE 
[54-59. May these same Instruments . . . for th’Warres] 


Vindicated, which was a violent attack on Collier’s volume, Notes and Emenda- 
tions, therein, p. 213, Singer, commenting on Collier’s acceptance of the word 
coverture, says that although he had once thought favorably of adopting this 
reading he now thinks it doubtful. The alterations which he suggests in the 
passage are the substitution of a full stop after ‘soothing,’ 1. 57, for the colon of 
the Folio, and reading silks and them for ‘silk’ and ‘him.’ The former of these 
Collier later gave as one of the MS. readings.—Ep.]—Knicut: The commentators 
have long notes of explanation [on this passage]; and they leave the matter more 
involved than they found it. The stage-direction of the original which precedes 
this speech is ‘A long flourish.’ The drums and trumpets have sounded in honour 
of Coriolanus; but displeased as he may be, it is somewhat unreasonable of him 
to desire that these instruments may ‘never sound more.’ We render his desire, 
by the slightest change of punctuation, somewhat more rational: 


“May these same instruments, which you profane, 
Never sound more, when drums and trumpets shall 
IT’ the field prove flatterers!’ 


The difficulty increases with the received reading; for, according to this, when 
drums and trumpets prove flatterers, courts and cities are to be made of false- 
faced soothing. Courts and cities are precisely what a soldier would describe 
as invariably so made. But Coriolanus contrasts courts and cities with the field; 
he separates them: 

‘Let courts and cities be 

Made all of false-faced soothing’; 


and he adds, as we believe, 


‘Where steel grows soft 
As the parasite’s silk!’ 


The difficulties with the received reading are immeasurable. When steel grows 
soft as the parasite’s silk the commentators say that him (the steel), used for it, 
is to be made an overture for the wars; but what ‘overture’ means here they do 
not attempt to explain. The slight change we have made gives a perfectly clear 
meaning. The whole speech has now a leading idea—‘Let them be made an 
overture for the wars.’ Let them, the instruments which you profane, be the 
prelude to our wars. Opposed as we are to editorial licence, we hold ourselves 
keeping within due bounds in substituting where for ‘when’ and them for ‘him,’ 
for there are several instances of these words having been misprinted in the original 
copies. We believe that the sense of these lines has been mistaken, in some 
measure, through the deviations from the metrical arrangements in the original. 
Our reading follows this arrangement much more closely than that of the modern 
editors.—Co ier (ed. i.): We do not think that any of the modern explanations 
[of this passage] have quite arrived at the full sense of the poet. We regulate the 
passage as in the First Folio, and, adhering, with a slight exception, to the words of 
the original, we only adopt a different punctuation. The meaning of Coriolanus 
seems to be: ‘Let drums and trumpets never sound more if they are to be pro- 
faned by you into flatterers; leave it to courts and cities to be made of false-faced 
soothing, when steel grows soft as the parasite’s silk; but let them (drums and 


148 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. ix. 


[s4-59. May these same Instruments . . . for th’Warres] 

trumpets) be made a prelude to the wars.’ We do not see the necessity of any 
change but of ‘him’ to them, in which we follow Knight.—([Collier concludes his 
note with a reference to Tyrwhitt’s changes, both of which he rejects, since wherever 
it is possible to make sense of the Folio reading it should be retained. In his 
second ed. Collier refers to these same emendations as comparatively small, adopt- 
ing them both, and remarking that they ‘make the whole meaning of the passage 
. . . as evident as it is excellent.’ His paraphrase of the passage is substantially 
the same as in his ed. i, except that he concludes it thus: ‘when steel becomes as 
soft as the parasite’s silk, it is fit that silk should be applied to the purposes of 
armour—‘“a coverture for the wars.’’ When steel becomes soft, silk, on the other 
hand, ought to become hard; and silk was just as well adapted to defend as steel 
ought to be capable of flattery. If we were at all authorised to read “silk” in 
the plural, it would not be necessary even to alter them to “‘it.”’—This last is a slight 
inadvertence; the original is ‘him’ not them.—Ep.]—ANnon. (Blackwood’s Maga., 
Sep., 1853, p- 321): The punctuation of this passage requires to be put right. 
Coriolanus is declaring how much disgusted he is with the flatteries, the flourish 
of trumpets, and other demonstrations of applause with which he is saluted. 
But what is the sense of saying let courts and cities be made of hypocrisy, when 
drums and trumpets in the field shall prove flatterers? This has no meaning. 
We should punctuate the lines thus: 


‘May these same instruments which you profane, 
Never sound more, when drums and trumpets shall 

I’ the fields prove flatterers. Let courts and cities be 
Made all of false-faced soothing,’ &c. 


The meaning is: When drums and trumpets in the field shall prove flatterers 
(as they are doing at present), may they never sound more! Let courts and cities 
be as hollow-hearted as they please; but let the camp enjoy an immunity from 
these fulsome observances. When steel grows soft as the parasite’s silk (that is, 
when the warrior loses his stubborn and unbending character), let silk be made a 
coverture for the wars, for it will then be quite as useful as steel—Derzius: Corio- 
lanus execrates the drums and trumpets, since they are profaned in sounding forth 
in his honor, and then continues, if these turn into flatterers in the field then 
may courts and cities (which are here set in contrast to the field) well consist of 
false soothing. If the steel, in which soldiers are clad, becomes as soft as the silken 
coat of the parasite, then let it (the silken coat or the parasite) serve as a prelude 
to war; the steel-clad soldiers shall resign the work of war to the silken clad parasite. 
If Shakespeare refers ‘him’ to ‘silk,’ and not to parasite, then ‘silk’ is here to be 
understood as personified.—SINGER (ed. ii.): Various attempts have been made to 
extract a meaning from this passage, and very many various readings have been 
proposed. Tyrwhitt would read coverture, but Shakespeare uses the word cover- 
ture only for a concealment, and has an ‘overture’ in the sense here attached to it 
elsewhere. I have left the passage as it stands in the Folio. The leading thought 
seems to be: ‘When drums, trumpets, and warlike instruments are profaned, 
let them lose their functions—never sound more, and let their places be taken 
by something else.’ I should, however, prefer to read and point thus: 


‘May these same instruments, which you profane, 
Never sound more! shall drums and trumpets, when 


ACT I, SC. ix.] CORIOLA NUS 149 


Oe A I ON Fa ee 
[s4-59. May these same Instruments . . . for th’Warres] 


IT the field prove flatterers? (Let courts and cities be 
Made all of false-faced soothing 
When steel grows soft as the parasite’s silk) — 
Let them be made an overture for the wars!— 
. No more! I say,’ &c. 


‘When,’ I think, stands for where or in which place, and them relates to the martial 
instruments. It is ‘him’ in the old copy, but, as Mr Dyce has remarked, ‘The 
words him and them are very often confounded by our early printers’ (Marlowe’s 
Works, vol. i, p. lxxvi.).—Dvyce: I read, with Tyrwhitt, a coverture, for I cannot 
but think that the commentators have most signally failed in their endeavors to 
support the old lection; and nothing can be more ridiculous than Malone’s ad- 
ducing in its defence, from Twelfth Night, ‘no overture of war,’ as if that expression 
were parallel to ‘an overture for the wars’!—HALLIWELL accepts Tyrwhitt’s 
emendation since ‘no good sense can be made out of the old text.—BApHAM 
(Text of Sh., p. 288): Some have changed ‘him’ [l. 59] to them, but I believe him 
(. e., the steel) to be right. Adopting Tyrwhitt’s conjecture of ‘a coverture,’ 
and changing the punctuation still further, we come to the very simple and in- 
telligible expression: 


. . . ‘When steel grows 
Soft as the parasite’s silk, let him be made 
A coverture for the wars no more,’ 


which exactly answers to the preceding ‘May these same instruments never 
sound more.’ And this very repetition of thought in a different metaphor 
will account for the words ‘I say.’ But where are they to be placed? Not 
at the end, where they come in most languidly, but after ‘let him,’ the words 
‘be made’ being removed to the commencement of the next verse-—WALKER 
(Crit., iii, 208) agrees with Knight in changing ‘him’ to them, and with Collier 
in changing ‘silk’ to siJks; he further elucidates: ‘“‘Overture” refers to “the 
parasite’s silks”; let them, in lieu of mail, be made an overture (clothing, cov- 
ering; compare coverture) for the wars! ...The omission of the final s, though 
not so common as [its addition], is not infrequent in the Folio.—Sraunton: 
If an alteration be absolutely needed, that of coverture for ‘overture,’ understanding 
‘him’ to be used for the neuter it, is the least objectionable; but we are strongly 
disposed to think that ‘overture,’ if not a misprint for ovation, is employed here 
in the same sense, and that the meaning is: When steel grows soft as the para- 
site’s silk, let him be made, i. e., let there be made for him, a triumph, as for a suc- 
cessful warrior.—R. G. Wuire: To Tyrwhitt’s reading there is the paramount 
objection that any soldier, and Coriolanus of all soldiers, would regard courts and 
cities as made all of false-faced soothing, whether drums and trumpets were used 
as instruments of flattery or not. Especially would he so speak of them under the 
circumstances of this occasion. And as to making either steel or silk a coverture 
for the wars, what possible connection is there between armor, or any soldierly 
equipment, and the flourish against which Coriolanus is protesting? These con- 
siderations, as well as the reading to which they lead, I supposed to have occurred 
first to myself, but I found them substantially given in Knight’s Pictorial Edition. 
(I may add that at first I thought of reading also ‘where drums and trumpets’ 


150 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Hesereaxs 


[54-59. May these same Instruments . . . for th’Warres] 


and ‘as the parasite, silk.’) The only objection to the reading of the Folio text 
(and it is a great one) is its rhythm, which is, in my judgment, both un- 
Shakespearian and unsuited to the mood of Coriolanus. There must be a pause 
after ‘Never sound more’; and it would be in Shakespeare’s manner of versifica- 
tion and especially appropriate to Coriolanus that the exclamation should come 
there to a full period. The prolongation of the first sentence of the speech, by 
an accessory clause, into the middle of the next line enfeebles both the protest 
and the verse. And the next sentence is measurably open to the same objection. 
But the rhythm of the whole speech with any arrangement is far from being 
unexceptionable. In the Folio we have a hemistich of seven syllables and three 
accents, followed by a line of ten syllables and four accents, which certainly indi- 
cates corruption of the text or derangement of the verse—KEIGHTLEY (Expositor, 
p. 361): By ‘him’ inl. 59 can only be meant the parasite, and what is the meaning 
of his being ‘an overture for the wars’? I feel convinced that it is a printer’s 
error for a noun; and I read pipes, which might be thus mistaken. The meaning 
then would be, when things are so, let pipes and tabors, not trumpets and drums, 
be used in our armies grown thus effeminate. ‘My throat of war be turn’d 
Which quired with my drum, into a pipe Small as a eunuch’s,’ etc., III, ii, 138.— 
VERPLANCK gives Knight’s remarks on this passage in full, adding in conclusion, 
‘Thus the whole sum is: “‘Let trumpets and drums cease to sound when they 
become flatterers in the field. Let falsehood and flatterers have the rule in courts 
and cities, where even steel becomes soft as the parasite’s silk. But let martial 
music be the prelude only to war.” ’—Hupson (ed. i.): That is, let the instruments 
of music be used as a prelude to battle. The passage has caused a great deal of 
discussion, and as commonly given it seems impossible to make any sense out of 
it. The only tolerable explanation of the Folio reading is that ‘him’ is used for 
it, referring to ‘silk,’ and that ‘overture’ is a misprint for coverture; so that the 
meaning is, ‘when steel grows soft as silk, let armors be made of silk instead of 
steel.’ We keep to the metrical arrangement of the original, and adopt the pointing 
of Knight, as we also do the changes of ‘When’ into Where and of ‘him’ into 
them, where being a relative adverb referring to ‘courts and cities’ and them refer- 
ring to ‘instruments.’ Everyone experienced in proof-reading knows how apt 
where and when and him and them are to be mistaken for each other, so that the 
changes in this case need not be greatly scrupled. Touching the whole passage 
as here given, we may observe that Marcius is referring to the ‘long flourish’ 
which has just been made by the musical instruments in honour of his stout and 
valiant action. This he regards as a profanation; a using of that which was 
meant as an incitement to do, for the purpose of glorifying what has been done. 
And he wishes not simply, as it is in the common reading, that those instruments 
may never sound more, but that they may never sound more when thus abused 
to the end of sounding compliments and flatteries on the battlefield. All such 
‘fale-fac’d soothing’ he would have confined to ‘courts and cities,’ where steel 
itself is used for ornament, not for fighting. That Marcius, with his all-devouring 
passion for war, should speak of courts and cities as made up of false-faced soothing 
is quite characteristic; but, as he thinks they are so already, he would not wish they 
might become so when drums and trumpets leave prompting and turn to com- 
plimenting feats of arms.——C. & M. CowDEN CLARKE (Shakespeare): We give 
this passage as worded in the Folio, excepting that we substitute them for ‘him’ 


AGT I, SCs Axel CORIOLA NUS I5I 


[54-59. May these same Instruments . . . for th’Warres] 

in 1. 59, on the supposition that the original ‘him’ is a misprint for ’em; and our 
interpretation of the whole passage is this: ‘May these same instruments which 
you profane (by this flourish in my honour) never sound more, when thus drums 
and trumpets in the field prove flatterers! Let courts and cities be made all of 
false faced adulation when thus martial steel grows soft as the parasite’s silken 
attire! Let them (“these instruments”) be made an overture (or used as a pre- 
lude) for the wars.’ It appears to us that ‘when’ here has the force of when thus, 
and that it is used in this passage as we sometimes use the word since.—Rev. 
Joun HunTER arranges and punctuates this passage thus: 


‘May these same instruments, which you profane, 
Never sound more, when drums and trumpets shall 
I’the field prove flatterers! Let courts and cities be 
Made all of false-faced soothing! when steel grows 
Soft as the parasite’s silk. Let them be made 
An overture for the wars! No more, I say!’ 


That is, Leave to cities to be made all of false adulation; but let drums and trumpets 
be a prelude to the wars.—P. A. DANIEx (p. 22): The alteration I propose is in 
lines 58, 59: 

‘Let ’em be made an overture for the wars 

No more, I say!’ 


t. e., Let em (the drums and trumpets) no more be made an overture for the wars 
when steel grows soft, &c. It is scarcely necessary to remark in justification of 
the change of ‘him’ to ’em that the two words are frequently confounded in the 
Folio. Mr Knight changes ‘him’ to them, referring, I believe, to the drums and 
trumpets, but he has totally changed the punctuation of the speech and, thereby, 
its meaning. It was no doubt the distance of the demonstrative pronoun from 
its noun or nouns rather in this instance which led to Tyrwhitt’s strange conjecture 
that when steel grew soft it was to be made a coverture for the wars!—ABxBorr 
(§ 484) among other examples of words lengthened for metrical reasons quotes 
1. 58, remarking: ‘‘‘Soft” is emphasized as an exclamation, but perhaps, on the 
whole, it is better to emphasize “steel” here. —‘I think neither the one nor the 
other,’ says Elze, as regards this remark by Abbott; he prefers that a pause after 
‘soft’? should take the place of the unaccented syllable-—WuiTELAW regulates 
these lines thus: 


‘May these same instruments, which you profane, 
Never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall 
I’ the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be 
Made all of false-faced soothing: when steel grows 
Soft as the parasite’s silk—Let them be made 
An overture for the wars no more, I say!’ 


‘It is possible,’ remarks Whitelaw, ‘the word “overture” (not used elsewhere by 
Shakespeare in the sense of prelude) is corrupt; but failing any probable correction 
of it, the passage, as given above, may be explained thus: Let your drums and 
trumpets, profaned to vulgar uses of flattery, never sound more! If even they 
must learn to flatter, if the soldier in his coat of steel must ape the parasite in 


152 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcrinyisCaix: 


[s4-s9. May these same Instruments . . . for th’Warres] 
his silk, let truth vanish out of the earth, and courts and cities go their own way 
undisturbed, let your drums and trumpets, I say, henceforth be silent!’"—Scummpt 
(Coriolanus) rearranges these lines thus: 


‘May these same instruments, which you profane, 
Never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall 
I’ th’ field prove flatterers, let °em be made 
An overture for the wars no more, I say! 

When steel grows soft as th’ parasite’s silk let courts 
And cities be made all of false-faced soothing!’ 


He thus comments on the whole passage: ‘If for no other reason the very meaning 
of coverture would make this conjecture impossible, since it does not mean what 
decorates and clothes, but what hides and conceals. The somewhat drastic re- 
arrangement of the text speaks for itself, since by no other arrangement can 
the lines be presented correctly accentuated and metrical. But the chief 
error which prevails in the line divisions of this passage in the Folio can be easily 
elucidated if we accept that in the MS. there was a parenthesis including 
two lines, 58, 59, which the compositor dropped out. ‘Him’ in 1. 59 can be 
nothing more than a misprint, and ’em is the word which stands nearest to 
‘him’ in form and makes all plain. Although the word ‘overture’ in the sense 
of prelude is not so used by Shakespeare, why should it not have been known in 
a sense which it now hasP—W. A. Wricut: [The retention of ‘overture’ by 
Warburton and others in the sense of prelude] is open to the objection that no 
example of the word in this sense has been found in Shakespeare’s time, and that 
Shakespeare uses it in an entirely different meaning. In King Lear, III, vii, 80, 
it has the sense of disclosure or exposure, as in Wint. Tale, Il, i, 172. In All’s 
Well, IV, iii, 46, V, ili, 99, and in Twelfth Night, I, v, 225, it signifies proposal, 
offer. The last-mentioned passage is quoted by Malone in defence of the reading 
‘overture’ here, but he evidently misunderstood it. When, therefore, he states 
that he found the word in the sense of prelude or preparation in Sir John Davies 
and Philemon Holland, without quoting any instance from either writer, we may 
be allowed to question his accuracy. On the other hand, coverture is a distinctly 
Shakespearian word. See Much Ado, III, i, 30: ‘Who even now Is couched in 
the woodbine coverture.’-—RoLre: Of the various emendations and explanations 
of this passage, we adopt Knight’s as, on the whole, the most satisfactory—or the 
least unsatisfactory. [In answer to the last part of the foregoing note by Wright 
Rolfe says: ‘The sound of the trumpet as the signal for beginning the battle is 
virtually an offer of battle. (As in the passage from Twelfth Night, I, v, 225: ‘I 
bring no overture of war,’ quoted by Malone.) Of course, it is not at all neces- 
sary to suppose that ‘overture’ is used in any technical sense; and to prevent 
misunderstanding it would be better to avoid the use of prelude in paraphrasing 
the passage, and to give it as White does: ‘Let drums and trumpets be used to 
usher in war,’ etc. That is really all that it means, and the expression seems to 
us thoroughly Shakespearian.’ Rolfe’s conclusion as to the meaning of the lines 
is, however, dependent on Knight’s reading them, whereas the Folio text is ‘him’ 
and can refer to the word ‘Steel’ alone—Ep.]J—Brrcuinc (Henry Irving Sh.): 
The passage by its regular balance has the form of sense, but what the sense may 
be it is difficult to determine. By laying stress upon ‘all’ in i. 57 the first clause 


ACT I, SC. ix.] CORIOLA NUS 153 


a ee ee ee ee ees 
[54-59. May these same Instruments . . . for th’ Warres] 


gains a certain meaning: ‘Tf flattery has reached the field of battle, we must expect 
courts and cities to be entirely given over to it.’ But the second clause eludes 
interpretation. ‘Overture’ in Shakespeare means either disclosure or proposal, 
and neither of these significations is appropriate to the parasite. The best emen- 
dation of the passage is Tyrwhitt’s conjecture, covertwre, altering ‘him’ to this, 
or, as Steevens suggested, leaving ‘him’ unaltered in the sense of it. His for the 
neuter possessive was common, as zfs was only coming into use; Aim for it is an- 
other matter. [Beeching follows Dyce’s arrangement of the text—Ep.]— 
PERRING (p. 296) quotes the five passages, besides the present one, wherein ‘over- 
ture’ appears, remarking that in all but one, King Lear, III, vii, 89, ‘the word 
means an offering of terms—whether hostile or amicable depends upon the con- 
text.’ It is, therefore, reasonable to suppose that that is its meaning here. Perring 
thus personifies ‘Overture’ with the ambassador who bears terms either of war or 
peace; when such a body, as Coriolanus describes—a man of silk and not of steel— 
was put forward the warlike sense was out of the question. ‘There is no more 
reason,’ concludes Perring, ‘why a man should not be said to be made an overture 
than a man is said to be made a sword, only the former is applied to the coward, 
the latter (as we have just seen) to Coriolanus. It is far too great a liberty to 
take with the text to change “‘overture” to coverture.—HERWEGH (Coriolanus 
ap. ULRICI, p. 161): I have translated this passage according to the punctua- 
tion commonly accepted, namely, exclamation marks or a colon after ‘never sound 
more,’ and a comma after ‘flatterers,’ but I am not unmindful that the connection 
between ‘when drums’ and ‘let courts’ remains somewhat obscure. The meaning 
seems to me perchance this: When drums and trumpets turn into flatterers in 
the field, why should we reprehend courts and cities if they become made of 
nothing but false flattery. And then comes a parallel sentence with a second ‘if’ 
and a second ‘thus.’ My poetic sense does not permit me to disturb the versi- 
fication here. Others have so done and have left the first ‘let’ in disagreement 
with the first ‘when.’ By the unconnected position of ‘let courts’ we certainly 
gain in clarity what we lose in harmony. The incomplete verse (1. 57) does not 
justify us in regarding it as a corruption of the text, whereon the English editors 
lay such rash hands, whenever a verse of two, three, or four feet appears instead 
of a regular verse of five feet. On the contrary, I reckon these incomplete verses 
among the beauties of the Shakespearian versification, comparable to the pauses 
in music, and have taken pains in my translation as few times as possible to lengthen 
them out to their five feet. They are frequently used by Shakespeare with a 
very fine calculation, and his example should generally be followed.—BEECHING 
(Falcon Sh.): The first clause of this difficult speech gains a certain sense by laying 
stress on ‘all.’ ‘If flattery has reached the field of battle, we must expect courts 
and cities to be entirely given over to it. —E. K. Caampers (Warwick Sh.): This is 
the most difficult passage in the play. Warburton proposed to read ‘let camps as 
cities,’ on the ground that cities being already corrupt, do not need the example 
of camps to become so. Shakespeare’s point, however, is: ‘If camps become 
flatterers, then let us not be surprised that courts and cities are altogether given 
up to flattery.’ The real crux liesin 1. 59. ‘Overture’ can only mean here a pro- 
posal or offer of war, as in Twelfth Night, I, v, 225; and how then can either ‘steel’ 
or ‘a parasite’ or ‘silk’ be an ‘overture’? It seems to me impossible to maintain 
‘overture’; I have, therefore, adopted Tyrwhitt’s conjecture, coverture, referring 


154 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. ix. 


[s4-59. May these same Instruments . . . for th’Warres] 
it to ‘steel.’ I have also slightly rearranged the lines so as to bring ‘no more I 
say’ into the first instead of the second period of the speech. This avoids two 
unmotived short lines in 57 and 64. It also makes Coriolanus’s wish about the 
steel parallel to his wish about the instruments, ‘Let these degenerate instruments 
and.this degenerate steel be used for war no more.’—CHOLMELEY: If the soldier’s 
instruments can flatter, courts and cities may well be made of flattery; and if 
armor is to imitate silk, we may as well take silk for armor—i. ¢., the distinc- 
tion between soldier and courtier is at an end.— Verity (Student’s Sh.): Whether 
‘him,’ l. 59, be referred to ‘steel’ or ‘parasite’ or ‘silk,’ I do not see that ‘overture’ 
can be so interpreted as to suit at once this and any of the other passages in which 
it occurs. Shakespeare uses it in two senses. Disclosure is not a possible sense 
here, nor is the other, viz., offer, proposal. [Verity here quotes the five other pas- 
sages outside of Coriolanus in which the word ‘overture’ occurs in Shakespeare.] 
Hence to interpret it here equivalent to prelude (a musical metaphor), or prepara- 
tion for, or sign of is to give it a sense unknown elsewhere in Shakespeare. I see 
no escape, therefore, from the emendation coverture; not that it is per se an ideal 
word for the context, since it means cover, shelter rather than covering in Much 
Ado, III, i, 30, and 3 Henry VI: IV, ii, 13 (the two passages in which it is used). 
It could, however, be used in the sense cover, covering, e. g., of clothes. Thus the 
coverings of leaves made by Adam and Eve are called ‘vain covertures’ in Para- 
dise Lost, x, 337-—Mliss C. PorTER (First Folio Sh.): It seems to us that Staunton is 
justified by the context in referring ‘overture’ to the ‘parasite’ instead of to 
‘silk,’ supposing also that ‘him’ is used as frequently in early writings instead of 
the neuter 77. But we do not feel that the right sense of ‘overture’ has been found. 
We suspect the meaning is very simple, ‘overture’ being used merely in its ety- 
mological sense of opening akin to that in All’s Well, V, iii, 16, ‘she had made the 
overture.’ The complexity and hence the difficulty consists in the figurative idea 
attaching to the use of the word here in this simple sense. Marcius was thinking 
not of anything in the least abstract, but of an embodied opening, or overture 
for war, such an opening as he himself had just been in broaching the way of 
battle into Corioli; and again in constituting himself an opening or overture for 
the war against the foe in the field when he had desired, as Shakespeare puts it, 
to be made into a sword opening the way into the Volscian forces. As Plutarch 
says: ‘he made a lane through them and opened a passage into the battell of the 
enemies.” Now he is being praised for all this, and while really knowing more 
than anyone how essential the service was, he deprecates such praise of it as would 
tend to make any less hardihood in men than such deeds require. That is why he 
is so fierce about it. He loves valor and would have it a matter of course, not 
exceptional, to be made a fuss over. He is sensitively apprehensive of any soften- 
ing by praise of the mettle war needs. Therefore he cuts the clamor short. May 
these war-trumpets, which you profane by sounding in praise of what is merely 
as it ought to be, sound not a tone more. When war-trumpets and battle-drums 
flatter on the battlefield (instead of being used for their legitimate purpose to 
incite to deeds there) let there be nothing in Courts and Cities but ‘false-fac’d 
soothing.’ When Steele grows soft as the silk of the parasite, i. e., the dependent 
upon other men, who does not stand alone and take the initiative, then let him be 
the one, and open out a path for warfare to follow in, i. e., ‘an Overture for the 
Warres.’ He ends thus in proud, grim irony of the inadequacy for such an office, 


ACT I, SC. ix.] CORIOLA NUS 155 


[54-59. May these same Instruments . . . for th’Warres] 
of any who does not stand alone, sufficient in himself and in his deed, which is done 
for the deed’s sake, and beyond praise-—SHERMAN (Tudor Sh.): Coriolanus with 
characteristic dislike of popular applause wishes martial instruments confined 
strictly to martial uses. If drums and trumpets, of which we expect stern sin- 
cerity, are prostituted to flattery, then let courts and cities, of which we ordinarily 
expect less candor, give themselves over wholly to hypocrisy. When the adulation 
of the city parasite is imitated upon the field of battle, then soldiers have ceased to 
be themselves, and may as well wear his silk as their steel. [In thus interpreting 
the last clause Sherman, it will be observed, adopts Tyrwhitt’s emendation.— 
Ep.]—DetcuTon: May these instruments, which you profane by using them for 
the purpose of proclaiming my triumphs (not for the purpose for which they were 
intended, that of giving the signal for the onset in battle), never be allowed to 
sound again! When drums and trumpets shall be employed in war for the pur- 
pose of flattery, we may well expect that courts and cities should wear one face 
of hypocritical cajolery (be made up of hypocrisy and nothing else)! When steel 
grows soft as the silken garments of the fawning hangers-on of rich men, let it 
(him, the silk) be used as a protection in battle! . . . Even if ‘overture’ were used 
in the modern sense [a prelude], it would have but little force here. Marcius’s 
meaning clearly is, let things be turned to a use they never as yet had; whereas 
for drums and trumpets to be used as a prelude to a fight would be for them to 
be used as they ordinarily were. [There seems to be some confusion here; it is 
the softened ‘steel,’ not the ‘instruments,’ which is to be made an ‘overture.’ 
—Ep.] Against a@ coverture there are two objections. In the first place, it 
is very unlikely that a@ coverture should be altered to ‘an Overture’ (with a 
capital O); and secondly, though Shakespeare twice uses coverture, the word in 
both instances means a cover that conceals, not a cover that protects, the mean- 
ing here required. I have therefore ventured in the place of ‘overture’ to read 
armature, a word in use (though uncommon) in Shakespeare’s time, both literally 
and figuratively, e. g., Bacon, Pathway of Prayer, 1542, ‘Prayer is truly called a 
... heavenly armature’; Guillim, Heraldrie, 1611: ‘For by Armature we understand 
not only those things that appertaine to the Military profession but also those 
defensive sciences of Masonry and Carpentry and Metall work’ (quotations ap. 
Murray, V. E. D.). Ihave also for the sake of the rhythm inserted is after ‘as’ in 
1. 58, [see Text. Notes, ad loc-—Ep.]. To make the contrast really forcible we need 
instead of ‘made’ some such word as cleans’d, purg’d, free’d, stripp’d; and it is 
improbable that Shakespeare would have written ‘Let him be made’ so immediately 
after ‘Let courts be made.’ Webster, however, uses coverture almost as = dress, 
‘Instead of gowns my coverture be earth,’ History of Sir Thomas Wyat, ed. Dyce, 
p. 203.—J. D. (NV. & Q., 30 April, 1881, p. 345): There does not seem to be any 
good reason for the alterations [made by Tyrwhitt and by Knight in this passage]. 
Coriolanus is speaking scornfully, implying that what he assumes is an impos- 
sibility, or something too absurd to be considered by reasonable men. He de- 
claims against any future wars on account of the ingratitude of the Roman people, 
and wishes that the sword may only be drawn as the beginning of a war when it 
has become ‘soft as a parasite’s silk,’ 7. e., never, ‘ad Graecas calendas.’ [It is, 
I think, to be regretted that J. D. had not made himself acquainted with the 
present situation before attempting an elucidation of the text; had he but done so 
he would have seen that Marcius has not yet experienced ingratitude on the part 


156 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. ix. 


[s4-s9. May these same Instruments . . . for th’Warres] 
of the Roman people, but is here reprehending the hyperbolical praise of the 
soldiers—Ep. He thus continues:] ‘It is objected to this explanation (1) that 
Shakespeare uses this in the sense of disclosing, not of beginning or prelude; and 
(2) that there is no instance of the word being used in this latter sense so early 
as the time of Shakespeare. But the word, I need hardly say, means opening, 
and this bears the double sense of beginning, as in the opening of a play, and also 
of making known. Cotgrave has: ‘Ouverture: an overture or opening, beginning 
made, path begun or beaten unto; also manifestation, discovery, uncovering.’ 
In Bullokar’s Dict. (1616) the word appears in this sense, ‘Overture, an opening 
entrance or way made unto; a motion or offer made.’ [See note by Malone, 
ante. This definition does not appear either in the ed. 1616 or 1621.—Ep.] The 
word, then, might be used by Shakespeare in any of these meanings, and this sense 
of opening or prelude is the only one that can give a reasonable explanation of the 
passage. . . . The preceding part of the passage is in the same strain. Drums and 
trumpets do not flatter on the field of battle; they call to stern duty; but when 
they do flatter, then courts and cities may well be made a portion ‘of false-faced 
soothing.’—OrGER (p. 60): ‘Overture’ is so naturally connected with war that 
the error lies much more probably in ‘him,’ which may very likely be a mistake 
for some word indicative of the behaviour of the parasite as distinguished from 
the warrior. ‘Smiles’ are the mark of the courtier, as in Love’s Labour’s, V, ii, 
331: ‘This is the flower that smiles on every one.’ I would accordingly suggest 
with diffidence: ‘Let smiles be made an overture for the wars.’—G. JoIcry 
(N. & Q., 28 Nov., 1891, p. 423): In 1. 57 if ‘Made all’ were changed to made 
well, and the words were understood to mean healed or cured, the sentence would 
very well express the soldier’s idea that courts and cities corrupt men. In the 
second clause the confusion may have arisen through the compositor or transcriber 
mistaking the words wear and coverture for ‘wars’ and ‘overture,’ and then other 
changes may have been made in an attempt to rectify the passage. How would 
it do to read somewhat as follows: ‘When steel grows soft as the parasite’s silk 
Let it be made a coverture for his wear!’ This reading, although it takes great 
liberty with the text, and is open to objection, would give a proper antithesis: 
War having turned flatterer, let courts and cities cast off their false-faced soothing, 
and steel having grown soft as silk, let it be spun into clothing for parasites to 
wear. The word coverture is most like ‘overture’ or the last line might read ‘into 
vesture for his wear.’ ‘The spirit of the speech would tend to cause wear to be read 
‘wars.’—H. Inciesy (NV. & Q., 6 Feb., 1892, p. 103), unaware apparently that he 
was anticipated, proposes to arrange and point these lines identicallyas they appear 
in Dyce, ed. ii.; he, however, retains the Folio reading ‘overture’ where Dyce fol- 
lows Tyrwhitt. Ingleby thus paraphrases: ‘Away with these instruments, which 
you profane! When war-like instruments prove flatterers, then shall our courts 
and cities be all composed of flatterers too! and when our steel becomes as soft as 
the flatterer’s silk, then send him (the flatterer) to deliver our messages of war! 
Let us have no more of these instruments (which are unsuitable to us)!’ In sober 
prose we should have expected ‘When our drums prove flatterers, then will our 
courts,’ &c. But in declamatory verse expressive of indignation the imperative 
is much more effective though less grammatically accurate. It has generally 
been objected that a soldier would always describe courts and cities as “made of 
false-faced soothing.” But surely not a citizen of Rome! “Him” is usually 


ACT I, SC. ix.] CORIOLANUS 157 


[54-59. May these same Instruments . . . for th’Warres] 
changed to them, as if the speaker would wish the very things he is rejecting to be 
again used! Or else it is changed to it, which is not much better.’—R. M. SpENcE 
(NV. & Q., 6 Feb., 1892, p. 104): With no change save in the punctuation, and the 
substitution of them (referring to ‘instruments’) for ‘him’ in 1. 59, I retain the 
reading in the Folio, [Spence places a full stop after ‘flatterers,’ after ‘silk,’ and 
after ‘wars,’ with an exclamation point after ‘I say’] presenting it thus: ‘May I 
never more hear trumpet or drum if you are to profane them thus. Flattery may 
well dominate courts and cities when steel-clad warriors thus act like silken para- 
sites. Keep these instruments for their proper use, to sound the battle charge. 
No more of this fulsome adulation!’ [In NV. & Q. for 3 June, 1899, seven years 
later than the foregoing note, Spence proposes ‘further emendations of the original 
text,’ viz.: them for ‘him,’ which he now refers to ‘silk’ and therefore proposes 
that this be changed to silks. The patient reader who has journeyed thus far 
through this long note will be aware, as Spence was not, that in both these con- 
jectures the proposer had long since been anticipated——Ep.]—A. E. Tuisrttron 
(NV. & Q., 28 Jan., 1899, p. 63): If ‘him’ is regarded as the dative instead of the 
objective case the difficulty in this much-discussed line will, I think, disappear. 
What would be then expressed would be: ‘Let an overture for the wars be made 
to him,’ meaning, ‘Let a proposal be made to the parasite with a view to engaging 
his services for the wars. The bribes and flatteries you offer will be congenial to 
him, and when steel has become soft as the silk he wears, he will make your best 
soldier.’ The words are spoken with infinite scorn, and no doubt contain, in 
addition, a suggestion that the Romans would like to have a general who would 
flatter them to their hearts’ content, as a parasite flatters his patron. The word 
‘overture’ is peculiarly appropriate in connexion with bribes and flattery. Corio- 
lanus has just refused what he regards as a bribe to pay his sword, and, in the 
lines which immediately precede, has pictured a world whose ruling principle was 
flattery. ‘Overture’ would thus appear to be far more in keeping with the spirit 
of the context than coverture, which has generally supplanted it, while armature 
owes its introduction merely to the manifest deficiency of coverture. Besides, 
when steel has become soft as silk what need of either coverture or armature for 
the wars?p—G. S. Gorpon: ‘Him’ probably refers to ‘steel’ by a freedom common 
in Elizabethan writers. Covertwre, which is a modern correction, means covering 
or dress, so that Coriolanus may be supposed to be ironical: ‘When steel grows 
as soft as the parasite’s silk, then let it be made a covering for the wars (and a 
fine covering it will make!)—Casr (Arden Sh.): I retain the Folio reading, and 
explain it by regarding ‘him’ as referring to ‘the parasite’ and asa dative. Staun- 
ton alone, if I am not mistaken, has done so [see note by Thiselton, ante—En.], 
but he rashly thought that ‘overture’ was a misprint for ovation, or had that sense. 
. .. Had 1. 59 run ‘Let him be made an offer,’ etc., the sense would have been 
unmistakable; and as it stands, it seems to me (whether the line be correct or a 
misprint, and whatever its artistic demerits as an expression of thought) to admit 
readily of the following meaning: Let him (the parasite) be made a proposal for 
the wars. The thought of the passage in this case is: When your drums and 
trumpets flatter, when the soldier’s garb is accommodated to the soft limbs of the 
parasite, why not complete the round and get the man to match? . . . If coverture 
is read instead of ‘overture,’ the only proposal commanding attention is that which 
refers it to silk or steel soft as silk, without further alteration. Coverture has not 


158 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT I, SC. ix. 


Neuer found more: when Drums and Trumpets fhall 55 
I’th’field proue flatterers, let Courts and Cities be 


Made all of falfe-fac’d foothing : 


When Steele growes foft,as the Parafites Silke, 

Let him be made an Ouerture for th’ Warres : 

No more I fay, for that I haue not wafh’d 60 
My Nofe that bled, or foyl’d fome debile Wretch, 


55-57. ...more:...flatterers,...foothing:] 
Ff, Rowe. ...more:...flatterers, soothing. 
Pope. ...more! ... flatterers, ... soothing. 
Han. Del. ...morel...flatterers,...sooth- 
ing: Sing. Ktly, Whitelaw. ...more, 
...flatterers!...soothing, Knt, Wh. i, 
Huds. i, Rife, Page. ...more,...flatter- 
ers:...soothing, Coll.  ...morel...flatter- 
ers,...soothing! Theob. et cet. 

55, 50. when...fhall...flatierers,| Shall 
..when...flatterers? Huds. ii. (Sing. 
conj.). 

56-63. Ith field...hyperbolicall,| Lines 
end:  Cities...growes...made...I fday,... 
bled,...note,...forth...hyperbolicall, Warb. 
Theob. Han. Johns. 

56, 57. be...foothing] As one line Pope 
et seq. 

56. flatierers, let...) flatterers! Let... 
Knut, Huds. 

Courts and] courts, as Warb. 
Theob. Han. Johns. Var. ’73. 

57-63. Made...hyperbolicall] Lines 
end: growes...made...I fay...bled...note... 
forth...hyperbolicall Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, 


Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Hal. Ktly, 
Dyce ii. Lines end: /oft...made...I fay 
...bled...note...forth...hyperbolicall Mal. 

57. Made all of] Made of all F3F,. 
made of Warb. Theob. Han. Johns. 
Var. 73. 

57-58. As two lines, ending /oft... 
Silke Knt, Wh. i. 

58, 59. Om. Words. 

58. as] as is Theob. conj. (Nichols. ii, 
480). 

Silke] silks Coll. iii. (MS.). 

59. him] Hymns Warb. Theob. Han. 
Johns. Cap. this Tyrwhitt. them 
Knt, Coll. i, Wh. i, Huds. Rife. 
Coll. ii. (MS.). pipes Ktly. this Lett- 
som (ap. Dyce ii.). 

an Ouerture] a coverture Var. ’78, 
85 (Tyrwhitt), Ran. Dyce, Coll. ii. 
(MS.), Hal. Cam.+, Craig, Neils. 
Creature Joicey (N. & Q., 3 Dec., 1892). 
Warres:] wars!— Theob.+, Cap. 
Varr. Mal. Ran. 
61. foyl’d] spoil’d Wray ap. Cam. 


been found = armor, but it is used for clothes and comes pretty near the sense 


of protective covering in Nashe, Summer’s Last Will (Haz.-Dods., viii, 77), cited 
by an anonymous MS. annotator of Deighton’s ed. of Coriolanus: ‘Will’d that his 
body spoiled of coverture Should be cast furth into the open fields.’ The objec- 
tion is that it necessitates imputing to Shakespeare a lax use of ‘him’ for 7 (ac- 
cusative), which he has not elsewhere employed, in a passage where it especially 
leads to ambiguity. In the only illustration actually offered from other writers 
there can be no doubt of the meaning, and the use otherwise fits in more naturally 
with the thought. See (as quoted by Wright, ante) Bacon, Advancement of 
Learning, ii, 22, § 11. Obviously coverture could be read with dative him referring 
to the parasite, but covertwre has not the claims of a Folio reading —TuckER 
Brooke (Yale Sh.) retains the Folio reading, ‘overture,’ since he considers that 
Tyrwhitt’s alteration does not much assist the interpretation of 1. 59. His own 
interpretation is substantially the same as Staunton’s, that ‘him’ is in the dative, 
not the objective case, and thus refers to the parasite. ‘When soldiers adopt the 
effeminate ways of courtiers let us recruit our armies among the latter class.’ 

61. debile] W. A. Wricut: That is, weak; Latin, debilis. It occurs again only 


ACT I, SC. ix.] * CORIOLANUS 159 


Which without note, here’s many elfe haue done, 62 

You fhoot me forth in acclamations hyperbolicall, 

As if I lou’d my little fhould be dieted 

In prayfes, fawe’ft with Lyes. 65 
Com. ‘Too modeft are you : 

More cruell to your good report,then gratefull 

To vs,that giue you truly : by your patience, 

If’gainft your felfe you be incens’d, wee’le put you 

(Like one that meanes his proper harme) in Manacles, 70 

Then reafon fafely with you : Therefore be it knowne, 

As to vs, to all the World, That Caius Martius 

Weares this Warres Garland : in token of the which, 

My Noble Steed, knowne to the Campe,I giue him, 74. 


63. You...hyperbolicall] As two lines, Theob. praises sauced Cam.+. praises 
ending forth...hyperbolical Knt, Coll. sauc’d Han. et cet. 


Del. Dyce, Cam.+, Wh. Huds. Craig, 68. giue you] give’t you Ran. (Heath). 
Neils. Rlfe. 69. ’gainfi] againft Ff, Rowe. 
Shoot] fhout F,, Rowe et seq. 71. be it] bet Dyce ii, Huds. ii, 
65. prayfes, fawc’fi] F.F;. praifes, Words. 
fawe'd Fy. praises, sauc’d Rowe, Pope, 74. him] to him Rowe. 


in All’s Well, II, iii, 39, ‘In a most weak—and debile minister.’ Cotgrave gives: 
‘Debile: com. Debile, weake, feeble, faint, infirme.’ 

63. shoot] W. A. Wricut: See I, i, 228 and V, v, 6, where ‘Vnshoot’ is found 
for Unshout. This variation of spelling perhaps represents the current pronuncia- 
tion, and if so it illustrates a passage in Henry V: III, vi, 81, ‘a horrid suit of 
the camp,’ where for ‘suit’ the Folios have ‘sute,’ and the Quartos of the imperfect 
play ‘shout.’ There is evidence that in Shakespeare’s time suit was pronounced 
shoot, and the present passage shows that ‘shoot’ might have been represented by 
shout, so that the Quartos do not really point to a different reading. 

64. dieted] Compare ‘Ile watch him Till he be dieted to my request,’ V, i, 
66.—Scumipt (Lewx., s. v.) furnishes other examples of this form of the verb.—Eb. 

66. Com. Too modest, etc.] Brrecuine (Falcon Sh.): Cominius has a difficult 
part to play, and it is noticeable how well he keeps his temper. As general, it is 
his duty to praise Marcius; as a subordinate, it is Marcius’s duty to be ‘grateful’ 
for his general’s praise instead of parading his superiority to it. 

68. giue] BrapLey (lV. E. D., s. v. 25): To represent, describe, portray, report. 
Now rare. [The present line quoted as earliest example. ABsBorr compares 
Ant. & Cleo., I, iv, 40: ‘Men’s reports give him much wronged.’ According to 
Scumipt (Lex.) these are the only examples in Shakespeare wherein the word is 
used in the above sense.—ED.] 

70. Like one . . . in Manacles] For other examples of lines wherein two extra 
syllables are allowed, if unemphatic, before a pause, especially at the end of a 
line, see ABBOTT, § 458. 

74. My Noble Steed . . . I giue him] MacCattum (p. 491): Sometimes in the 
survival [of a passage in North] the fact is transformed to figure, the prose to 
poetry. After Marcius’s miracles of valour at Corioli Cominius gives him, ‘in 


160 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT I, SC. ix. 


With all his trim belonging ; and from this time, 75 

For what he did before Corioles, call him, 

With all th’applaufe and Clamor of the Hoatt, 

«Marcus Caius Coriolanus. Beare th’addition Nobly euer? 
Flourifh. Trumpets found,and Drums. 


Omnes. 


Martius. I will goe wath : 


Marcus Caius Coriolanus. 80 


And when my Face is faire, you fhall perceiue 
Whether I blufh,or no : howbeit,I thanke you, 83 


76. Corioles] Ktly, Schmidt. Corio- 
lus Ff, Rowe. Corioli Pope et cet. 

78. As two lines, ending Beare...euer 
Steev. Dyce, Sta. Cam.+, Wh. Huds. 
ii, Words. Craig, Neils. As two lines, 
ending Coriolanus...ewer Johns. et cet. 

78, 80. Marcus Caius] Martius Caius 


Caius Marcius Theob. et cet. 

80. Omnes.] all. Cap. All. Mal. et 
seq. 

81, 94, 98, 108. Martius] Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Wh. i, Cor. 
Johns. et cet. 

81-83. Mnemonic Warb. 


F,F,. Caius Martius Rowe, Pope, Han. 


testimonie that he had wonne that day the price of prowes above all other, a 
goodly horse with a capparison, and all furniture to him.’ This Shakespeare does 
not omit. [The present lines quoted.] But the same episode furnishes Titus 
Lartius with his imagery as he points to the wounded and victorious hero, ‘O 
general Here is the steed, we the caparison,’ ll. 17, 18. This illustrates the sort 
of sea-change that always takes place in the language of North under the hands 
of the magician, though it may not always be equally perceptible. But it is never 
entirely lacking even where we are at first more struck by the amount that Shake- 
speare has retained without alteration. 

78. Marcus .. . euer] As will be seen by the Text. Notes this long line was 
divided into two, first by Johnson, ending ‘Coriolanus . . . euer’; secondly, by 
Steevens, ending ‘Beare . . . euer.’ WALKER, having evidently the text of the 
Variorum of ’21 only at hand wherein Johnson is followed, remarks, ‘A catalectic 
line is a discord in Shakespeare.’ To remedy this he suggests that the lines end 
as in Steevens’s arrangement, apparently unaware that therein he is anticipated 
by that meticulous prosodist—Ep.—DeEtcuTon, following Theobald’s rearrange- 
ment of the name, says: ‘The first is the prenomen peculiar to the individual; 
the second, the nomen, or nomen gentilicium or name of the clan to which he be- 
longed; the third the agnomen, or name, or title, added on (the “addition” as here), 
given as an honorary distinction. Such agnomina were sometimes given by one 
general to another, sometimes by the army and confirmed by the general-in-chief, 
sometimes by the people assembled in public, and sometimes assumed by the 
person himself. Here the z in “Coriolanus” must be pronounced short.’ 

81. Martius] R. G. Wurre: It has been the general custom to invest Marcius 
immediately with his cognomen, and to prefix this and his following speeches, 
Coriolanus [see Text. Notes]. But in the Folio this, with some propriety, is not 
done until the arrival of the hero in Rome and the proclamation and confirmation 
of his honors. 

82. And when my Face is faire] Lr1icH Hunr (Critical Essays: Appendix, 
p- 5), speaking of certain eccentricities of pronunciation committed by John Philip 


ACT I, SC. ix.] CORIOLA NUS 161 


I meane to ftride your Steed, and at all times 
To vnder-creft your good Addition, 85 
To th’faireneffe of my power. 
Com. So,to our Tent : 
Where ere we doe repofe vs, we will write 
To Rome of our fucceffe : you Titus Lartius 
Mutt to Corioles backe, fend vs to Rome go 
The beft, with whom we may articulate, 


84. times] time Theob. Warb. Johns. Where e’er Rowe. Where, ere Pope et 


86. To th’] To the Cap. et seq. seq. 
faireneffe] fairest Anon. ap. Cam. go, 98. Corioles] Ktly, Schmidt. 
farness Badham. Coriolus Ff, Rowe (Corolius Rowei.). 


88. Where ere] Where, ere Fy. Corioli Pope et cet. 


Kemble, says that this passage was ‘delivered with almost as heroic a resolution as 
the last; Coriolanus means to be familiar, but Mr Kemble is—what shall we say?— 
is still Mr Kemble. The word “fair” might positively have been measured by a 
stop-watch; instead of being a short monosyllable, it became a word of tremendous 
elongation. We can describe the pronunciation by nothing else than by such a 
sound as fay-er-7-r.’ 

85, 86. To vnder-crest . . . of my power] WARBURTON: A phrase from heral- 
dry, signifying that he would endeavor to support his good opinion of him.— 
HEATH (p. 413): I understand the meaning to be, to illustrate this honourable 
distinction you have conferred on me by fresh deservings to the extent of my power. 
To ‘undercrest,’ I should guess, signifies properly to wear beneath the crest as a 
part of a coat of arms. The name or title now given seems to be considered as 
the crest; the promised future achievements as the future additions to that coat.— 
JOHNSON, justly dissenting to Warburton’s interpretation of ‘to the fairness’ as 
meaning to the utmost, remarks: ‘I know not how “fairness” can mean wtmost. 
When two engage on equal terms we say it is fair; “fairness” may, therefore, be 
equality; in proportion equal to my power.’—M. Mason: ‘To the fairness of my 
power’ is, as fairly as I can.—Scumopt (Lew., s. v. Fairness, 2.): Spotlessness, un- 
stained honour. [The present line quoted.] Alluding to 1. 82.—Lxo (Coriolanus, 
p. 121): If ‘undercrest’ is the word of the poet, this must be the sense: In his 
modesty Marcius is not of opinion to have already merited ‘the good addition,’ 
the name of honour, Coriolanus; he promises to merit it by other deeds; for him 
it is nothing more but a hollow name until he has ‘undercrested’ it, adorned it 
by new heroical actions, and to the ‘fairness of his power.’—VeErRity (Student's 
Sh.): That is, And always to support, to the best of my ability, the title you have 
graciously conferred on me. ‘To undercrest’; not simply ‘to wear as on the crest,’ 
but ‘to support as if it were my crest,’ 7. e., to act up to it and so justify its be- 
stowal on me, just as a man feels that he must act up to some great family motto. 
The metaphor from heraldry may be preserved by using the word ‘support,’ 
which is a technical heraldic term. The whole utterance is a piece of ‘irony.’ 
It is significant of the man that he does not refuse this reward like the material 
reward offered him. 

gi. The best] JoHnson: That is, the chief men of Corioli. 

Te 


162 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. ix. 
For their owne good,and ours. 92 
Lartius. I fhall,my Lord. 
Martius. The Gods begin to mocke me : 
I that now refus’d moft Princely gifts, 95 
Am bound to begge of my Lord Generall. 
Com. Tak’t,’tis yours : what is’t? 
Martius. 1 fometime lay here in Corioles, 
At a poore mans houfe: he vs’d me kindly, 99 
94-96. The Gods...Generall| Lines 97. Tak’t] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 


end: now...begge...Generall Han. Cap. 
Var. ’78, ’85 et seq. 

95. now] but now Rowe, Pope,+, 
Cap. 


Han. Warb. Dyce, Cam.+. Take it 
Johns. et cet. 
g9. At] And at Han. 
poore] most poor Cap. poor rich 


Words. 
kindly] very kindly Ktly. 


97-99. Tak’t...kindly] As three lines, 
ending lay...houfe...kindly (reading 
Take it, 1. 97) Walker (Crit., iii, 209). 


gl. articulate] Murray (NV. E. D.,s. v. vb.I, 10.): To come to terms; to capitu- 
late. [The present line quoted. Compare also z Henry IV: V, i, 72, ‘Indeed, 
these things you have articulated.’] 

93. I shall, my Lord] As regards this use of ‘shall’ in answer to an order 
AssottT (§ 315) says: ‘“I shall” has a trace of its old meaning, “I ought”; or 
perhaps there is a mixture of “I am bound to” and “I am sure to.” Hence it is 
often used in the replies of inferiors to superiors. ‘‘King. Desire them all to my 
pavilion. Glost. We shall, my lord,” Henry V: IV, i, 27.’ 

97. Tak’t . .. is’t] BAYFIELD (p. 192) quotes this line with fifteen others from 
this play which are but ‘sixteen out of forty-eight specimens of the way in which 
the Folio defaces Shakespeare’s work by its passion for abbreviating zt.’ He 
contrasts nine other lines ‘which have accidently escaped this injury.’ The 
following three examples are, I think, sufficient: ‘My hate to Martius. Where 
I finde him, were it At home,’ etc., I, x, 27; ‘Than the rebuke you give it. He loves 
your people,’ II, ii, 66; ‘Than one of his ears to hear it. Proceed Cominius,’ II, 
ii, 89. 

98. I sometime lay] Gorpon: It is impossible not to quote here Sir Henry 
Wooton’s definition of an ambassador: ‘an honest man sent to lie abroad for the 
good of his country.’ 

99. At... kindly] To remedy the slight metrical deficiency here ABBOTT 
(§ 484) reads ‘kindly’ as a trisyllable, kind-e-ly; BROWNE (Versification, p. 16) also 
makes it a trisyllable, but takes the m as syllabic, ki-endly. On taking such a 
liberty with this word WorpswortH (Historical Plays, i, 119) remarks: ‘But 
even supposing this to be allowed, there will remain the further difficulty that in 
the narrative of Plutarch, from which the incident is taken, the host of Corio- 
Janus is described not as a “poor” but a “rich” man. I have therefore ventured 
to interpolate rich, and to read “a poor-richman’s,” 7. ¢., one who had been rich, 
but had now become “poor” and wretched as a prisoner. Or, if preferred, the 
reading might be, “at a rich man’s house now poor.” Coriolanus calls him, 
below, “my poor host.” Shakespeare has the words “poor-rich” combined (not 
hyphened in old ed.), with the meaning seemingly rich, but indeed poor, in Lucrece, 


ACT I, SC. ix.] CORIOLANUS 163 


He cry’d to me: | faw him Prifoner : 100 
But then Auffidius was within my view, 
And Wrath o’re-whelm’d my pittie : I requeft you 
To giue my poore Hoft freedome. 
Com. Oh well begeg’d : 
Were he the Butcher of my Sonne, he fhould 105 
Be free, as is the Winde : deliuer him, Titus. 
Lartius. Martius,his Name. 
Martius. By Iupiter forgot: 
I am wearie, yea,my memorie is tyr’d: 
Haue we no Wine here ? 110 
Com. Goe we to our Tent : 
The bloud vpon your Vifage dryes,’tis time 


It fhould be lookt too : come. Exeunt. 113 
Iol. within] in Rowe i. 109. memorie] Mem’ry Rowe i. 
tog. I am] I’m Han. Huds. ii, 113. too] F;F,. to F, et cet. 
Words. 


140; and again, [bid., 97, “poorly rich.” It is strange that no editor, so far as 
I have seen, has noticed the discrepancy between Shakespeare and his authority, 
Plutarch, in the description of the Coriolan host.’—MacCatium (p. 581): The 
postponement of pity to wrath is a new characteristic detail which shows how these 
gentler impulses in Coriolanus must yield to his ruling passions. On the other 
hand, his host is transformed from a rich to a poor man, and thus his humanity 
acquires a wider range, and we see how it can extend beyond his own class if only 
there is a personal claim on it. Above all, there is the new illuminating touch of 
the lapse of memory. Sometimes this has been taken as betraying the indiffer- 
ence of the aristocrat for an inferior whose name he does not think it worth while 
toremember. Surely not. Coriolanus is experiencing the collapse that follows his 
superhuman exertions, the exhaustion of body and mind when one cannot think 
of the most familiar words, but he rallies his strength for a last effort, and is just 
able to intercede for his humble guest-friend ere he succumbs.—PRoLss (p. 102): 
Plutarch, by making the host of Coriolanus a rich man, directly bases the leader’s 
request upon the contrast between the former wealth and the present pitiable 
condition of his host. Shakespeare by making Marcius forget the name of his 
host seeks not only to exalt the purity of the pity and complete lack of self- 
seeking in the gratitude of his hero but also that he knows how to value good 
qualities even in a poor man.—VeERITy (Student’s Sh.): Shakespeare’s variation 
of the man’s status [as given by Plutarch] tells in two ways: by heightening our 
admiration of the hero who, at such a moment, remembers his humble befriender, 
and by emphasizing the aristocratic, exclusive temper to which the name of a 
mere man of the people had been of no account.—Casr (Arden Sh.): Some critics 
believe that Shakespeare’s purpose in inventing the circumstance of Coriolanus’s 
forgetfulness is to represent him as being so selfish that he does not care to take the 
trouble to remember the name of his poor host and makes his request ‘entirely 
out of a sense of what his own magnanimity requires of him’ (Deighton, [MS.}}. 


164 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


fact 1, sc. x. 


[Scene X.] 


A flourifh. Cornets. Enter Tullus Auffidius I 
bloudie,with two or three Souldiors. 


The Towne is ta’ne. 


Auf. 


Sould. ’Twill be deliuer’d backe on good Condition. 


Auffid. Condition ? 


ScENE x. Cap. et seq. SCENE XI. 
Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. SCENE XI, 
Var 773: 

The Camp of the Volsci. Pope,+. 
The Volcian Camp. Cap. The Camp 


) 
Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt. The Camp 
of the Volsces. Coll. et seq. 
4. Sould.;\ 19. Sol.s 33.) 3oausouly 
1. S. Cap. First Sol. Dyce, Cam.-+-, 
Coll. iii, Craig. 1. Sol. Mal. et cet. 


of the Volces. Var. ’78, ’85. Mal. Ran. 


There can, I think, be no doubt that this, or the like, is too ingenious a gloss on one 
of Shakespeare’s natural touches, the amnesia of an exhausted man, which the 
wine he asks for probably disperses. His nature can answer the bravery of the 
volunteers in scene vi. with comradeship and respect, and was equally capable of 
forgetting its pride in answer to kindness accepted from a poor man.—BEECHING 
(Falcon Sh.): Notice how Shakespeare has used this episode to emphasize the 
generosity of Marcius and its futility because self had stood in the way. 

Scene X.] Verity (Student’s Sh.): The dominant idea of the scene is ‘dramatic 
irony.’ And there is, I think, a peculiar verbal deliberateness in the ‘irony.’ 
What Aufidius says in ll. 27-30 is the precise antithesis of what he afterwards does 
(IV, v.), though in the end (V, vi.) he swings back to his first purpose. We have 
seen (I, iv, 57, I, vi, 89) the ‘ironical’ method applied similarly to Aufidius’s great 
rival, hence a parallelism of design and development in the story. 

3-5. The... Condition?] Waker (C7it., iii, 210): Perhaps we should arrange: 


‘Aufid. The town is ta’en. 

rt Sold. ’Twill be deliver’d back 
On good condition. 

Aufid. Condition!’ 


We may suppose Aufidius to syllable the hated word. 

3. The Towne is ta’ne] BAYFIELD (191): Is it within the remotest bounds of 
possibility that Shakespeare wrote ‘The town is tane/’? Modern editors may 
seek to beguile us by printing ‘ta’en,’ but that does not mend the matter; the 
sound of the syllables is unchanged. What should we think of a modern poet who 
wrote: ‘The Seine is seen,’ or ‘The lane is lone,’ or ‘The main doth moan,’ or 
‘The sullen tarn awaked her teen’? Yet we are quite ready to assign to Shake- 
speare the most preposterous of the Folio’s vagaries. It is hardly too much to 
say that, if the various phenomena we are considering were genuine, he must, 
as he wrote his plays, have been subject from moment to moment to recurrent 
fits of lunacy. 

4-9. ’Twill... mercy] Case (Arden Sh.): Shakespeare plays upon ‘condition.’ 
The first (1. 4), favowrable terms, when repeated by Aufidius, suggests state to him 
and accounts for his remark, ll. 5, 6; his second repetition suggests quality. The 


ACT I, sc. x.] CORIOLANUS c 165 


I would I were a Roman, for I cannot, 6 
Being a Volce, be that Iam. Condition ? 

What good Condition can a Treatie finde 

I’th’part that is at mercy? fiue times, Martius, 


I haue fought with thee ; fo often haft thou beat me : 10 

And would’ft doe fo, I thinke, fhould we encounter 

As often as we eatee By th’Elements, 12 
7. Volce] F2, Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. 9. I’th’| TP’ the Cap. et seq. 

Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt. Volcie 12. As] And F.F;. 

F;.  Volscie F,, Rowe. Volscian th’| Huds. Words. the Ff et cet. 


Pope,+. Volsce Var. ’73 et cet. 


whole passage runs: It will be restored on good condition (favourable terms). 
Auf. Condition! A nice condition we are in! I would... for I cannot... be 
an unyielding enemy, a free spirit. Condition indeed! What good quality will 
treaty-granters discover that is at their mercy? For this last sense of ‘condition’ 
(manners, quality, disposition) see II, iii, 99, post. It is common. 

7. Volce] CaPety (vol. I, pt i, p. 85): Volce and Volces or Volcies—the names 
us’d by Shakespeare, and which he had from his Plutarch—are vanish’d out 
of all modern copies except the first [see Text. Notes]; and so is Coriolus, a word 
as constantly us’d by him instead of Corioli; the present editor thought it 
right to dismiss the old readings as they have done, except in this place, where the 
measure is hurt by their Volcian. The speaker’s sense is expressed with great 
force, being a puffy exalting of his own valour, and a debasing of that of his coun- 
trymen. He speaks again of this valour at |. 20 in the same confident terms that 
we have here, adding that his rage against Marcius should make it upon some 
future occasion ‘fly out of itself’; that is, exceed the bounds of true valour, and 
degenerate into fury and perfidy; preparing us by this declaration for the actual 
future commission of what is threatened in a part of this speech.—[Johnson, 
whose edition appeared almost contemporaneously with Capell’s Notes, likewise 
calls attention to the change Volcian as destructive to metrical regularity, but has 
not the hardihood of Capell to depart from the example of his predecessors Pope 
and Theobald.—Ep.] 

9. I’th’part . . . at mercy] W. A. Wricut: Compare Tro. & Cress., IV, iv, 
116: ‘If e’er thou stand at mercy of my sword.’ In the old language of the law 
courts a person was said to be in misericordia, or a merci, when he had rendered 
himself liable to a penalty which was imposed at the mercy of the court. The 
phrase ‘in mercy’ in the same sense occurs in Lear, I, iv, 350: ‘He may enguard his 
dotage with their powers And hold our lives in mercy.’ In Cowel’s Law Dictionary 
‘Misericordia’ is defined as ‘an Arbitrary Amerciement imposed on any for an 
Offence; for where the Plaintiff or Defendant in any Action is amerced, the Entry 
is Ideo in Misericordia.’ 

9. fiue times] THEOBALD (Letter to Warburton, Feb. 12, 1729, Nichols, ii, 480): 
Well; Marcius after this goes home; stands up for the Consulship; is banished; 
never meets any more with Aufidius till he seeks him in his own palace; and then 
Aufidius says: ‘Thou hast beat me out TWELVE several times,’ &c. Either Aufidius, 
or our poet, has a very treacherous memory, and I am afraid History will hardly 
help to reconcile the contradiction. 


166 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACTEEISG-ax: 


If ere againe I meet him beard to beard, 13 
He’s mine, or I am his : Mine Emulation 
Hath not that Honor in’t it had : For where 15 


1] thought to crufh him in an equall Force, 

True Sword to Sword : Ile potche at him fome way, 

Or Wrath, or Craft may get him. 18 
17. True...Sword:] (True...Sword) 17. potche) poach Heath (Rev.), Wh. 


Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Sta. i, Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 
Hal. 


13. beard to beard] STEEVENS: So in Macbeth, ‘We might have met them dare- 
ful, beard to beard,’ [V, v, 6]. 

14-18. Mine Emulation . . . may get him] MAtone (Supplemental Observa- 
tions, i, 219): I am not so honourable an adversary as I was; for whereas I thought 
to have subdued him in equal combat, our swords being fairly opposed to each 
other; but now I am determined to destroy him in whatever way my resentment or 
cunning may devise. ‘Where’ is used here, as in many other places, for whereas. 
[For examples of ‘where’ in this sense, see ABBOTT, § 134.|—COLERIDGE, in his 
Notes on this play, commenting on this and the next speech of Aufidius, says: 
‘I have such deep faith in Shakespeare’s heart-lore that I take for granted that 
this is in nature, and not as a mere anomaly; although I cannot in myself discover 
any germ of possible feeling which could wax and unfold itself into such senti- 
ment as this. However, I perceive that in this speech is meant to be contained 
a prevention of shock at the after-change in Aufidius’s character. —VERPLANCK: 
Such a criticism from Coleridge is worthy the reader’s consideration, but I cannot 
myself perceive its justice. The varying feelings of Aufidius are such as may 
be often observed to arise in the contentions of able and ambitious men for honour 
or power, and are just such as would, under these circumstances, be natural in 
a mind like that of Aufidius—ambitious, proud, and bold, with many noble and 
generous qualities, yet not above the influence of selfish and vindictive emotions 
and desires. The mortification of defeat embitters his rivalry to hatred. When 
afterwards his banished rival appeals to his nobler nature, that hatred dies away 
and his generous feeling revives. Bitter jealousy and hatred again grow up as 
his glories are eclipsed by his former adversary; yet this dark passion too finally 
yields to a generous sorrow at his rival’s death. I think that I have observed very 
similar alternations of such mixed motives and sentiments in eminent men in 
the collisions of political life—Hupson (Sh’s Life, Art, etc., ii, 487), after quoting 
in part the foregoing remark by Coleridge, says: ‘The speech is hard indeed; but 
I do not take it as a fair index of the speaker’s real mind; it seems to me but one 
of those ebullitions of rage in which men’s hearts are not so bad as their tongues; 
the impulsive extravagance of a very ambitious and inconstant nature writhing 
in an agony of disappointment. In such cases dark thoughts often bubble up 
from unseen depths in the mind, yet do not crystallize into character. Still it 
must be owned that Aufidius comes pretty near putting the thought of the speech 
into act at last..—MacCatium (p. 586): It seems strange that Coleridge should 
say this, for it is proved by not a few examples that baffled emulation may issue 
in an envy which knows few restraints. Peril was the avowal rather than the 
temper which struck him as verging on the unnatural or abnormal. Those who 


ACT.I, SC." x;] CORIOLANUS 167 
Sol. He’s the diuell. 
Auf.Bolder, though not fo fubtle:my valors poifon’d, 20 
With onely fuff’ring ftaine by him: for him 
Shall flye out of it felfe, nor fleepe, nor fanctuary, 22 


19. diuell] devil F;F,. 
20. fubtle:| subtle. Johns. Cam.+, 
Coll. iii, Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. 
valors] valor’s F3F,. valour Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Ran. Coll. 
ii. (MS.), Sing. ii, Dyce ii, Huds. ii, 
Words. valour’s Rowe et cet. 
20, 21. potfon’d,...him:] Ff, Rowe. 


Dyce, Cam.+, Huds. i. 
him; Mal. et cet. 

21. With] Which M. Mason (Com- 
ments, 240). 

22. Shall] ’T shall Coll. MS. 

it felfe] itself. Coll. Del. Sta. 

Ktly, Wh. i, Neils. 

22-30. nor fleepe...heart] Mnemonic 


poison’d,... 


(poison’d...him) Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Warb. Ran. Coll. ii, Sing. ii, Ktly, 22. nor fleepe] not sleep Rowe ii,+. 
Dyce ii, Huds. ii. poison’d...him; Cap. 


deliberately adopt such an attitude do not usually admit it to themselves, still 
less to their victims, and least of all to a third party, which may admonish us 
that Aufidius’s threats were not deliberate, but mere frantic outcries wrung from 
him in rage and mortification. Yet they spring from authentic impulses in his 
heart, and though they may for a time be hidden by his superficial chivalry, yet 
they will spread and thrive if the conditions favour their growth. When they 
have over-run his nature and choked the wholesome grain, he will not point to 
them so openly and will name them by other names. But they are the same 
and differ from what they were only as the thorny thicket differs from its parent 
seeds. They have always been there, and it is well that we should be aware of 
their presence from the first. . . . In short, it is not to be taken as his definite pro- 
gram from which he inconsistently deviates when the opportunity is offered at 
Antium for carrying it out, but as the involuntary presentment, which the reveal- 
ing power of anguish awakens in his soul, of the crimes he is capable of committing 
for his master passion, a presentiment that in the end is realised almost to the 
letter.—T. Pace: We do not feel Coleridge’s difficulty here; we regard the words, 
awful as they are, as scarcely to be taken seriously; they represent simply a tem- 
porary furious outburst of anger couched in the wildest language Aufidius can 
discover on the spur of the moment. 

17. potche] Murray (NV. E. D., s. v. Poach, v?. Forms: poche, potch, poach, 
3b.): To make a stab or thrust at as in fencing. Also fig. Obs. rare. [The present 
line quoted.] 

20-22. my valors . . . of it selfe] BreEecuinc (Henry Irving Sh.): My valour, 
poisoned simply by losing colour in comparison with his, shall, in order to do 
him hurt, leave its true nature altogether and become cowardly. Aufidius means 
he will turn assassin. To ‘stain’ or distain was originally not to dye, but to take 
colour out. Compare Ant. & Cleo., III, iv, 26, 27, ‘I'll raise the preparation of a 
war Shall stain your brother.’ [Beeching in his text reads with Pope ‘valour,’ 
placing a comma after that word and also after ‘him,’ 1. 21.] 

20, 21. valors poison’d, . . . him:] Tyrwuirr: The construction of this pas- 
sage would be clearer if it were written thus: ‘my valour poison’d With only 
suffering stain by him, for him,’ etc. [The Text. Notes will demonstrate that 
Tyrwhitt has not collated the texts of his predecessors.—ED.] 


168 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. x. 


Being naked, ficke; nor Phane, nor Capitoll, 23 

The Prayers of Priefts, nor times of Sacrifice: 

Embarquements all of Fury, fhall lift vp 25 
23. ficke;] sick. Sta. seek Long MS. Han. Cap. Huds. ii. Embarrments 

(ap. Cam.). Warb. Johns. Lmbalkments Daniel. 
24. times] time F,, Rowe i. 25. of Fury] of fancy Warb. conj. 


25. Embarquemenis] Embarkments (Daily Journal, Apr. 8, 1729). 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. LEmbankments 


22. sanctuary] WALKER (Vers., p. 163): ‘Sanctuary’ is very often a dissyllable. 
In old times the word, like the thing itself, was in frequent use, and, like other 
familiar terms, became shortened for convenience sake. In Sir Henry Ellis’s 
Letter’s Illustrative of English History, as quoted, Atheneum, No. 973, p- 625, 
col. 3, letter from Lawrence Stubbs to Cardinal Wolsey, the sanctuary men are 
called in three places Sentuary men, Ib. the Sentuary. Santry still exists as a family 
name; so, by the way, does Sanctuary. [Walker furnishes several examples, 
among them the present line, wherein, for the sake of the metre, ‘Sanctuary’ is 
to be pronounced sanct’ry.—Ep.] 

23. Being naked, sicke] BEEcHING (Falcon Sh.): That is, ‘Nor nakedness, nor 
sickness.’ Compare Matthew, xxv, 35, 36, ‘I was a stranger, and ye took me in: 
Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me,’ etc. [Beeching is 
possibly right, but at the same time it is to be remembered that Shakespeare, and 
other writers of his time, frequently use ‘naked’ in the sense of defenseless, un- 
armed. See Scumupt (Lex., s. v. 3) for examples. On the other hand, that ‘sick’ 
is here coupled with ‘naked’ is in favour of Beeching’s comparison.—ED.] 

25. Embarquements] WARBURTON: The dramatic art of this speech is great. 
For after Aufidius had so generously received Coriolanus in exile, nothing but the 
memory of this speech, which lets one so well into Aufidius’s nature, could make 
his after perfidy and baseness at all probable. But this line []. 25] is corrupt. 
For tho’, indeed, he might call the assaulting Marcius at any of those sacred seasons 
and places an embarkment of fury; yet he could not call the seasons and places 
themselves, so. We may believe, therefore, that Shakespeare wrote: ‘Embarrments all 
of fury,’ &c., z. e., obstacles. Tho’ those seasons and places are all obstacles to 
my fury, yet &c. The Oxford Editor [Hanmer] has, in his usual way, refined upon 
this emendation in order to make it his own; and so reads Embankments, not con- 
sidering how ill this metaphor agrees with what is said just after of their lifting 
up ‘their ratten privilege’ which evidently refers to a wooden bar, not an earthen 
bank. These two generals are drawn equally covetous of glory: But the Volscian 
not scrupulous about the means. And his immediate repentence, after the as- 
sassinate [sic], well agrees with such a character—HeEatu (p. 413): As Embarr- 
ments is a word quite new from Mr Warburton’s own coinage, from whence he 
hath so plentifully besprinkled our poet’s works with terms of base alloy, I am not 
much inclined to accept it for current. The reading of the former editions was 
embarkments. Why may not this word have the same meaning as embargo, derived 
from the Spanish, embargar, to arrest, stop, or stay; whence also in the same 
language, embaracion, an arresting or stopping? Or if the reader should think a 
new word should be coined for the occasion, why not as well embargments? Mr 
Warburton’s cavil about the uniformity of the metaphor is mere trifling. For 
an embarrment made with a wooden bar, as he chooses to have it, unless the said 


ACT I, SC. x.] CORIOLANUS 169 


Their rotten Priuiledge, and Cuftome ’gainft 26 
My hate to Martius. Where I finde him, were it 
At home, vpon my Brothers Guard, euen there 
Againft the hofpitable Canon, would I 
Wath my fierce hand in’s heart. Go you to th’Citie, 30 
Learne how ’tis held, and what they are that muft 
Be Hoftages for Rome. 
Soul. Will not you go ? 
Auf. Iam attended at the Cyprus groue. I pray you 34 


30. in’s] in his Cap. Varr. Mal. Hal. Ktly. 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt, Del. 34. Cyprus] cypress Rowe et seq. 


bar be supposed to lift up itself, can no more lift up a privilege than an embarkment 
can.—STEEVENS: The word in the old copy is spelt ‘embarquements,’ and, as 
Cotgrave says, meant not only an embarkation, but an embargoing. The ‘rotten 
privilege and custom’ that follow seem to favor this explanation, and therefore 
the old reading may well enough stand, as an embargo is undoubtedly an impedi- 
ment.—MatoneE: In Sherwood’s English and French Dictionary, at the end of 
Cotgrave’s, we find: ‘To imbark, to imbargue. Embarquer.’ ‘An imbarking, an im- 
barguing. Embarquement.’ Cole, in his Latin Dictionary, 1679, has ‘to imbarque, or 
lay animbargo upon.’ There can be no doubt, therefore, that the old copy is right. 
If we derive the word from the Spanish, embargar, perhaps we ought to write em- 
bargement; but Shakespeare’s word certainly came to us from the French, and there- 
fore is more properly written embarquements or embarkments—WALKER (Vers., p. 
163), without reference to Hanmer, says: ‘EMBANKMENTS all of fury is the true read- 
ing. —Wiusuurst (WV. & Q., 11 March, 1905, p. 184), without reference either to 
Hanmer or Walker, also says that Embankments seems to be the word needed.—Eb. 

28. At home... Brothers Guard] Jounson: In my own house, with my brother 
posted to protect him. 

28. Brothers Guard] KEIcHTLEY (Expositor, p. 361): With the fullest convic- 
tion I read for ‘brother’s guard’ household hearth; for that was the very place 
where he did find him. ‘He got him up straight to the chimney hearth, and sate 
him down’ (North’s Plutarch). Besides, we never hear that Aufidius had a 
brother; and it should be wnder, not ‘upon,’ the guard; a man is, or stands, on his 
own, not on another’s guard. In Rich. II: IV, i, [282] we have ‘under his house- 
hold roof’; and household hearth occurs in Campbell’s Gertrude of Wyoming, iii, 
17. [In both his editions, 1864 and 1865, Keightley records this reading, which 
later, in his Expositor (1867), became of ‘fullest conviction,’ merely as a conjectural 
reading. As to Keightley’s objection that this should be wnder, not ‘upon’ guard, 
of which he says there are no examples, Wright, following Johnson’s interpretation 
of the foregoing words, quotes in illustration: ‘The messenger Came on my guard,’ 
Ant. & Cleo., IV, vi, 23, 2. ¢., while I was on guard. The quotation given by 
Steevens, ‘The lieutenant watches tonight on the court of guard,’ is not, I think, 
apposite; ‘the court of guard’ means the court where the guard is placed, as is shown 
by Othello’s words in a later scene, ‘In night and on the court of guard and safety’ 
(II, iii, 216).—Ep.] 

34-38. I am attended . . . I shall sir] Bayrrexp (p. 194): So the Folio, which 


170 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcrixSGaex: 


(Tis South the City Mils) bring me word thither 35 
How the world goes : that to the pace of it 
I may fpurre on my iourney. 


Soul. I fhall fir. 38 
34, 35. I pray you...thither] As one 35. City Mils] City Mill F,, Rowe i. 
line Knt. city-mills Theob. Warb. city walls 


34. I pray you] As separate line Wray conj. ap. Cam. city mills Rowe 
Johns. Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. ii. et cet. 
Var. ’03, 713, Sing. Hal. 38. fir.] sir. [Exeunt. Rowe et seq. 


editors follow apparently without suspicion, although 1. 34 is a purposeless Alex- 
andrine. The abbreviation ‘’Tis’ is at the bottom of the mischief, and we should 
read and arrange thus: 


‘I am attended at the cyprus grove 

I pray,—it is south the city mills— 

Bring me | word thither | how the | world goes, that | to 

The : pace of it | I may | spur on my | journey.—I shall, sir.’ 


34. attended] That is, waited for. Compare I, i, 74; I, i, 265. 

35. ’Tis South the City Mils] Tyrwuitt: But where could Shakespeare have 
heard of these mills at Antium? I believe we ought to read, ‘’Tis south the city 
a mile. —STEEVENS: Shakespeare is seldom careful about such little improprieties. 
Coriolanus speaks of our divines, and Menenius, of graves in the holy churchyard. 
It is said afterwards that Coriolanus talks like a knell; and drums, and Hob, and 
Dick are, with as little attention to time or place, introduced in this tragedy.— 
Matone: Shakespeare frequently introduces those minute local descriptions 
probably to give an air of truth to his pieces. So in Romeo & Juliet, ‘—under- 
neath the grove of sycamore, That westward rooteth from the city’s side,’ [I, i, 
128]. Again, ‘Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate tree,’ [Jbid., III, v, 4]. 
Mr Tyrwhitt’s question may be answered by another question: Where could 
Lydgate hear of the mills near Troy? ‘And as I ride upon this flode On eche syde 
many a mylle stode, When nede was their graine and corne to grinde,’ Auncient 
Historie, &c., 1555.—W. A. Wricut: It is worth while observing, as an indication 
that in such cases of local colouring Shakespeare had probably London in his 
mind, that in the year 1588 the Mayor and Corporation of the City petitioned the 
Queen that they might build four corn mills on the river Thames near the Bridge, 
and the Masters of the Trinity House certified that the erection of these mills 
‘on the south side of the Thames upon the Starlings above the bridge’ would breed 
no annoyance. The ‘city mills,’ therefore, in Shakespeare’s time were close to the 
Globe Theatre. 

38. I shall sir]: For this use of ‘shall,’ see note by Assort, I, ix, 93, ante.— 
RALEIGH (p. 102): The whole First Act of Coriolanus is so full of alarums and ex- 
cursions and hand-to-hand fighting, with hard blows given and taken, that it is 
tedious to Shakespeare’s modern admirers, but it gave keen pleasure to the patrons 
of the Globe. The Comedy of Errors is noisy with beatings and the outcries of the 
victims. All these things, though it discolour the complexion of his greatness to 
acknowledge it, were imposed upon Shakespeare by the tastes and habits of his 
patrons and by the fashions of the primitive theatre. It was on this robust stock 
that his towering thought and his delicate fancy were grafted. 


ACT II, sc. i.] CORIOLA NUS I7I 


A étus Secundus. 
[Scene I.] 


Enter Menenius with the two Tribunes of the 2 
people, Sicinius & Brutus. 


Men. The Agurer tels me, wee fhall haue Newes to 


night. 5 
1. Actus Secundus] Act II. Scene 1. Rowe i. Enter Menenius with Sici- 
Rowe. nius and... Rowe ii,+, Varr. Ran. 
Rome. Rowe,+, Varr. Ran. Enter Menenius, Brutus, and Sicinius. 
Rome. A Publick Place Cap. et seq. Cap. et: cet: 
2, 3. Enter...Brutus.| Ff, Cam.+, 4. Agurer] Augur Pope,+. Augurer 
Neils. Enter Menenius with Sicinius. Ff, Rowe et cet. 


1. Actus Secundus] BrEecuinec (Falcon Sh.): The first part of this scene is an 
amusing study in manners. Notice the superior tone Menenius adopts towards 
the Tribunes, soon passing into downright rudeness, which they hardly resent, 
while he loses his temper at once when they in turn only hint at a home-truth. 
The entry of the ladies makes us forget plebeian Rome, and leads up to the tri- 
umph. The last part of the scene is a reminder that to ridicule or ignore the 
Tribunes is not to draw their sting—VeERity (Student’s Sh.): The purpose of 
this prelude is to show that Coriolanus’s brilliant exploits and services to his 
country have not affected the causes of dissension between the patricians and the 
people (represented by the Tribunes) nor the popular feeling of grievance against 
Coriolanus himself—E. K. CaamBers (Warwick Sh.): The subject of the first 
act was the nobility of Coriolanus; for all his faults he is lifted before our eyes to 
an heroic level. The subject of the second act is his inherent weakness, leading 
up to and explaining the tragic crisis of his fate in the third act. The first need 
for a would-be leader of men is a certain sympathy with average every-day hu- 
manity. Of this Coriolanus has nothing; he is too completely self-centered and 
self-absorbed. It is the function of the second act to bring this out, and to show 
how irreconcilable is the hostility between him and the plebeians. The crucial 
test of this is the canvassing for the consulship in which Coriolanus’s insolent 
demeanor gives occasion to his enemies the Tribunes to destroy the momentary 
popularity which he has won by his valour—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): 
This scene passes on the fore-stage. At 1. 98 the stage-direction of the Folio shows 
that Brutus and Sicinius go Aside, not off the stage. Since the rest, after Corio- 
lanus enters in triumph, pass in procession following him across the stage, it may 
be that the Tribunes pass way out upon the projecting fore-stage, and, standing 
with their backs to the audience and at one side, at the back of the procession, 
come forward after it has passed out at the opposite side, presumably on its way 
to the Capitoll. After the Messenger comes to summon them they follow in the 
same direction. 

4. Men.] Detius (Die Prosa in Sh’s Dramen, Jahrbuch, v, p. 269): Menenius 


72 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. i. 


Bru. Good or bad ? 6 
Men. Not according to the prayer of the people, for 
they loue not Martius. 
Sicin. Nature teaches Beafts to know their Friends. 
Men. Pray you, who does the Wolfe loue ? 10 
Sicin. The Lambe. 
Men. I, to deuour him,as the hungry Plebeians would 
the Noble Martius. 
Bru. He’s a Lambe indeed, that baes like a Beare. 
Men. Hee’s a Beare indeede, that liues like a Lambe. 15 


10. who] whom Pope,+, Coll. Huds. 


confronting the two Tribunes lets his tongue go on without restraint in a humor- 
ous manner of speech—which beautifies neither himself nor them—with complete 
pleasure to himself. Also in his talk with the Roman matrons he gives expression 
to his joy over the return of Marcius in the fresh and hearty manner to which 
prose so aptly lends itself. [See also Notes by Delius, I, i, 5, 6; I, iii, 3—Ep.]— 
E. K. CuamBers (Warwick Sh.): Menenius, not a very serious politician, nor per- 
sonally dignified, finds it exceedingly amusing to ‘roast’ the Tribunes. He does 
not, however, come off without some home-truths in return. Shakespeare is 
fairly impartial in his analysis of the weaknesses of both parties. To his cynical 
point of view there is not much to choose between them. And how vivid and 
characteristic his portraits are! Just so might a genial Pall Mall clubman and a 
couple of London county-councillors satirize each other today. 

4. Agurer] W. A. WricHT: Pope altered this to Augur, apparently regarding 
the speech as verse, but ‘augurer’ is the more common form in Shakespeare. See 
Jul. Ces., TI, i, 200: ‘The unaccustomed terror of this night, And the persua- 
sion of his augurers.’ 

g-11. Nature... The Lambe] Eaton (p. 125): The ideas here seem bor- 
rowed from Ecclesiasticus, chap. xiii, ‘Every beast loveth his like, and every man 
loveth his neighbor. All flesh consorteth according to kind, and a man will cleave 
to his like. What fellowship hath the wolf with the lamb?’ verses 15, 16, 17. 
[WorpswortH (Sh’s Knowledge & Use of Bible, p. 220) compares |. 9 with Isaiah, i, 
3: ‘The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s crib. —CartTEr (p. 457) 
also quotes this last in illustration of 1. 9.—Eb.] 

10. Pray you... loue] JoHNsoN: When the Tribune, in reply to Menenius’s 
remark on the people’s hate of Coriolanus, had observed ‘even beasts know their 
friends,’ Menenius asks ‘whom does the wolf love?’ implying that there are beasts 
which love nobody, and that among those beasts are the people-—B. CorNWALL: 
Menenius probably means to infer that the tribune’s rule is not without an ex- 
ception; and that the people are not, in the particular referred to, more dis- 
criminating than the wolf. 

10. who] For other examples of a like neglect of inflection in relative pro- 
nouns see ABBOTT, § 274. 

11, The Lambe] Brecutne (Falcon Sh.): Sicinius answers in haste, meaning 
that the friends of the people are those that do them no harm. Perhaps in 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 173 


You two are old men, tell me one thing that I fhall aske 16 
you. 
Both. Well fir. 
Men. In what enormity is Martius poore in, that you 
two haue not in abundance ? 20 
Bru. He’s poore in no one fault, but ftor’d withall. 
Sicin. Efpecially in Pride. 
Bru. And topping all others in boafting. 
«Men. This is ftrange now : Do you two know, how 24 


16. two are] are two Warb. Johns. 21. withall] with all FF, et seq. 
Wires Gee 22. in Pride| pride F,, Rowe. 

19. poore in,] poor, Pope,+, Cap. 23. boafting| boaft Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Varr. Ran. Steev. Var. ’o03, ’13. Theob. Han. Cap. 


Menenius’s question stress should be laid on ‘does.’ ‘Whom does your Roman 
wolf love?’ 

19. In what... poore in] MALoNnE: Here we have another of our author’s 
peculiar modes of phraseology, which, however, the modern editors have not suf- 
fered him to retain; having dismissed the redundant ‘in’ at the end of this part 
of the sentence.—STEEVENS: I shall continue to dismiss it till such peculiarities 
can, by authority, be discriminated from the corruptions of the stage, the tran- 
scriber, or the printer. It is scarcely credible that in the expression of a common 
idea, in prose, our modest Shakespeare should have advanced a phraseology of his 
own in equal defiance of customary language and established grammar. As, on 
the present occasion, the word ‘in’ might have stood with propriety at either end 
of the question, it has been casually, or ignorantly, inserted at both. [By way of 
reply to the foregoing remarks by Steevens, Malone merely refers to a note on a 
line from the Chorus preceding Act II. of Rom. & Jul., ‘for which love groan’d 
for,’ in vol. vi. of Variorum 1821, wherein Malone justifies the redundant prepo- 
sition as a grammatical peculiarity of the time, instancing the present line in 
Coriolanus, and also, ‘The scene wherein we play in,’ As You Like It, II, vii, 
139. Steevens refuses to accept these as valid examples, since both are taken from 
the Folio text and therefore ‘stand on no surer ground than that of copies pub- 
lished by ignorant players and printed by careless compositors.’ He adds: ‘I 
utterly refuse to admit their accumulated jargon as the grammar of Shake- 
speare or of the age he lived in.’ Malone in support of his statement and 
in answer to Steevens’s challenge quotes in answer the following examples of 
this redundancy in contemporary writers: Lyly’s Prologue at Court, to Cam- 
paspe: ‘So are we enforced upon a rough discourse to drawe on a smooth 
excuse.’ Job, ch. xli, vers. ii, Barker’s Bible, 1599: ‘Out of his nostrils cometh 
out smoke.’ Letter from Lord Burghley to the Earl of Shrewsbury, Jan. 
23, 1587-8, Weymouth MSS: ‘I did earnestly enqre of hym, in what estate he 
stood in for discharge of his former debts.’ In another letter from the same to 
the same, October 26, 1586: ‘To the which it is ment that we all should put to 
our names.’—For other examples from Shakespeare see, if needful, Axssort, 
§ 407.—Eb.] 


174 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 11, "SC! ie 


you are cenfured heere in the City,I mean of vs a’th’right 25 
hand File, do you? 
Both. Why? ho ware we cenfur’d? 
Men. Becaufe you talke of Pride now, will you not 
be angry. 
Both. Well,well fir, well. 30 
Men. Why ’tis no great matter : for a very little theefe 
of Occafion, will rob you of a great deale of Patience : 
Giue your difpofitions the reines, and bee angry at your 
pleafures (at the leaft)if you take it as a pleafure to you, in 
being fo : you blame Martius for being proud. 35 
Brut. We do it not alone, fir. 


25. ath] F.F;. o’th’ F,, Rowe,+. 27. ho ware] F;. 
o’the Cap. et seq. 30. Both] Ff, Rowe,+, Varr. Ran. 

25, 26. right hand] right Rowe ii, Sta. Cam.+, Words. Craig, Neils. Tri. 
Pope. Capell. Both Trib. Mal. et cet. 

26. File,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 33. difpofitions] disposition Theob. i, 
Han. Warb. Cap. jfile? Johns. et cet. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt. 

27. Both] F., Sta. Cam.+, Words. 34. pleafures (at the leaft) if...] Ff, 


Craig, Neils. Bru. F;F,, Rowe,+, Rowe, Pope. pleasures; at the least 
Varr. Ran. Tri. Capell. Both Trib. if... Han. pleasures; at the least 7f,... 
Mal. et cet. Theob. et cet. 


25. censured] W. A. WricHT: That is, what opinion is formed of you, how you 
are estimated. See I, i, 294, and compare Much Ado, II, iii, 233, ‘I hear how I 
am censured.’ And Jul. Ces., III, ii, 16, ‘Censure me in your wisdom.’ 

25, 26. right hand File] Scammr (Coriolanus): That is, men of rank who are 
the right hand of the state. The parliamentary sense of right and left is here 
quite untenable-—Gornon: That is, by us of the conservative ranks. The ‘left- 
hand file,’ by the same token, would be radical opposition represented by the 
Tribunes. [On this point Schmidt is undoubtedly correct; the use of Right and 
Left in the parliamentary sense is too modern for application here—FortTESCUE 
(Shakespeare's England, vol. i, ch. iv, The Army, p. 114) says: ‘A file in these days 
consists of two men. In the sixteenth century it numbered at least ten. . . . Again, 
the place of honour to military men has always been the right of the line, and 
accordingly a captain always drew up his best and choicest men in the right-hand 
files of his company.’ Fortescue quotes this present line in illustration —Ep.] 

31, 32. theefe of Occasion] W. A. WricuT: ‘Of’ is used frequently to connect 
two nouns in apposition, as ‘city of London.’? Compare Richard II: I, iii, 196, 
‘Banish’d this fair sepulchre of our flesh.—Gorpon: You are a mighty impatient 
pair, Menenius means to say; a very little occasion will put you out. To convey 
this meaning it would have been enough to say ‘a very little occasion will rob you,’ 
&c. But if ‘occasion’ can be said to ‘rob,’ why not complete the metaphor and 
call it a ‘thief’? There is nothing active or possessive about the ‘of’ [in the 
phrase ‘city of London’], it merely connects in apposition. The meaning is 
that London is a city. The meaning of ‘thief of occasion’ is that occasion is a 
thief. 


ACTA; -SCy1)| CORIOLANUS 175 


Men. I know you can doe very little alone, for your 37 
helpes are many, or elfe your actions would growe won- 
drous fingle : your abilities are to Infant-like, for dooing 
much alone. You talke of Pride: Oh, that you could turn 40 
your eyes toward the Napes of your neckes, and make 
but an Interiour furuey of your good felues. Oh that you 
could. 

Both. What then fir ? 

Men. Why then you fhould difcouer a brace of vn- 45 
meriting, proud, violent, teftie Magiftrates (alias Fooles) 
as any in Rome. 

Sicin. Menenius, you are knowne well enough too. 


Men. Iam knowne to be a humorous Pairitian, and 49 
39. to] too Ff. 45, 46. unmeriting] as wunmeriting 
41. toward] towards Rowe,+, Varr. Rowe, +, Cap. Var. °78, ’85. 

Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt. 46. teftie] refty F2. 
44. Both] F.F,, Cam.t+. Men. F,. 49. Patritian] Patrician F,. 


Bru. Rowe et cet. 


39. single] That is, trivial, insignificant. Compare 2 Henry IV: I, ii, 207, ‘Is 
not your chin double, your wit single.’ 

41. eyes toward ... your neckes] JoHNSON: With allusion to the fable which 
says that every man has a bag hanging before him, in which he puts his neighbor’s 
faults, and another behind him, in which he stows his own.—Dettus: This eluci- 
dation by Johnson does not accord with what follows; the Tribunes are to look 
not behind, but within, themselves—‘toward the napes’ must, moreover, be only 
in the direction of your necks.—Casr (Arden Sh.) quotes Johnson’s elucidation 
and adds, ‘Dr Tyrrell kindly provides the following note: “The original fable of 
Esop, reproduced by Phzdrus, IV, 10, [Bk IV, Fable ix, ed. Dyche, 1713.—Eb.] 
was that Jupiter has furnished every man with two wallets, one hanging down on 
his breast and containing his neighbor’s faults, which are always before his eyes, 
and the other hanging down his back out of sight, and filled with his own faults. 
This is referred to by Horace (Sat. II, iii, 299) and by Catullus (xxii, 21), who 
seems to speak of one wallet with two parts. Persius (iv, 24) slightly varies the 
image by giving every one a single wallet to hang behind him, and making each 
neglect his own, and look exclusively on his neighbor’s wallet (variously called 
pera and mantica).’”’’—[All of which is excellent as a note on Johnson’s note, but 
has little if anything to do with the present line in Coriolanus. In spite of the fact 
that Johnson’s note has been accepted by many commentators, I am quite in 
accord with Delius that the context will not admit of any reference to this fable 
here. The very next words should have shown Johnson that as Menenius asks 
them ‘to make but an interior survey’ of themselves there could be no thought 
of an exterior wallet either front or back. Tucker Brooxr (Yale Sh.) says: 
‘A variation of the fable is found in Tro. & Cress., III, iii, 145, where Ulysses says, 
“Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back, wherein he puts alms for oblivion.””’ 
But this is again a note on Johnson and not on this passage in Coriolanus.—En.] 


176 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT II, SC. i. 


one that loues a cup of hot Wine, with not a drop of alay- 50 
ing Tiber in’t : Said, to be fomething imperfect in fauou- 
ring the firft complaint, hafty and Tinder-like vppon, to 52 


50. with not] without Coll. ii. (MS.). 

51. imperfect] imperfect, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Hal. 
Ktly, Wh. i. impatient Anon. ap. 
Cam. 

52. firft complaint] thirst complaint 


or impulse Ulrici conj. 

52. Tinder-like] Fi, Rowe i, Dyce, 
Sta. Wh. Cam.+, Words. Huds. ii, 
Craig, Neils. tinderlikeTheob. tinder- 
like, Rowe ii. et cet. 

vppon, to] vpon, to Fi, Rowe i. 
upon too Rowe ii. et seq. t00, upon 
Anon. ap. Cam. 


50, 51. not a drop of alaying Tiber in’t] SrrEveNns: Lovelace, in his Verses 
to Althea from Prison, has borrowed this expression: ‘When flowing cups run 
swiftly round, With no allaying Thames,’ &c. See Percy, Reliques, &c. (3d ed.), 
ii, p. 324.—HatiiwELt: Mr Fairholt sends me this note: ‘A remarkable illustra- 
tion of the allusion here made to the use of warm drinks by the Romans is fur- 
nished from the discoveries made at Pompeii. Under the staircase of a shop in 
that city where warm decoctions were sold a bronze urn of beautiful workmanship 
was discovered which is now deposited in the Museo Borbonico at Naples. [Fair- 
holt gives a sectional drawing of this urn, which shows a spherical receptacle for 
the wine, surrounding an inner chamber for hot coals. The wine was poured in 
at one side and drawn off by a cock at the lower opposite side. I give this note 
for what it may be worth. Shakespeare’s antiquarian knowledge as regards warm 
drinks among the Romans could hardly have been obtained through the discovery 
made at Pompeii, as Fairholt insinuates, since such had not been made until at 
least one hundred and fifty years after Shakespeare’s death. The allusion here is, 
of course, to the popular mulled wine of Shakespeare’s day.—Ep.]—W. A. 
Wricut: Compare V, iii, 94, and Mer. of Ven., II, ii, 195, ‘—allay with 
some cold drops of modesty Thy skipping spirit.’ Baret (Alvearie, s. v.) has, 
‘Alaied: tempered with water. Dilutus.... He alaieth wine with water. Lympha 
temperat merum.’ See also Huloet’s Abcedariwm (1552): “Alaye wyne. Diluo.... 
Alayd wyne. Aquaticum Vinum.’—BErEcuine (Henry Irving Sh.): There were 
originally two verbs of this form, one being purely English and meaning to put 
down, reduce; the other through French, from Latin alligare, now written alloy, 
after the modern French form, and meaning fo mix. The senses very much ran 
into each other, and were in time referred to a single verb. The metaphor here 
might be either that of reducing (as in Paradise Lost, x, 566, ‘Fondly thinking to 
allay their appetite’) or that of mixing with alloy. 

52. the first complaint] CoLtmR (Notes and Emendations, etc., p. 351): Few 
scenes are worse printed in the early copies than this between Menenius and the 
two Tribunes: it is full of literal errors, and of some which are important to the 
author’s sense, and are set right in manuscript in the Second Folio. What is ‘the 
first complaint’ in connexion with Menenius’s love for ‘a cup of hot wine’? It is 
merely an error from mishearing on the part of the copyist; for, undoubtedly, we 
ought to alter ‘first’ to thirst—‘the thirst complaint.’ The humour is entirely lost 
in the old misprinted text; and although no objection need be raised to with not 
instead of ‘without,’ nothing could be easier than the misprint of one word for 
the other; seeing that thirst complaint must be right, we can readily believe in the 


ACT, SCHL] CORIOLANUS 177. 


[52. the first complaint] 


less important change.—SINcER (Text of Sh. Vindicated, p. 213): The alteration 
of ‘first’ to thirst is not necessary, for it seems that ‘thirst’? was sometimes pro- 
vincially pronounced and spelt jirst and furst. Thus, in Piers Ploughman, passus 
vii: ‘For whetshod thei gaugen A furst and a fingered,’ z. e., thirsty and hun- 
gered. Menenius uses it jocularly— Anon. (Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p. 321): 
No sense can be extracted from ‘first complaint’ by any process of distillation. 
The old corrector, brightening up for an instant, writes ‘thirst complaint,’ on 
which Mr Singer remarks [as in the foregoing note]. Come, come, Mr Singer, 
that is hardly fair. Let us give the devil his due. What one reader out of every 
million was to know that ‘first’ was a provincialism for thirst? We ourselves, at 
least, had not a suspicion of it till the old corrector opened our eyes to the right 
reading—the meaning of which is, ‘I am said to have a failing in yielding rather 
too readily to the thirst complaint.’ This emendation covers a multitude of sins, 
and ought, beyond a doubt, to be promoted into the text—DeEttus: ‘It is said of 
me, I am somewhat weak therein, that I favour the first complaint or charge, that 
I give judgment to the first plaintiff, without a further examination of the case.’— 
This mode of procedure of Menenius with a client stands in direct opposition to 
the utterly tedious procedure in like cases with which he later reproaches the 
Tribunes.—Dyce: Mr Collier asks: ‘What is “the first complaint” in connexion 
with Menenius’s love for a cup of hot wine?’ But is it quite certain that any 
‘connexion’ was intended between ‘the first complaint’ and ‘a cup of hot wine’? 
At least if the Folio faithfully represents the author’s punctuation, none was 
intended; for in the Folio we find a colon after ‘Tiber in’t,’ while ‘the first com- 
plaint’ is disjoined only by a comma—‘hasty and tinder-like upon too trivial mo- 
tion’—words which assuredly do not in any way allude to Menenius’s love for drink- 
ing. Again, is ‘the thirst complaint’ a probable expression? In short, I consider 
the MS. Corrector’s alteration a very doubtful one; and I have the satisfaction 
of knowing that Mr John Forster concurs with me in that opinion. I must add 
that Mr Singer’s explanation of ‘first’ appears to me even more unlikely than the 
MS. Corrector’s new reading, by which indeed it was evidently suggested.— 
STAUNTON: What is ‘the first complaint’? At one time we conceived the sprightly, 
warm-hearted old senator, among his other failings, ‘cried out of women,’ and 
referred to what Ben Jonson as obscurely terms ‘the primitive work of darkness’ 
(Devil is an Ass, II, ii.); but what militates against this supposition, and the 
wonderfully acute emendation of Collier’s MS. Corrector also, is the doubt whether 
‘complaint’ obtained the sense malady or ailment until many years after these 
plays were written. If it did not bear this meaning in Shakespeare’s day, the only 
explanation of ‘something imperfect in favouring the first complaint’ appears to 
be that he was too apt to be led away by first impressions; to act rather from im- 
pulse than from reflection—IncLEBY (Sh. Controversy, p. 144), in his chapter on 
Philological Tests as to the genuineness of the corrections in Collier’s Folio, in- 
stances the foregoing objection by Staunton in regard to the modernity of ‘com- 
plaint’ in a medical sense, remarking that the ‘whole phrase would be nonsense’ 
unless ‘complaint’ were there employed with that meaning. ‘Now I think,’ adds 
Ingleby, ‘the latter position indisputable; but I have not examined a sufficiently 
large number of instances to arrive at any decided opinion on the former point. 
However, it is not improbable that this test-word may ultimately be found to be 
of great value in the determination of the question of the genuineness of the 
12 


178 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. i. 


[52. the first complaint] 

manuscript notes of the disputed folio. —LEo (Coriolanus, p. 121): If ‘first com- 
plaint’ does not stand in connexion with the mysterious charms of the worship of 
Venus, I would suggest the following explanation: Menenius gives his own por- 
trait as that of an Epicurean. He confesses to liking drinking and revelling, so 
that I wonder he does not say anything about eating. But perhaps he does; he 
does not at all favour ‘the first complaint,’ for else he would favour the com- 
plaint of the Plebeians, and since he already in the first words has confessed to 
like drinking, the ‘thirst’ has no reason to complain. That Menenius is known 
to be a gourmand appears from the remark of Brutus, ‘you are well understood 
to be a perfecter giber for the table—,’ and if we therefore take the f in ‘favouring’ 
as a misprint for long /, and remember that Menenius says, 


‘but when we have stuff’d 
These pipes and these conveyances of our blood 
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls 
Than in our priest-like fasts. . . .’ (V, i, 63-66), 


we are induced to search in ‘the first complaint’ for a misprint for something 
belonging to the culinary art; and the words ‘priest-like fasts’ remind us of the 
time when fasting was ordered—the lenten time. Is it not possible that ‘first 
complaint’ is a misprint for feast of lent, and that instead of ‘in favouring the 
first complaint’ we ought to read ‘ in favouring the feast of lent.’ (I will not too 
strongly advocate a change in the word feast, and reading fish for it. See Pericles, 
II, ii, ‘we'll have flesh for holidays, fish for fasting days.’) At all events the sense 
given by the emendation is quite in keeping with the whole portrait: Menenius 
likes neither wine allayed with Tyber, nor lenten food, nor retiring to bed early— 
in short, he confesses to being a jolly fellow. [Leo prefaces his note with the mod- 
est disclaimer that he himself does not ‘pretend to attach much importance to 
it’; again some fifteen years later (Jahrbuch, xv, p. 55), in reference to his pro- 
posed emendation, he says: ‘I gladly surrender it to the laughing critics of the 
editors, since I myself regarded it only as an attempt, a makeshift, but I really 
believe it was beneficial, either to specify formerly proposed emendations or to 
refer to them as needless and incorrect.’ Sz sic omnes, etc—Ep.]—R. G. WHITE 
(Sk. Scholar, p. 359): Collier’s Folio suggests, with reason, that we should read, 
‘without a drop’ and ‘the thirst complaint.’ Common sense will not set the 
latter word aside because Mr Singer has discovered that ‘thirst was sometimes 
provincially pronounced first and furst.’ Shakespeare does not make Menenius 
talk like a West of England ploughboy.—Isp. (ed. i.): How lamentably from the 
purpose have the commentators been in their exegesis and correction of this pas- 
sage! I myself in my youth and haste (see Shakespeare’s Scholar) having followed 
the multitude to do evil. All readers, too, according to my observation, refer 
‘said to be’ to ‘allaying Tyber’; but it is Menenius who, being ‘hasty and tinder- 
like upon too trivial motion,’ is said to be ‘something imperfect in favouring the 
first complaint’ brought to him. All the clauses of this sentence are but specifi- 
cations of his traits of character.—A. A. (Notes & Queries, 19 March, 1864, p. 231): 
It has been proposed to read the ‘thirst complaint’; but is not the passage better 
as it stands? Menenius says he has two faults, or complaints. The just that he 
is ‘humorous’; the second that he is too fond of a cup of hot wine, and that this 
second complaint has rather a tendency to aggravate the first. I do not remember 


ACTIN SCoe| CORIOLA NUS 179 


[52. the first complaint] 
such a phrase as ‘the thirst complaint’ in any author. [Staunton’s objection that 
‘complaint’ here in the sense of malady, disorder is too modern renders the fore- 
going interpretation untenable—Ep.]—Hunpson declares that the Folio reading 
has ‘neither sense nor humour’ and therefore there can be little hesitation in 
accepting that of Collier’s MS. Corrector ‘as it makes both the sense and the humour 
perfect.’ This note Hudson repeats unchanged in his ed. ii—Ep.—C. & M. 
CowbEN CLARKE (Shakespeare): ‘The first complaint’ appears to us clearly to refer 
to the first clause of Menenius’s speech, his being ‘a humourous patrician,’ which is 
the first complaint made against him, while his being ‘one that loves a cup of 
hot wine,’ &c., is the second complaint made against him. He goes on to explain 
what is ‘the first complaint’ by adding ‘hasty and too tinder-like upon too trivial 
motion,’ which exactly interprets the word ‘humourous’ as used by Shakespeare 
in one of the senses it bore in his time.—Rev. Jonn Hunter: That is, somewhat 
weak in at once showing by my looks when I am displeased.—Scumupt (Coriolanus, 
p. 86) quotes at some length two interpretations of this passage: the first, that 
which is commonly accepted, viz., Menenius is too apt to give judgment in the 
case of an appeal without due deliberation; second, that some commentators 
have understood by ‘the first complaint’ the sin of Adam and Eve, symbolised 
by the eating of the apple; Georg Herwegh, who edited this play for Ulrici’s ed., 
is responsible for this; he has had no followers, but, as Schmidt objects, Menenius 
is represented as an old man, and besides he is not given to speaking so euphemis- 
tically. Schmidt is quite in agreement with those editors who hold that the text 
is here corrupt, but maintains that no emendation thus far proposed is acceptable 
(Leo’s ‘feast of lent’ he only refers to as ‘a curiosity’). In conclusion he offers his 
own solution of the difficulty, which as an original emendation is even more of 
‘a curiosity’ than Leo’s; it is that we here read thirst-complaint. No reference is 
made to the fact that this is the reading of Collier’s MS. Corrector or that any 
other editor so reads following that correction. Schmidt naively explains that f 
and th are near allied in sound and that as the Tribunes speak of hunger Menenius 
confesses to a sympathy with the thirsty ones. This is, however, but one of many 
indications in Schmidt’s notes to this play that he had not consulted—perhaps 
even did not know of—the MS. corrections in Collier’s Folio.—Ep.—W. A. WRIGHT: 
That is, in hastily judging a case without waiting to hear the other side; not wast- 
ing time upon trifles like the Tribunes. It has been objected to this reading that 
Menenius would not speak of himself in such depreciatory terms, and justify the 
Tribunes’ attack. But it is his humour to say of himself the worst that popular 
opinion says of him, and so to disarm his opponents; that he is quick of temper 
and hasty of tongue, that his bark is worse than his bite, that he never stops to 
think whether his outspokenness will give offense. There appears to be no neces- 
sity for change, and certainly none for reading with Collier ‘the thirst complaint’ 
or with Leo ‘savouring the feast (or fish) of Lent.—Roxtre: That is, somewhat 
faulty as a magistrate in forming an opinion of a case before hearing the other 
side—Gorpon: Somewhat imperfect because of a way I have of favouring the 
first complainant. I suppose this means that he gave the impression, when he 
was on the bench, of being keener to get through and away than to hear both 
sides and give deliberate judgment. [The majority of modern editors is in favour 
of the view that Menenius admits that he is a little too prone to give judgment 
without considering the case sufficiently. Staunton’s objection to ‘complaint’ 


180 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 1y,-SCaa 


triuiall motion : One, that conuerfes more with the But- 53 
tocke of the night, then with the forhead of the morning. 
What I think, I vtter, and {pend my malice in my breath. 55 
Meeting two fuch Weales men as you are (I cannot call 
you Licurguffes,) if the drinke you giue me, touch my Pa- 
lat aduerfly, I make a crooked face at it, I can fay, your 58 


56. Weales men] Weals-men F3F,. 58-67. I can...too] Om. Words. 
57. you] your F.F3. 58. can fay] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Licurguffes,) 7...] Lycurguses. Schmidt. can’t say Theob.+, Var. ’78, 
Tf... Spedding. 85, Cam.+. cannot say Cap. et cet. 


used in a medical sense here is to the point and is quite enough to cause rejection 
of this MS. correction, if for other reasons it were not quite unnecessary, as Wright 
sagely remarks. According to Murray (WN. E. D., s. v. complaint, 6.) the earliest 
use of this word in the sense of malady occurs in 1705.—Eb.] 

53, 54. One, that .. . of the morning] Lerrsom (ap. Dyce ii.): These words 
should come before ‘said to be something imperfect,’ &c. [l. 51]; and ‘complaint’ 
should perhaps be complainer. 

53. conuerses more] W. A. Wricut: That is, associates more, is more con- 
versant with. Compare As You Like It, V, li, 66: ‘I have, since I was three years 
old, conversed with a magician.’ The word is less frequently used by Shakespeare 
in its more restricted modern sense. 

53, 54. Buttocke of the night] Jounson: That is, rather a late lier down than an 
early riser—MALoNE: So, in Love’s Labour’s Lost: ‘It is the king’s most sweet 
pleasure and affection, to congratulate the princess at her pavilion, in the poste- 
riors of this day; which the rude multitude call the afternoon,’ [V, i, 944—Malone 
quotes another somewhat similar expression from 2 Henry IV.; but is not the 
above ‘exquisite phrase,’ as W. A. WricuT terms it, sufficient to show that such 
was not intended as the coinage of the brain of Menenius on this occasionPp—Eb.]} 

56, 57- I cannot call you Licurgusses] C. & M. Cowpen CLarkeE (Shakespeare): 
This fleer of the old patrician has doubly humorous force of allusion; since it not only 
refers to the renowned Spartan lawgiver, Lycurgus, who was a man that banished 
luxury and possessed large wisdom with utmost severity of morals, but it also includes 
reference to a King of Thrace, named Lycurgus, who abolished the worship of 
Bacchus from his dominions, and ordered all the vines therein to be cut down, in 
order to preserve himself and subjects from the temptations and consequences of 
a too free use of wine.—ORGER (p. 61): This passage has been left without al- 
teration by the editors, when the suppression of the parenthesis is, I think, evi- 
dently demanded by the sense. Menenius is piquing himself on his frankness, 
and declares that he cannot call such politicians as these Lycurgusses on any oc- 
casion when he falls in with them. I think it clear we should read, ‘Meeting 
two such wealsmen as you are I cannot call you Lycurgusses. If the drink,’ etc. 

58. I can say] Scumipt (Coriolanus): This is needlessly altered by modern 
editors to J cannot say. ‘I can say’ is here used as the ancient and modern phrase 
I dare say. Menenius means, ‘You have delivered the matter very well, if I do 
not find in your talk the ass as an ingredient (in compound),’ 7. e., if it is not all 
pure asininity. That the alteration cannot renders the phrase more easily in- 
telligible may not be gainsaid. 


ACT II, SC) 1] CORIOLANUS 181 


Worfhippes haue deliuer’d the matter well, when I finde 
the Affe in compound, with the Maior part of your fylla- 60 
bles. And though I muft be content to beare with thofe, 
that fay you are reuerend graue men, yet they lye deadly, 
that tell you haue good faces, if you fee this in the Map 63 


62. graue men] graue F.F;. grave MS., Wh. Cam.+, Dyce ii, Huds. ii, 
F,, Rowe. Craig. tell, you have Mal. Steev. Varr. 
63. tell you haue] tell you, you have Sing. i, Coll. i, Hal. Huds. i. 
Pope,+, Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Coll. 


60. the Asse in compound] W. A. Wricut: Shakespeare was thinking of the 
Latin he learnt at school, and the ‘As in presenti,’ etc—RoLFre: That is, when 
I find your talk so asinine—Gorpon: That is, most of your words with a large 
mixture of the ass in them, most of what you say very foolish. The phrase sounds 
like a punning version of a grammer rule: ‘as in compound with major part of 
syllables’; but I have failed like others to find such a rule in the most likely place, 
Lilly’s Latin Grammar.—BExEcuinc (Henry Irving Sh.): That Menenius means 
to call the Tribunes asses is clear, but what is his joke? Shakespeare, of course, 
knew that -as was a common termination of Latin words, but Menenius talked 
Latin no less than the Tribunes. Probably Shakespeare had in mind some Latin 
Grammar rule in which were the words ‘as in compound with the major part of 
the syllable.—Verirty (Siudent’s Sh.): Possibly Menenius means that the Tribunes 
belong to the class of argumentative opinionated people who are always ready to 
give their reasons (as= ‘since, because’) and justify themselves and their actions. 
[Verity agrees with Wright that there is here possibly the same quibble as in 
Hamlet, V, ii, 43; and also cites Twelfth Night, II, iii, 184, 185.—Ep.]—SHERMAN 
(Tudor Sh.): A pun on the last syllables of Sicinius and Brutus. [In this con- 
nection compare Hamlet’s reply to Polonius, ‘It was a brute part of him [Brutus] 
to kill so capital a calf there,’ III, ii, 110.—Ep.] 

62. they lye deadly] Compare: ‘The viliaine lieth deadly, he reviles me 
bicause I bid him make hast,’ Gascoigne, Supposes (1566), III, i, p. 211, ed. 
Cunliffe —Eb. 

63. tell you] Casr (Arden Sh.): Though Pope reads ell you, you, and others 
tell you you, the text may be correct. Menenius says in substance: I must bear 
to hear you called reverend grave men; and he may also say: It is a big lie to re- 
port you have good faces. 

63. you haue good faces] GorpoN: This jest has not been understood. To 
understand it we must go back to ‘ass.’ We are in the region of desperate puns. 
After ‘ass’ and as in 1. 60 it was easy to think of ace. Ass and ace were pronounced 
alike, and Shakespeare had been very guilty of the pun about twelve years before 
in Mid. N. Dream, V, i, 315-317 (‘Less than an ace, man, for he is dead; he is noth- 
ing.’ ‘With the help of a surgeon, he might yet recover, and prove an ass’). It 
was this ace that suggested ‘faces.’ ‘Faces’ was a regular word for ‘face-cards’ 
(z. e., king, queen, knave), and ‘face’ and ace ran naturally together. Compare 
Cotton’s Complete Gamester (1674): ‘If you have neither ace nor face you may 
throw up your game’ (NV. #. D.). On this and the ordinary meaning of ‘faces’ 
Menenius puns. You are worthy ‘asses,’ he says, and speaking of ‘aces,’ they 
are deadly liars that report you have good ‘faces.’ This is not easy punning, but 


182 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, Sc. i. 


of my Microcofme, followes it that I am knowne well e- 64 


‘faces’ is pointless without it—Casr (Arden Sh.): There are probably two senses 
here: (1) good faces, honest faces, the indices of good hearts, the denial of which 
destroys any credit not already ironically subtracted from ‘reverend, grave’ ; (2) hand- 
some faces. This closes Menenius’s speech so far as it relates to his own faults as 
they may appear to the two Tribunes: he loves strong wine; he is hasty; he 
revels late; he speaks his mind; he shows it too (here the list leaves what is generally 
known and becomes an attack on the Tribunes); he does not applaud their words, 
for he finds them foolish; if he must not contradict the titles that belong to age 
when others bestow them on them, he thinks their looks ugly in both senses. 
This they may see in him, as he goes on to tell them. ‘I cannot grant the finality 
of Gordon’s ingenious view that ass suggested ace, and that ace suggested “faces.” 
It entirely ignores the intervening clause, “and though . . . reverend, grave 
men,” which sufficiently accounts for what follows, not to say that it is almost 
inevitable for Menenius to proceed from attack on character to attack on looks. 
It cannot be said, as Gordon does, that ‘‘‘faces’ is pointless without” the pun he 
suggests.’ [With this I quite agree; I may even go further and say that for philo- 
logical reasons Gordon’s deduced pun is inadmissible, since it depends entirely 
upon the sense in which ‘faces’ is to be taken. His quotation from Cotton is 
too late (1674) to be acceptable as an example of Shakespearian usage. The 
name applied to ‘face cards,’ according to Murray (NV. £. D.), was ‘coat, or cote 
cards’ (from the brightly coloured costumes of the king, queen, and knave) down 
to the end of the seventeenth century, for example, 1563. Foxe, Actes & Monu- 
ments, etc., p. 1282, ‘The best cote carde in the bunche, yea thoughe it were 
the Kyng of Clubbes.’? Again, 1591. Florio, Second Fruites, 69, ‘I have none 
but coate cardes.’ In the same edition of Cotton’s Gamester, and on the same page 
from which Gordon quotes, we find: ‘The value of your coat-cards and trumps.’ 
By an easy transition the term was changed to our modern one, court-cards —Ep.] 

63, 64. Map of my Microcosme] VERITY (Student’s Sh.): That is, his face. 
Shakespeare uses ‘map’=démage or picture of, and here the face is regarded as a 
picture of a man’s whole character and constitution (a favourite thought with 
Spenser). For the figurative use of ‘map’ cf. Sonnet Ixviii: ‘Thus is his cheek the 
map of days outworn.’ [Verity interprets ‘If you see this’ as referring to ‘this 
character,’ 1. 66, 2. e., all that he has been saying of himself. ‘The line of thought,’ 
adds Verity, ‘is not very clear (to me), but obviously Menenius is nettled at 
Sicinius’s words in |. 45, and shows his annoyance by reiterating them with ironical 
emphasis.’]|—CasrE (Arden Sh.): This map or chart may be Menenius’s face, as 
Verity interprets, or, more probably, merely the collective impression of Menenius 
possessed by the Tribunes and delivered from various sources—repute, personal 
observation of his habits, etc., perception of his opinion of themselves. 

64. Microcosme] W. A. Wricut: That is, my little world, man being regarded 
as the universe in little. Menenius still remembers the apologue which he ad- 
dressed to the citizens in the first scene of the play. The same idea of man being 
a microcosm occurs several times in Shakespeare. In his discourse on the virtues 
of sherris-sack (2 Henry IV: IV, iii, 116-122) Falstaff says: ‘It illumineth the 
face, which as a beacon gives warning to all the rest of this little kingdom, man, 
to arm; and then the vital commoners and inland petty spirits muster me all to 
their captain, the heart, who, great and puffed up with this retinue, doth any deed 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 183 


nough too ? What harme can your beefome Con{pectui- 65 
ties gleane out of this Charracter, if I be knowne well e- 
nough too. . 67 

65. beefome] F., Ktly. beefom F;. 65, 66. Confpectuities| conspicuities 
befom F,, Rowe, Pope. bissom Beech- Del. conj.  conspectivity Whitelaw 
ing. bisson Theob. et cet. conj. 


of courage.’ [References or allusions to the body of man as a microcosm or world 
in little are found in many of the writers contemporary with Shakespeare and 
those before him. The idea is very ancient. For other examples and illustra- 
tions see a note on the lines ‘the state of man Like to a little kingdom,’ Jul. Ces., 
II, i, 75, 76, this edition —Ep.] 

65, 66. beesome Conspectuities] THropatp: If the editors have formed any con- 
struction to themselves of this epithet ‘besom,’ that can be @ propos to the sense 
of the context—Davis swm non Oedipus: it is too hard a riddle for me to expound. 
Menenius, ’tis plain, is abusing the Tribunes, and bantering them ironically. By 
“Conspectuities’ he must mean their sagacity, clearsightedness; and that they 
may not think he is complimenting them he tacks an epithet to it, which quite 
undoes that character, i.e., bisson, blind, bleer-eyed. Skinner, in his Etymologicon, 
explains this word, Caecus: vox agro Lincoln usitatissima. Ray concurs, in his 
North and South Country Words. And our author gives us this term again in 
his Hamlet, where the sense exactly corresponds with this interpretation: ‘Run 
barefoot up and down, threatning the flames With bisson rheum,’ [II, ii, 528], 
i.e., blinding. It is spoken of Hecuba, whose eyes o’erflow and are blinded both 
with tears and the rheums of age. [MALonz, in elucidation of the word bisson, 
quotes the above passage from Hamlet without any notice that both explana- 
tion and quotation are Theobald’s.—Ep.]—HAa.iiweL. (Folio Edition) quotes 
from Boucher’s Glossary of Archaic & Provincial Words, s. v. Bisson, as follows: 
‘That is, blind. Skinner’s explanation and etymology of this word are almost 
beneath notice, owing, I imagine, to his having too hastily taken it for granted 
that bisson, in Shakespeare’s time, did really signify positive blindness. It has 
long appeared to me that bisson is fairly deducible from the Saxon verb, of which 
the literal import is respicere; and respicere, exactly translated, means to look 
back upon. Shakespeare may be thought to have this idea in his mind when in 
a speech by the same personage, just before that in which bisson occurs, he says: 
“You talk of pride; oh, that you could turn your eyes towards the napes of your 
necks, and make but an interior survey of your good selves.” And it is still more 
probable that this idea, having taken possession of his mind, led him immedi- 
ately after to use the word bisson, which, I conceive, is its true sense, notwith- 
standing its having acquired, in process of time, a somewhat different one in 
provincial speech. Bisson rheum it would be harsh, and forced beyond all prece- 
dent, to interpret into blindness occasioned by rheum or a defluxion; nor would 
it add much, if anything, to the sense and meaning of the passage, even if the 
context would admit of such an interpretation. The whole speech has, and was 
intended to have, an air of obscurity and mysteriousness, that it might with the 
more effect, as well as with greater safety, convey more than met the ear. The 
passage in Coriolanus, in which we have the odd phrase of “bisson conspectuities,” 
is also, with the same view, dark and ambiguous, that its ironical severity might 


184 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Ti scetie 


Bru. Come fir come, we know you well enough. 68 
Menen. You know neither mee, your felues, nor any 
thing : you are ambitious, for poore knaues cappes and 70 


legges : you weare out a good wholefome Forenoone, in 


41. legges| lungs G. Gould. 


be the more poignant. ‘Bisson conspectuities,” as I would interpret it, means, 
and is equivalent to, indirect or distorted view, &c. It is easy, if not natural, to 
regard distorted vision as imperfect; and an imperfect sight as blindness.’—The 
unfortunate derivation by Skinner to which Boucher alludes is quoted in Nares, 
s. v. Bisson as ‘from by, for besides or without, and sin, a Dutch word signifying 
sight: the sight being the most excellent sense.’—[For the various forms in which 
this word appears and earlier examples of its use, see V. E. D., s. v. Bisson.—Ep.]— 
W. A. Wricut: That is, your purblind powers of vision. In ‘conspectuities’ 
Menenius is playing upon the ignorance of the Tribunes with a word of his own 
invention. The word is from the A.-S. bisen, blind, which is found in the Lin- 
disfarne MS. of the Gospels printed for the Surtees Society. In Mati., ix, 27, ‘duo 
caeci’ is rendered ‘tuoege bisene,’ and as an alternative to the latter word ‘blinde’ 
is added. Again in Matt., xi, 5, ‘caeci vident’ is rendered ‘biseno gesea.’ In 
the Old English poem, The Owl and the Nightingale 243, ‘bisne’ and ‘blind’ are 
distinguished: ‘A dai thu art blind other bisne,’ by day thou art blind or dim- 
sighted. ‘Beesen’ is still familiar in Lincolnshire (see Brogden’s Provincial Words, 
&c., used in Lincolnshire), and ‘ Bizzen blind,’ purblind, is in Miss Baker’s North- 
amptonshire Glossary. The form ‘Beesome,’ ‘beesom,’ or ‘Besom,’ which is found 
in the folios, is perhaps only a dialectic variety or corruption of ‘bisson.’ Among 
the words in the late Sir Frederic Madden’s Collection, which is now in my 
possession, I find under the head ‘Bysom’ a quotation from a poem with the 
proverbial title ‘The bysom ledys the blynde’ (MS. Harl. 5396, fol. 295; printed 
in Wright and Halliwell’s Reliqguie Antique, ii, 283), and another from MS. Add. 
11,307, fol. 115 0: 


‘Ther stod Longius a bisom knyght, 
Thei maden hym vnder the rode go.’ 


In the latter example the ‘bisom knyght’ is the same as ‘Longeus the blind’ or 
‘blynde Longeus’ of the Cursor Mundi, 16,385. Richardson quotes from Udal’s 
translation of Erasmus’s Paraphrase on Mark, viii. (fol. 52 b): ‘This man was not 
poreblynd, ora litell appayred, and decayed in sight, but as bysome as was possyble 
to be’; where the Latin is ‘sed profundissima caecitate obrutus.’ See also Huloet’s 
Abcedarium, ‘Blynde or besom borne. Cecigenus.’ The analogy of the Dutch 
bijziend, near-sighted, is apparently accidental, although it is referred to by Ett- 
miiller (Lexicon Anglo-Saxonicum, p. 294), who regards ‘bisen’ as equivalent to 
‘bise6nde.’ 

7°, 71. cappes and legges] MAtonr: That is, for their obeisance shown by 
bowing to you. To make a leg was the phrase of our author’s time for a bow, 
and is still used in ludicrous language. 

71. you weare out ... Forenoone] WARBURTON: It appears from this whole 
speech that Shakespeare mistook the office of praefectus urbis for the Tribune’s 


ACT I, sc. i.] CORIOLANUS 185 


hearing a caufe betweene an Orendge wife, and a Forfet- ye, 
feller, and then reiourne the Controuerfie of three-pence 
to a fecond day of Audience. When you are hearing a 
matter betweene party and party, if you chaunce to bee 75 


72. Orendge wife] Orange-wife Fy. 73. the] a Pope,+. 
72, 73. Forfet-feller] F.F;. Faufet- Controwerfie] controversion Rowe 
feller F,, Rowei. faucet-seller Neils. ii. 
Fosset-seller Rowe ii. et cet. 75. betweene party] between a party 
73. retourne] adjourn Pope,+, Coll. F,, Rowe, Pope. 
MS. 


office. [‘But,’ comments W. A. Wricut, ‘he merely followed North’s Plutarch 
in regarding the Tribunes as magistrates.’—Ep.]—CampBELL (p. 119): In this 
drama, in which we should not expect to find any allusion to English juridical 
proceedings, Shakespeare shows that he must have been present before some tire- 
some, testy, choleric judges at Stratford, Warwick, or Westminster. [The present 
passage quoted. Campbell also remarks, without reference to Warburton, on the 
mistake as regards the office of the Tribunes.—Eb.], ‘but in truth,’ he adds, ‘Shake- 
speare was recollecting with disgust what he had witnessed in his own country.’— 
“And if so, what then?’ asks J. M. Robertson (Baconian Heresy, p. 85). ‘Is this 
any proof of profound legal knowledge? Where the claim is so feeble, it is hardly 
worth while to offer parallel instances; but, as usual, they are easily found. The 
testy and choleric judge, a lamentably common figure in Tudor England, appears 
in Webster’s White Devil; in Chapman’s Admiral of France; in Massinger’s The 
Fatal Dowry, and in Lodge and Greene’s Looking Glass For London. In The 
Duchess of Malfy (I, i.) Webster makes Antonio say of the Duke that he “will 
seem to sleep o’ the bench Only to trap offenders.”” Is this such a reminiscence as 
proves legal training?’—Brrcuine (Falcon Sh.): The description would no doubt 
apply to Robert Shallow, Esquire. We may add that IV, vi. shows that this char- 
acter of the Tribunes is overdrawn. 

72, 73. Forset-seller] W. A. Wricut: That is, a seller of faucets or taps. Pals- 
grave (Lesclarcissement de la langue Francoyse) gives: ‘Faucet to drawe wyne— 
faucet z, m.; broche a estouper le win.’ And Cotgrave, ‘Guille: f. The quill, or 
faucet of a wine vesseil.? The French forms of the word given in Cotgrave are 
Faulset and Fausset. See Massinger, New Way to Pay Old Debts, IV, ii, ‘They 
are good souls As ever drew faucet.—Case (Arden Sh.): Originally faucet had 
the meaning of the peg or screw, as opposed to spigot, the tube with which it 
makes up the tap, and it has still this meaning in the Sheffield dialect. Compare 
Lyly, Mother Bombie, I, v. (ed. Fairholt, ii, ror): ‘Memp. Tl teach my wag- 
halter to know grapes from barley. Pris. And I mine to discerne a spigot from a 
faucet.’ But fauset, rarely fosset, was early used for the whole tap. See instances 
in N. E. D., which include the spelling in the text. Mr A. P. Paton has shown 
that forseta = little chest or coffer (cistella, arcella) in Gouldman’s Latin Dict., 
and forset (and also forser) occurs much earlier; see Furnivall’s Earliest English 
Wills, E. E. T. S., p. 70, 1. 31, and p. gt, |. 20, and note ‘tal. forziere, a chest, a 
forcet, . . . Florio, 1598.’ But a seller of taps is more likely to be coupled with 
an orange-seller than a seller of caskets. 

73. reiourne] Cratcie (NV. E£. D., s. v. 1.): To adjourn, postpone, defer, put 


186 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. i. 


pinch’d with the Collicke, you make faces like Mum- 76 
mers, fet vp the bloodie Flagge againft all Patience, and 
in roaring for a Chamber-pot, difmiffe the Controuerfie 
bleeding, the more intangled by your hearing : All the 
peace you make in their Caufe, is calling both the parties 80 
Knaues. You are a payre of {trange ones. 

Bru. Come, come, you are well vnderftood to bee a 82 


79. bleeding] pleading Coll. ii. (MS.), Huds. ii. 


off. 31556. Chron. Gr. Friars (Camden), 66: “Item the terme rejurnyd from the 
Assencion unto Myhylmas.’ 

76, 77. Mummers] W. A. Wricut: That is, maskers or masqueraders. See Cot- 
grave (Fr. Dict.): ‘Mommeur: m. A Mummer; one that goesa mumming. Mom- 
mon, as Mommeur; Also, a troupe, or companie of mummers; also, a visard, or 
maske.’? Brand (Popular Antiquities, i. 461, Bohn’s ed.) says, speaking of Christ- 
mas, ‘Mumming is a sport of this festive season which consists in changing clothes 
between men and women, who, when dressed in each other’s habits, go from one 
neighbour’s house to another, partaking of Christmas cheer, and making merry 
with them in disguise.’ The etymology of the word is uncertain. The Germans 
have mumme, mummen, mummer, and mummerei; the Dutch, mommen, &c.; and 
in consequence a Teutonic origin has been assigned to the word. But, on the other 
hand, the French mommeur, mommerie, the Italian mommeo, mommea, mommeare, 
and the Spanish momeria, seem all to point to the Latin momus as the origin of 
the word. In Minsheu’s Spanish Dictionary an explanation occurs which illus- 
trates the present passage: ‘hazer Mémios, to make mops and mowes with the 
mouth, to make visages and foolish faces.’ 

77. set vp the bloodie Flagge] Jonson: That is, declare war against pa- 
tience. There is not wit enough in this satire to recompense its grossness.— 
W. A. Wricut: The red flag was the signal of battle. See Henry V: I, ii, 101: 
‘Stand for your own, unwind your bloody flag.’ And Jul Ces., V, i, 14: ‘Their 
bloody sign of battle is hung out.’ The famous Dr Sacheverall, in his sermon at 
Oxford in 1702, on Proverbs, viii, 15, denounced as apostates and traitors to the 
Church of England those of her members who were favourable to the dissenters: 
‘Against Whom every Man, that Wishes Its Welfare, ought to hang out the 
Bloody Flag, and Banner of Defiance.’ 

79. bleeding] SmncER (Text of Sh. Vindicated, p. 213): The substitution [by 
Collier’s MS. Corrector] of pleading for ‘bleeding’ is very plausible as a prob- 
able misprint.—Hupson (ed. i.): Here again we derive a judicious and valuable 
correction from Collier’s second Folio. It is not easy to discover why ‘bleeding’ 
should be used in such a connection. [Hudson in his ed. ii. returns, however, to 
the Folio text without comment.—Ep.]—Lro (Coriolanus): I have no doubt 
that Collier’s Correction is right in emending this word to pleading; the plead- 
ing controversy is entangled.—Gorpon: Instead of healing the dispute, they 
only wound it further and send it away raw and bleeding. It was proverbial to 
say of a raw or unfinished affair that it still ‘bled’ Compare The Buggbears 
(1564), IV, iii: ‘Thou hast sene nothinge yet, to that thou shalt see. For yet 
it lies and bledes.’ 


ACT I, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 187 
perfecter gyber for the Table, then a neceffary Bencher in 83 
the Capitoll. 

Men. Our very Priefts muft become Mockers, if they 85 
fhall encounter fuch ridiculous Subie¢ts as you are, when 
you fpeake beft vnto the purpofe. It is not woorth the 
wagging of your Beards, and your Beards deferue not fo 
honourable a graue,as to ftuffe a Botchers Cufhion, or to 
be intomb’d in an Affes Packe-faddle; yet you muft bee go 
faying, Martius is proud : who in a cheape eftimation, is 
worth all your predeceffors, fince Deucalion, though per- 
aduenture fome of the beft of ’em were hereditarie hang- 
men. Godden to your Worfhips, more of your conuer- 
fation would infeét my Braine, being the Heard{men of 95 


83. for] of Warb. Johns. 94. Godden] God den F,F;. Good-e’en 


86. are,] are; F,, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. are. Johns. et seq. 

87. purpofe. It| purpofe, it F, et seq. 

go. Packe-faddle;| pack-saddle. Rowe 
et seq. 

93. em] Fi, Rowe, Coll. them Pope 
ee Cet. 


F,, Rowe, Pope ii, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. Varr. Good-een Pope i. Good 
e’en Cap. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
Knt, Hal. Good den Coll. Del. Ktly, 
Wh. i, Huds. Craig. God-den Dyce, 
Sta. Cam.+, Words. Huds. ii, Neils. 
95. Heard/men] herdsman Coll. i. 


83. perfecter gyber...then...] Modern grammatical construction would 
here require rather than. See Asgott (§ 390, end), who compares this passage 
with Tempest, V, i, 28: ‘The rarer action is In virtue than in vengeance.’—Eb. 

85. Our very Priests . . . Mockers] STEEVENS: So, in Much Ado, ‘Courtesy 
itself must convert to disdain, if you come in her presence,’ [I, i, 123]—E. K. 
CHAMBERS (Warwick Sh.): Menenius has become more abusive than witty. The 
shaft of the Tribunes, who hinted that even by the Patricians he is not taken very 
seriously, has gone home. 

89. to stuffe a Botchers Cushion] W. A. Wricut: Compare Lily’s Mydas, 
v. 2 (Works, ii, 63, ed. Fairholt): ‘A dozen of beards, to stuffe two dozen of cush- 
ions.’ A botcher was a patcher of old clothes. See Twelfth Night, I, v, 51: ‘If 
he mend, he is no longer dishonest; if he cannot, let the botcher mend him. Any- 
thing that’s mended is but patched.’ Huloet, Abcedariwm, gives, ‘Bodger, botcher, 
mender, or patcher of olde garmentes. Rudiarius.’ 

92. Deucalion] W. A. Wricut: Deucalion was the Greek Noah. Compare 
Winter’s Tale, ‘Far than Deucalion off,’ IV, iv, 442; that is, more remote in 
relationship than Deucalion. 

94. Godden] SINGER (ed. ii.): ‘Good den,’ I think, meant good day, and not 
good e’en or evening. See Rom. & Jul., Il, iv, 116. [This reference, cited by Singer, 
shows very clearly that in the time of Shakespeare the hours after noon were 
indiscriminately termed either afternoon or evening, as is the custom in the 
southern states of America. It is not by any means a proof that ‘God den’ 
meant good day.—Ep.] 

94, 95. your conuersation ... being] For other examples of a participle with 
pronoun implied in a pronominal adjective see ABBOTT, § 379. 


188 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT II, SC. i. 


the Beaftly Plebeans. I will be bold to take my leaue of 96 


you. 
Bru. and Scic. 


Afide. 


Enter Volumina, Virgilia,and Valeria. 


How now (my as faire as Noble)Ladyes,and the Moone 100 
were fhee Earthly, no Nobler ; whither doe you follow 


your Eyes fo faft ? 


Volum. Honorable Menenius, my Boy Martius appro- 
ches : for the loue of [uno let’s goe. 104 


96. the...Plebeans.] the...Plebeians. Ff, 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Coll. Wh. i, 
Neils. beastly Plebeians. Warb. Johns. 
Var. 773. the...Plebeians; Cap. et cet. 

98. Bru. and Scic. Afide. Enter 
Volumnia...Valeria.| Brutus and Si- 
cinius afide. Enter Volumnia and 
Valeria. Ff. Exeunt Brutus and Si- 
cinius. Enter Volumnia...Valeria. 
Rowe. Exe. Brutus and _ Sicinius. 
ScENE ul. Enter Volumnia...Valeria. 
Pope, Han. Brutus and Sicinius stand 
aside. As Menenius is going out, enter 
Volumnia...Valeria. Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Enter, hastily, Volumnia, 
Virgilia, Valeria, and a great Crowd of 
People: Tribunes join the crowd. Cap. 


nia, Virgilia, and Valeria, and a great 
crowd of people. Mal. Brutus and 
Sicinius retire. Enter Volumnia... 
Valeria, &c. Steev. Dyce, Coll. ii, Sta. 
Wh. Words. Huds. ii. Brutus and 
Sicinius retire to the back of the scene. 
Enter Volumnia...Valeria. Var. ’03, 713, 
’21, Sing. Knt, Coll. i, Del. Hal. Ktly, 
Huds. i. Brutus and Sicinius go aside. 
Enter Volumnia...Valeria. Cam.+, 
Craig, Neils. 
99. SCENE 1. Warb. Johns. 

100. now (my as...] Fi, Rowe, Pope. 
now my (as... Theob. Warb. now my 
as Johns. Var. 773. now, my fair as 
Var. ’78,’85. now, my as... Han. et cet. 

100, 101. and...Nobler] In paren- 


Enter Volumnia, Virgilia, and Valeria. 
Var. ’73, 78, 785, Ran. Enter Volum- 


theses Johns. et seq. 


98. Bru. and Scic. Aside] Miss C. H. Haynurst (p. 8): Rowe’s change here [see 
Text. Notes], it would seem, is a poor one, because dramatically it is much more 
effective to have the Tribunes present to view the great ado made by the people 
at the triumphal entry of Coriolanus to which they refer a little farther on in the 
scene. 

100. (my as faire as Noble) Ladyes] P. Stimpson (Sh. Punctuation, p. 94): [In 
the Folio] compound nouns or adjectives are enclosed within brackets, where we 
should employ the hyphen if we used any punctuation at all. Compare I, i, 132 
ante; and ‘In ranke, and (not to be endur’d) riots Sir. —King Lear, I, i, 226. 

101, 102. whither ...so fast] Case (Arden Sh.): Shakespeare here beauti- 
fully refers to the eager glances of the expectant ladies, which were, as one might 
say, darted out before them towards the place where their warrior was about to 
appear. We might compare Montano’s expression in Othello, II, i, 35-37: ‘Let’s 
to the seaside, ho! As well to see the vessel that’s come in, As to throw out our 
eyes for brave Othello.’ In Miss Jackson’s Shropshire Word Book, 1867, we find: 
‘Follow your looks boys and come to the fire,’ quoted from the Shropshire News, 
Nov. 20°, 1897. 


ACT I, Sc. i.] CORIOLANUS 189 


Menen. Ha? Martius comming home ? 105 
Volum. 1, worthy Menenius, and with moft profperous 
approbation. 
Menen. Take my Cappe Iupiter,and I thanke thee : 
hoo, Martius comming home ? 
2.Ladies. Nay,’tis true. Bie) 
Volum. Looke,here’s a Letter from him,the State hath 
another, his Wife another, and (I thinke) there’s one at 
home for you. 
Menen. 1 will make my very houfe reele to night : 
A Letter for me ? II5 
Virgil. Yes certaine,there’s a Letter for you, I faw’t. 


108. Cappe] cup Warb. 110. 2. Ladies.] Both. Rowe,+. Vir. 

109. hoo,] Ho, Cap. Val. Cap. Cam.+-, Huds. ii. Vol. Vir. 
{throwing up his cap. Coll. Dyce, Sta. Craig. 

Ktly, Neils. 116. faw’t| Ff, Rowe,+, Knt, Dyce, 


Cam.+. saw it Cap. et cet. 


108. Take my Cappe] WARBURTON: Tho’ Menenius is made a prater and a 
boon-companion, yet it was not the design of the poet to have him prophane, and 
bid Jupiter take his cap. Shakespeare’s thought is very different from what his 
editors dreamed of. He wrote, Take my cup, Jupiter, z. e., I will go offer a liba- 
tion to thee for this good news, which was the custom of that time. There is 
a pleasantry, indeed, in his way of expressing it, very agreeable to his convivial 
character. But the editors, not knowing the use of this cup, alter’d it to ‘cap.’— 
HEATH (p. 414): Mr Warburton’s religious zeal is alarmed at the common read- 
ing, ‘my cap,’ which he therefore alters to my cup, but it unfortunately happens 
that, being in the street, he hath no cup at hand to make the libation out of; 
and though Mr Warburton understands this to be an engagement, that he will 
go home and offer the libation aforesaid, yet he seems in no great haste to acquit 
himself, but tarries on the stage until the procession is ended. In truth this gen- 
tleman’s religion needed not have been so immoderately scrupulous. Here was 
no prophaneness intended. Menenius, on hearing the good news of Marcius, 
his return with victory, throws up his cap into the air as a token of his exultation; 
and at the same time that he thanks Jupiter offers him his cap, being the first 
thing that came to hand, as an acknowledgement of his protection of the republic. 
This is followed by a huzza in the usual form: ‘Hoo, Marcius coming home!’ 
Now what reason can be given why our poet might not have imagined a cap 
thrown up into the air with thanks as acceptable an offering to Jupiter as a liba- 
tion, at least till an opportunity of offering the latter should present itself? But 
be this as it will, the libation is certainly out of the case for the reasons already 
given.—JouHNson: Shakespeare so often mentions throwing up caps in this play 
that Menenius may be well enough supposed to throw up his cap in thanks to 
Jupiter—Matone remarks that Warburton’s proposed change is an indication 
of how little Warburton knew of Shakespeare —W. A. Wricut: He throws his 
cap into the air, Jupiter being especially the god of the sky. 


190 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT 11, SC. i. 


Menen. A Letter for me ? it giues me an Eftate of fe- 117 
uen yeeres health ; in which time, I will make a Lippe at 
the Phyfician:The moft foueraigne Prefcription in Galen, 
is but Emperickqutique ; and to this Preferuatiue, of no 120 
better report then a Horfe-drench. Is he not wounded ? 
he was wont to come home wounded ? 

Virgil. Oh no, no, no. 

Volum. Oh, he is wounded,I thanke the Gods for’t. 

Menen. So doe I too, if it be not too much : brings a 125 
ViGtorie in his Pocket?the wounds become him. 


120. Emperick qutique] Fo. Embper- (MS.), Huds. i. empiricutick Mal. et 


tckttque F3F,  empericktick Rowe. cet. 

emperic Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. 125. it be] he be F,, Rowe,+. 
empiric Jobns. Var. 773, ’78. em- a] Ff, Rowe, Theob. i, Knt. 
perick qutique Var. ’85. empirictic he a Pope, Han. a’ Theob. ii. et cet. 
Del. Cla. empiric physic Coll. ii, iii. 126. Pocket?] pocket, Han. 


119. Galen] Grey: An anachronism of near 650 years. Menenius flourished 
Anno U. C. 260, about 492 before the birth of our Saviour. Galen was born in 
the year of our Lord 130, flourished about the year 155 or 160, and lived to the 
year 200. 

120. Emperickqutique] Rrrson (Remarks, p. 141): ‘The most sovereign pre- 
scription in Galen (says Menenius) is to this news but empiricutick,’ an adjective 
evidently formed by the author from empirick (empirique), a quack—CoLERIDGE 
(Notes on Coriol.): Was it without, or in contempt of, historical information 
that Shakespeare made the contemporaries of Coriolanus quote Cato and Galen? 
I cannot decide to my own satisfaction —CoLuiER (Notes & Emend., etc., p. 351): 
Emperickqutique was not, if we are to believe the old Corrector, formed from 
‘emperick,’ [as Ritson suggests], but was a blunder of the printer for two words 
which he absurdly combined in one, namely, ‘empirick’ and ‘physique,’ as physic 
was then often spelt: we ought, therefore, to read, ‘the most sovereign prescrip- 
tion in Galen is but empiric physic,’ etc. ‘Empiric physic’ is, of course, only 
quack medicine.—SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, p. 213): The proposed reading, em- 
pirick physique, is plausible. The Corrector of my second Folio has effaced six 
letters in the middle of the word, leaving it empirique, which answers every pur- 
pose. The third Folio made a step toward it by printing empiricktique—Hupson 
(ed. i.): There can be little doubt that ‘empirickqutique’ is a misprint for em- 
pirick physique, the correction in Collier’s Folio. 

125, 126. brings a Victorie] Caper (vol. I, pt i, p. 85): Here’s another 
of Menenius’ speeches, damag’d of the moderns by length’ning it—‘ Brings he a 
victory, etc?’ The excess of Volumnia’s joy breaks out, as nature wills that it 
should do, in indirect answers and broken expressions: ‘On’s brows, Menenius,’ 
speaking exultingly, and instead of—he has it on his brows, Menenius; meaning the 
oaken garland that follows. And Menenius is not much behind her in extasy; 
showing it in short questions and quick passings from person to person; his 
sudden turn to the Tribunes (who are retir’d, and not gone as some editors make 


ACE, SCaa.| CORIOLANUS I9I 


Volum. On’s Browes : Menenius, hee comes the third 127 
time home with the Oaken Garland. 

Menen. Ha’s he difciplin’d Auffidius foundly ? 

Volum. Titus Lartius writes,they fought together,but 130 
Auffidius got off. 

Menen. And ’twas time for him too, Ile warrant him 
that : and he had ftay’d by him, I would not haue been fo 133 


127. Browes : Menenius,] Ff, Rowe, Has F,, Rowe i, et cet. 

Pope. brows, Menenius. Johns. brows, 130. Lartius] Lucius F;. 

Menenius; Theob. et cet. (subs.). 133. and] Ff, Rowe. if Pope,+. 
129. Ha’s] F.F;. Hath Rowe ii,+. aw Cap. et cet. 


them), and then again to Volumnia, is of this nature; and so his abruption in his 
tale of the wounds. 

127. On’s Browes: Menenius,] Mason (Comments on Johnson & Steevens, 1778, 
p- 249): This speech is wrong pointed; there should be a comma after Menenius, 
for it was the oaken garland, not the wounds, that Volumnia says he had on his 
brows. It appears afterwards that his wounds were in the shoulder and left arm. 
[As will be seen from the Text. Notes the pointing to which Mason takes exception 
is due to Theobald. The colon and comma of the Folio give actually the sense 
Mason requires.—Ep.]—MALone, in answer to Mason, says: ‘In Jul. Ces. we 
find a dialogue exactly similar, 


“Cas. No, it is Casca; one incorporate 
To our attempts.—Am I not stayed for Cinna? 
Cin. Tam glad on’t,” [I, iii, 136], 


z. e., 1am glad that Casca is incorporate. But Mason appears to me to have mis- 
apprehended the passage. Volumnia answers Menenius, without taking notice 
of his last words, “‘The wounds become him.” Menenius had asked, ‘‘ Brings he 
victory in his pocket?” “He brings it,” says Volumnia, “‘on his brows, for he comes 
the third time home brow-bound with the oaken garland, the emblem of victory.” 
If these words did not admit of so clear an explanation, in which the conceit is 
truly Shaksperian, the arrangement proposed by Mason might perhaps be ad- 
mitted, though it is extremely harsh, and the inversion of the natural order of 
the words not much in our author’s manner in his prose writings. —PYE (p. 246): 
Mr Malone appears to me to have mis-apprehended the note of Mr Mason, who 
seems to give precisely the same meaning with Mr Malone. Indeed, I read both 
the notes several times over with very great attention before I could find what 
other meaning could be adduced from Mr Mason’s note, but at last I found that 
he must suppose Mr Mason explains the passage thus, ‘He comes the third time 
home, with the oaken garland on’s brows,’ a construction, as express’d, very uncon- 
genial with Shakespeare’s prose style. By comma I conceive Mason meant gen- 
erally a stop; there is a colon in this edition. I prefer a period. This direction 
should have convinced Mr Malone that there was no idea of connecting so closely 
‘his brows’ with what follows; if he had said only a comma, there might have been 
some ground for the supposition. But the illustration from Jul. Ces. exactly 
corresponds with the idea of Mr Malone. 


192 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. i. 


fiddious’d, for all the Chefts in Carioles, and the Gold 
that’s in them. Is the Senate poffeft of this ? 135 
Uolum. Good Ladies let’s goe. Yes, yes, yes : The 
Senate ha’s Letters from the Generall, wherein hee giues 
my Sonne the whole Name of the Warre : he hath in this 
action out-done his former deeds doubly. 
Valer. In troth,there’s wondrous things fpoke of him. 140 
Menen. Wondrous : I, 1 warrant you,and not with- 
out his true purchafing. 
Virgil. The Gods graunt them true. 
Volum. True ? pow waw. 
Mene. True? Ile be fworne they are true : where is 145 
hee wounded,God faue your good Worfhips ? -Aartius 


134. fiddious’d] fidi-used Hal. 144. pow waw] Ff, Rowe,+, Cla. 
Carioles| Ktly, Schmidt. Coriolus pow wow Cap. et cet. 
Ff, Rowe. Corioli Pope et cet. 146. your] their Han. 


137. ha’s] has F 4. 


134. fiddious’d] Worpsworts (Historical Plays, i, 120): This is explained to 
mean treated as Coriolanus treated Aufidius. And if this be correct the word 
may be compared with, ‘Master Fer. Vl fer him,’ &c., Henry V: IV, iv, 27; 
with the use of the participle ‘mousing’ in King John, II, i, 371; and with the 
verb ‘to badger’= to annoy, as dogs do a badger. . . . It occurs to me that the word 
here may possibly be formed from ‘Fidius,’ the Volscian and Sabine name of the 
god Hercules—‘trounced by him as by another Hercules!’ (there is a reference 
to Hercules below, IV, i, 22, and again IV, vi, 126); not, however, without allusion 
to Aufidius’s name, which may have been derived from Fidius. Respecting this 
Volscian Hercules see Ovid, Fastz vi, 213. 

138. the whole Name of the Warre] W. A. Wricut: That is, the whole credit or 
glory of the war. Compare r Henry VI: IV, iv, 9: ‘York set him on to fight and die 
in shame, That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.’ [It is,I must admit, 
with hesitation that I question ay interpretation by Dr Wright, but may not this 
phrase refer to the fact that Cominius bestowed upon Marcius the title Coriolanus 
from the siege of Corioles? In I, ix, 71-73 Cominius says: ‘Therefore be it known 
. .. That. Caius Martius wears this war’s garland . . . and from this time For 
what he did before Corioles, call him . . . Marcus Caius Coriolanus.’ It is the ac- 
count of this incident that Cominius includes in his report to the Senate.—Ep.] 

146. wounded, God saue your good Worships] THEOBALD (Letter to Warburton, 
February 12, 1729; Nichols, [/ustrations, etc., ii, 481): You, dear Sir, alter the 
pointing of this passage, and imagine the people are to be apostrophised. It is 
true, the pointing is to be corrected, but Mr Pope’s inaccuracy has given rise to 
your latter suspicion, for where he marks, 1. 98, Exeunt Brutus et Sicinius, the 
old books only say Brutus and Sicinius aside, so that they do not go out, but only 
retire a little back to overhear what the ladies and Menenius talk of. Now when 
Menenius hears Marcius is returning from his conquest, he insultingly turns upon 
the Tribunes and cries: ‘God save your good worships! Marcius is coming; he 
has more cause to be proud.’ [See Text. Notes, 1. 148.—Ep.] 


ACT II, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 193 


is comming home : hee ha’s more caufe to be prowd: 147 
where is he wounded ? 

Volum. Ith’Shoulder, and ith’left Arme : there will be 
large Cicatrices to fhew the People, when hee fhall ftand 150 
for his place : he receiued in the repulfe of Tarquin feuen 
hurts ith’ Body. 

Mene. One ith’Neck, and two ith’Thigh,there’s nine 
that I know. 

Volum. Hee had, before this laft Expedition, twentie 155 
fiue Wounds vpon him. 

Mene. Now it’s twentie feuen ; euery gafh was an 


Enemies Graue. Hearke,the Trumpets. 158 
148. wounded?] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 140, 153. Ith’...ith’] I’the...i’the Cap. 

wounded? [To the Tribunes. Theob. et seq. 

Warb. (after 1. 146), Johns. Cap. Varr. 153. two] one too Warb. Theob. Han. 

Mal. Ran. Steev. To the Tribunes, Johns. Varr. Ran. 

who are standing back. Coll. ii. To 155. this] his F,, Rowe, Pope. 

the Tribunes who come forward. Var. 157. it’s] ’tis Rowe ii,+, Varr. Ran. 

703 et cet. 158. Enemies] enemy’s Rowe et seq. 


153, 154. there’s nine that I know] Warsurton: Seven,—one,—and two, 
and these make but nine? Surely we may assist Menenius in his arithmetic. 
This is a stupid blunder, but wherever we can account by a probable reason for the 
cause of it, that directs the emendation. Here it was easy for a negligent tran- 
scriber to omit the second one as a needless repetition of the first, and to make 
a numeral word of too.—MAtone, after quoting the substance of Warburton’s 
explanation and proposed changes, adds this comment: ‘It is not without reluc- 
tance that I encumber my page by even mentioning such capricious innovations, 
but I am sometimes obliged to do so to introduce the true explanation of passages.’ 
—This note Boswell did not include in the Variorum of 1821. Malone does not 
provide any explanation, evidently preferring that that task be undertaken by 
UPTON; see next note——Ep.—Upton: The old man, agreeable to his character, 
is minutely particular: ‘Seven wounds? let me see; one in the neck, two in the 
thigh—Nay, I am sure there are more, there are nine that I know of.’—Scumipt 
(Coriolanus): Menenius concludes aloud an enumeration he has made to him- 
self, and according to which Coriolanus has nine wounds, following the incidents 
just related by Volumnia.—Hupson (ed. ii.): Menenius probably has no reference 
to the wounds Volumnia was speaking of, but is probably trying to reckon up 
and locate those already known to himself; he therefore specifies three, and then, 
in his haste, merely states the gross number.—E. K. Caamsers (Warwick Sh.): 
Menenius is not adding three to Volumnia’s seven and making nine of them. 
He corrects her number by adding up all the Tarquin wounds, first aloud, then to 
himself, and finds there were nine.—Casr (Arden Sh.): The usual explanation is 
that Menenius silently completes a reckoning of the wounds and arrives at a 
total of nine. I believe he supplements by opposing neck and thigh to body, and 
then he, or the poet, hastily claims nine instead of ten. 


13 


194 THE TRAGEDIE OF FACT "IL, 'SC.48 


A fhowt, and flourifh. 
Uolum. Thefe are the Vihers of -Aartius : 160 
Before him,hee carryes Noyle ; 
And behinde him,hee leaues Teares : 
Death,that darke Spirit, in’s neruie Arme doth lye, 
Which being aduanc’d, declines, and then men dye. 


cA Sennet. Trumpets found. 165 
Enter Cominius the Generall,and Titus Latvus : be- 
tweene them Coriolanus,crown’d with an Oaken 
Garland, with Captaines and Soul- 


diers, and a Herauld. 169 

159. flourifh.] flourish within. Cap. Knt, Del. Dyce, Wh. Cam.+, Huds. 
Coll. iii. Craig, Neils. 

160-162. As two lines verse, ending: 162. And] Om. Han. 
Before him...Teares. Han. Mal. Steev. ScENE rt. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 
Varr. Sing. Coll. Sta. Hal. Ktly. Om. 165. Sennet] Sonet Fi. Sonnet Rowe 
Words. i. Om. Rowe ii,+, Var. 778. 

161, 162. As prose Pope, Theob. found.] Om. Cap. 
Warb. Johns. Cap. Var. ’o03, 713, 721. 166. Latius] Lartius F.F;. Lucius F,. 


160-162. These are... Teares] WALKER (Crit., i, 20) remarks that these 
lines are, in the Folio, wrongly printed as verse, whereas they should be prose. 
See Text. Notes also—EbD. 

163, 164. Death, that darke Spirit ... men dye] R. G. Wate: For reasons 
that will be apparent to the critical reader, when his attention is directed to the 
subject, I cannot accept this couplet as Shakespeare’s. The second line might 
be even poorer in thought, and yet have the external semblance to Shakespeare’s 
work, in which it is now utterly deficient. I believe the lines to have been added 
to the prompter’s book to please the actor of Volumnia with a round, mouth-filling 
speech.—HERWEGH (Evléuterungen und Bemerkungen, ed. UtRict, p. 163): My 
poetic sense cannot recognise these verses, especially the utterly flat second one, 
as Shakespearian. They are not worth the time spent upon a painful translation 
of them. I quite agree with Grant White. [Herwegh is, I think, to be commended 
for his excellent paraphrase of this couplet: 


‘Der finst’re Tod den Nerv’gen Arm ihm lenkt, 
Das Leben flieht, wo er ihn hebt und senkt.’ 


—Hupson (ed. ii.) and Rotre likewise agree with White that these lines are un- 
Shakespearian.—Ep.]—VeErity (Student’s Sh.): What rhyme there is in Shake- 
speare’s later plays is seldom if ever accidental. Here it lends a rhetorical 
emphasis to Volumnia’s great pride in her son. It isa supreme moment, that de- 
mands an extra something for its full expression, and the rhyme gives the some- 
thing.—BAYFIELD (p. 193): Surely the author of this wretched bombast was not 
Shakespeare? It reads like actor’s ‘gag,’ and ‘in’s’ is for once probably genuine. 

165-169. Trumpets sound ... a Herauld] J. C. Youne (p. 40): In the second 
scene of the second Act of Coriolanus, after the victory of the battle of Corioli, an 


ACT II, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 195 


Herauld. Know Rome, that all alone Martius did fight 170 
Within Corioles Gates : where he hath wonne, 


171. Corioles] Ktly. Coriolus Ff, Rowe. Corioli’s Johns. Var. ’85, Coll. Sing. 
ii, Wh. i, Huds. Corioli Pope et cet. 


ovation in honour of the victor was introduced with great and imposing effect 
by John Kemble. On reference to the stage directions of my father’s inter- 
leaved copy I find that no fewer than 240 persons marched, in stately procession, 
across the stage. In addition to the recognised dramatis persone, thirty-five in 
number, there were vestals, and lictors with their fasces, and soldiers with the 
spolia opima, and sword-bearers, and standard bearers, and cup-bearers, and 
senators, and silver eagle-bearers, with the S. P. Q. R. upon them, and trumpeters, 
and drummers, and priests, and dancing girls, &c., &c. Now, in this procession, 
and as one of the central figures in it, Mrs Siddons had to walk. Had she been 
content to follow in the beaten track of those who had gone before her she would 
have marched across the stage, from right to left, with the solemn, stately, almost 
funereal, conventional step. But at the time, as she often did, she forgot her 
own identity. She was no longer Sarah Siddons tied down by the conventions of 
the prompter’s book; she broke through old traditions—she recollected that, for 
the nonce, she was Volumnia, the proud mother of a proud son and conquering 
hero. So that, when it was time for her to come on, instead of dropping each foot 
at equi-distance in its place, with mechanical exactitude and in cadence subservient 
to the orchestra; deaf to the guidance of her woman’s ear, but sensitive to the 
throbbings of her haughty mother’s-heart, with flashing eye and proudest smile, 
and head erect, and hands pressed firmly on her bosom, as if to repress by manual 
force its triumphant swellings, she towered above all around, and rolled, and 
almost reeled across the stage; her very soul, as it were, dilating and rioting in its 
exultation; until her action lost all grace, and yet became so true to nature, so 
picturesque, and so descriptive that pit and gallery sprang to their feet, electrified 
by the transcendent execution of the conception. 

166. Titus Latius] P. A. Dante (Time Analysis, etc., New Sh. Soc. Trans., 
1877-79, p. 185, foot-note): The introduction of Titus Lartius in this scene is 
an oversight which has hitherto been unnoticed, but which modern editors might 
take on themselves to correct. Lartius does not speak, nor is he mentioned in 
the dialogue as being present. In I, ix. Cominius places him in charge of Corioli. 
In II, ii. he is supposed to be still there, for Menenius says, ‘Having determined 
of the Volsces and To send for Titus Lartius,’ etc. He does not make his appearance 
in Rome till III, i, and there we should understand that he has returned from 
Corioli without waiting to be recalled. In answer to Coriolanus, who says, 
‘Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?’ he replies: ‘He had, my lord; and 
that it was which caused Our swifter composition. —BrEcuine (Henry Irving 
Sh.), in answer to the foregoing objection by Daniel, says: ‘Possibly Lartius was 
allowed to join the triumph upon the stage without the question being raised 
whether he had come to Rome on purpose.’—This Beeching repeats in his notes 
in the later Falcon Sh., adding thereto the significant remark that the words ‘be- 
tween them,’ in the stage-direction, and later ‘You are three,’ |. 202, show that 
the slip was probably Shakespeare’s.—ED. 

171. Corioles Gates] For other examples of like noun-compounds see ABBOTT, 


§ 430. 


196 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT II, SC. i. 


With Fame,a Name to <Wartius Caius : 172 
Thefe in honor followes <Aartius Caius Coriolanus. 
Welcome to Rome, renowned Cortolanus. 


Sound. 


Flourifh. 175 


All. Welcome to Rome,renowned Cortolanus. 


Coriol. 
now no more. 


172, 173. Lines end: Thefe...Corio- 
lanus. Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Coll. Dyce, Sta. Hal. Wh. 
Cam.+, Huds. Words. 

Martius 
Martius Rowe et seq. 

173. Thefe...Coriolanus] Om. Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. 

Thefe] This Rowe ii. For these 


Caius] Caius 


Ktly. 
honor] sign of honor Anon. ap. 


No more of this, it does offend my heart: pray 


178 


173. followes] followeth Anon. ap. 

Cam. ii. 
Martius Caius Coriolanus] Ff, 

Rowe. now Coriolanus Cap.  Corto- 
lanus:—Welcome Dyce ii. (Walker), 
Huds. ii, Words. Coriolanus Var. ’73 
eticet, 

175. Sound.] Shout. Cap. Om. Mal. 
et seq. 

177. No...heart] As one line Pope et 
seq. 


Cam. ii. 177-182. As verse, ending lines: 


heart...Oh!...Gods...up: Pope et seq. 


172. Martius Caius] ScummtT (Coriolanus): The transposition of the name 
Martius Caius of the Folio to Caius Martius is, of course, the correction of an error, 
but an error for which undoubtedly Shakespeare, and not the compositor, is to blame, 
and it is not the office of the critic to correct the poet. That ‘Martius Caius’ 
has erroneously been repeated in the next line can hardly be doubted; even so 
little as it belongs in |. 174, since it rested with the Herald whether at the close he 
should announce the complete name without the addition of ‘renowned’ of this 
line. [Schmidt reads ll. 173, 174 as follows: 


‘In honour follows Coriolanus. Welcome 
To Rome, renowned Martius Caius Coriolanus.’—Ep.] 


173. in honor followes] CHAMBERS, noting Steevens’s regulation of the metre 
of this and the preceding line, says: ‘The third foot [after “follows”] is completed 
by a pause, to give due emphasis to the resounding name which follows.’ 

173. Martius Caius Coriolanus] MaLone: The Compositor, it is highly prob- 
able, caught the words ‘Martius Caius’ from the preceding line, where also in 
the old copy the original names of Coriolanus are accidentally transposed. 

177. No more of this] Mrs GrirritH (p. 438): In the first scene of the first 
Act one of the discontented citizens charges Marcius with paying himself for 
his services, ‘with being proud’; and his reproach was just. But yet here he seems 
to appear in a light the very reverse of such a character; for when the herald, in 
the voice of Rome, is proclaiming his merits, he stops him short by crying out, 
‘No more of this; it does offend my heart.’ He manifests the same modesty 
also in the scene following this. Again, when he is pressed to harangue the 
people in order to get himself elected Consul, he answers in the same style and 
spirit of character. But these seeming contradictions form in effect but one char- 
acter still. The overvaluing his merits, and the undervaluing the applause of 
them, are both equally founded in pride, fierceness, and impatience. Plutarch 


ACTIITGSCoas| CORIOLA NUS 197 


Com. Looke,Sir,your Mother. 

Coriol. Oh! you haue, I know,petition’d all the Gods 180 
for my profperitie. Kneeles. 

Volum. Nay,my good Souldier, vp: 
My gentle -Aartius, worthy Caius, 
And by deed-atchieuing Honor newly nam’d, 


What is it (Coriolanus) muft I call thee ? 185 
But oh, thy Wife. 
Corio. My gracious filence,hayle : 187 
182. good] Om. Pope, Han. 183. worthy] my worthy Han. 
{raising him. Dyce ii, Coll. iii, 184. deed-atchieuing|  deed-atchieved 
Words. Huds. ii. Han. deed, achieving Anon. ap. 
183, 184. My...And] As one line Cam. 
Theob. et seq. (except Knt). 187. [rises. Coll. ii. 


draws a comparison of Coriolanus with Alcibiades; but I think he more resembles 
Achilles, as described by Horace: ‘Vigilant, irascible, inflexible, harsh, and above 
all laws; acknowledging no rights, but those of conquest.’ 

181. Kneeles] WorpswortH (Sh’s Knowledge and Use of Bible, p. 201): Nicholas 
Ferrar was born when Shakespeare began to write, viz., in 1592; and we are told 
of him, when he was twenty-seven years old, and his mother came to visit him at 
Little Gidding, that ‘though he was of that age, and had been engaged in many 
public concerns of great importance, had been a distinguished member of parlia- 
ment, and had conducted with effect the prosecution of the Prime Minister of the 
day, at first approaching his mother, he knelt upon the ground to ask and receive 
her blessing’; and he kept up the same practice in his family; as did also, we read, 
Mr Philip Henry, who died in 1696; so that we have evidence of the existence of 
the custom during two centuries. Bishop Sanderson in 1657 mentions it as 
one of the observances which, in that disordered and distempered time, were 
cried down as ‘rags of popery.’ And there can be no doubt that during the Crom- 
wellian usurpation our old English manners suffered not a little, and ‘many prac- 
tices, which were themselves part and instruments of piety, were exploded and lost 
by being branded under that odious name’ (Eccles. Biog., iv, 180). There could 
not be a more striking illustration of the custom of which I have been speaking, 
than that Caius Marcius, on his return from the capture of Corioli and victory 
over the Volscians, should be made, as he is, to kneel and beg his mother’s blessing. 

184. deed-atchieuing Honor] WarirrLtaAw: Honour that, by inciting men to, 
may be said itself to achieve great deeds. [To this interpretation Scummt 
(Coriolanus) rightly, I think, dissents; he says: ‘ “‘Achieving”’ is here to be under- 
stood as the gerund, thus the phrase means honour which is achieved by deeds; 
according to the usual Shakespearian construction as in several other passages, for 
example, ‘‘an unrecalling crime,” Lucrece, 993, t.e., a crime that cannot be recalled; 
“his all-obeying breath,’’ Ant. & Cleo., III, xiii, 77, his breath which all obey, etc.’ 
Wricut also thus interprets the present phrase.—ED.] 

187. My gracious silence, hayle] WARBURTON: The epithet to silence shows it 
not to proceed from reserve or sullenness, but to be the effect of a virtuous mind 
possessing itself in peace. The expression is extremely sublime; and the sense of 


198 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Tnascane 


[187. My gracious silence, hayle] 
it conveys the finest praise that can be given to a good woman.—STEEVENS: By 
‘eracious silence’ I believe the poet meant, ‘thou whose silent tears are more 
eloquent and grateful to me than the clamorous applause of the rest.’ So 
Crashaw: 
‘Sententious show’rs! O! let them fall! 
Their cadence is rhetorical.’ 


[U pon the Death of a Gentleman, ll. 33, 34, ed. Grosart, ii, 219. For the locating of 
this passage I gladly acknowledge my indebtedness to Dr Louis F. Benson.-—Ep.] 
Again, in Love’s Cure, or The Martial Maid, Beaumont and Fletcher: 


‘A lady’s tears are silent orators, 
Or should be so at least, to move beyond 
The honey-tongued rhetorician.’ 


[V, iii; ed. Dyce, p. 188. The Ep. notes that both Folios read ‘honest-tongu’d.’— 
Ep.] Again, in Daniel’s Complaint of Rosamund, 1599: 


“Ah beauty, syren, fair enchanting good! 

Sweet silent rhetoric of persuading eyes! 

Dumb eloquence, whose power doth move the blood, 
More than the words or wisdom of the wise!’ 


Again, in Every Man out of his Humour, ‘You shall see sweet silent rhetoric, and 
dumb eloquence speaking in her eye,’ [Act III, sc. i, p. 95, ed. Gifford. Ina note 
on this passage the editor says: ‘I know not what Jonson found so ridiculous in 
the following extract, but this is not the only place in which he laughs at it.’ He 
then quotes the four lines from Daniel’s Complaint of Rosamund given by Steevens. 
Gifford compares: 
‘T will call you mine, 
And trouble this good shame [Fulvia] no farther.’ 


—Catiline, III, ii, p. 263, and thus notes: ‘Cicero is complimentary and poetical 
at once—this modest and virtuous lady. Examples of a similar kind are to be 
found in Shakespeare and others, where the predominant quality of the moment 
is turned into an appellative. Thus Coriolanus terms Volumnia [sic.] his “gracious 
silence.””’—Ep.]——Matone: I believe ‘My gracious silence’ only means My 
beauteous silence or my silent Grace. ‘Gracious’ seems to have had the same 
meaning formerly that graceful has at this day. So, in the Mer. of Ven., ‘But 
being season’d with a gracious voice,’ [III, ii, 76]. Again, in King John, ‘There 
was not such a gracious creature born,’ [III, iv, 81]. Again, in Marston’s Mal- 
contant, 1604, ‘he is the most exquisite in forging of veines, spright’ning of eyes 
. . . that ever made an old lady gracious by torch-light,’ [II, iv; ed. Hal., p. 233. 
Murray (NV. £. D.) corroborates Malone’s belief as to the former signification of 
‘gracious,’ quoting likewise the foregoing passage from Marston in illustration — 
Ep.].—Rusxin (Academy Notes, 855; ed. Cook & Wedderburn, xiv, p..16): In the 
whole compass of Shakespeare’s conceptions the two women whom he has gifted 
with the deepest souls are Cordelia and Virgilia. All his other women can speak 
what is in them. These two cannot. The ‘Nothing, my lord,’ of Cordelia, and 
the ‘gracious silence’ of Virgilia are the everlasting seals set by the Master of the 


ACD AlnSC.t-] CORIOLA NUS 199 


Would’ft thou haue laugh’d, had I come Coffin’d home, 188 
That weep’{t to fee me triumph ? Ah my deare, 
Such eyes the Widowes in Carioles were, 190 
And Mothers that lacke Sonnes. 

Mene. Now the Gods Crowne thee. 

Com. And liue you yet? Oh my fweet Lady, pardon. 193 


190. Carioles] Coriolus Ff, Rowe. 193. Com.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Schmidt. 
Cortoles Ktly. Corioli Pope et cet. Cor. Theob. et cet. 
were| weare Ff. [To Valeria. Theob. et seq. 


human heart upon the most sacred writing of its folded and golden leaves. Shake- 
speare himself could not find words to tell what was in these women. [Few, I 
think, realize how profound was the influence of Shakespeare upon the poetic 
soul of John Ruskin. In Cook & Wedderburn’s definitive edition of his writings 
the Shakespearian references occupy ten columns of the Index; that is, five 
large 8vo pages.—Ep.]—C. & M. Cowpren CrarxE (Shakespeare): This name 
for his wife, who, while the others are receiving him with loud rejoicings, meets 
and welcomes him with speechless silence looking out from her swimming eyes, is 
conceived in the very fulness of poetical and Shakespearian perfection. It com- 
prises the gracefulness of beauty which distinguishes her, and the gracious effect 
which the love-joy has upon him who shrinks from noisy applause and even from 
merely expressed approbation; and it wonderfully concentrates into one felicitous 
word the silent softness that characterizes Virgilia throughout. She is precisely 
the woman—formed by nature gentle in manner, and rendered by circumstances 
sparing in speech—to inspire the fondest affection in such a man as Coriolanus; 
and we accordingly find him a passionately attached husband. The few words 
he addresses to her in the course of the play are among the most intense utter- 
ances of spousal enamouredness that even Shakespeare has written. The dramatic 
portrait of Virgilia we have always considered to be one of the very finest of the 
poet’s sketch-productions. It is put in with the most masterly touches; it paints 
her by very few strokes, very few colours; but they are so true, so exquisitely 
artistic that they present her to the life. She is supremely gentle, and, like most 
women whose gentleness is their chief characteristic, singularly immoveable, not 
to say obstinate, when once resolved; she is habitually silent, as the wife of such 
a man as Coriolanus and the daughter-in-law of such a woman as Volumnia would 
undoubtedly become, being naturally of a gentle disposition; and this combination 
of gentleness and silence is wonderfully drawn by Shakespeare throughout the 
character-portrait, and as wonderfully condensed here into one expressive name.— 
Case (Arden Sh.): Abstract for concrete is common, though, as given to the 
mute Virgilia, the title may have been suggested by the following passage in North’s 
Plutarch, Life of Numa, ed. 1595, p. 72: ‘He, Numa, much frequented the Muses 
in the woddes. For he would say he had the most part of his revelations of the 
Muses and he taught the Romans to reverence one of them above all the rest, 
who was called Tacita, as ye would say Lady Silence.’ 

193. Com. And liue you yet] Scummr (Coriolanus): Compare Much Ado, 
‘are you yet living,’ I, i, 119. The modern editors have needlessly assigned this 
speech to Coriolanus. While Coriolanus speaks with Virgilia Cominius turns to 


200 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 


Volum. I know not where to turne. 
Oh welcome home:and welcome Generall, 195 
And y’are welcome all. 
Mene. A hundred thoufand Welcomes : 
I could weepe,and I could laugh, 
I am light, and heauie ; welcome : 
A Curfe begin at very root on’s heart, 200 
That is not glad to fee thee. 
Yon are three,that Rome fhould dote on : 
Yet by the faith of men,we haue 
Some old Crab-trees here at home, 
That will not be grafted to your Rallifh. 205 
Yet welcome Warriors : 
Wee call a Nettle, but a Nettle ; 


And the faults of fooles,but folly. 208 
194-199. Four lines, ending: home:... 200. on’s] of’s Cap. Varr. Ran. of 
all....weepe,...welcome: Pope et seq. his Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Del. 
196. y’are] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. Hal. on his Ktly. 
ye’re Dyce, Sta. Cam. Words. Huds. ii, 201-207. Lines end:  three...men... 
Craig. yow’re Neils. you are Cap. et not...Warriors:...And Pope et seq. 
cet. 202. Yon] You Ff. 
199. I am] I’m Pope,+. 203. we hauc] we've Pope,+. 
200. begin] begnaw Craig. 205. Rallifh| Relifh F,. 
at very] at the very Rowe. 206. Yet] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. 


Volumnia, from whom he once more returns to Menenius. Thus his deprecating 
‘O my sweet lady, pardon’ is most easily interpreted, otherwise we should not know 
wherewith to connect it. [Schmidt’s interpretation strikes me as both awkward 
and undramatic. The speech palpably belongs to Coriolanus; the words ‘And 
live you yet’ are addressed jocularly to the older man, Menenius, who has just 
addressed Coriolanus for the first time since his entrance. He then catches sight 
of Valeria, and turns to her, asking her pardon for neglecting her unwittingly. 
Theobald had evidently a sense of the theatre keener than that of Schmidt— 
GorDON suggests that the words of pardon are addressed to Virgilia, whereby 
Coriolanus ‘asks his wife to forgive him for jesting at her tears. —Ep.].—TuckEeR 
BrooxE (Yale Sh.): If 1. 193 really belongs to Coriolanus, it is possible that ‘I 
know not where to turn’ should also be assigned to him, and Volumnia’s speech 
begin ‘O! welcome home,’ which commences a new line in the Folio. 

198. I could weepe, and... laugh] Mrs Grirrira (p. 438): [This and the 
speech wherein Menenius expresses his joy at receiving the letter] have a double 
beauty in them if ’tis considered by whom they are delivered. It would not 
have near the effect upon the Reader if spoken by a more stayed and sober person; 
for virtues are apt to strike us more forcibly in slight characters than in sober 
ones; and Menenius has already given us a description of himself, in the preceding 
scene, which sufficiently justifies me in this distinction. 


ACT II, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 201 


Com. Euer right. 
Cor. Menenius, euer,euer. 
Herauld. Giue way there, and goe on. 
Cor. Your Hand,and yours? 
Ere in our owne houfe I doe fhade my Head, 
The good Patricians muft be vifited, 
From whom I haue receiu’d not onely greetings, 215 
But with them, change of Honors. 


210 


209, 210. Com. Euer...euer.] Com. 213. our] your Theob. i. 
Ever right Menenius. Cor. Ever, ever. 216-221. But...bui] Lines end: fee... 
Ran. (Tyrwhitt). Com. ver right. And...there’s...but (reading there is, 1. 
Cor. Menenius? ever, ever. Ritson. 220) Nicholson ap. Cam. 

212. [To Volumnia & Virgilia. Cam. 216. change] charge Theob. Han. 


+, Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. Craig, Sing. ii, Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), Ktly, Dyce 
Neils. To his Wife and Mother. Cap. ii, Words. Huds. ii. 


et cet. Honors] honour Han. 


209, 210. Euer right . . . euer] Tyrwuirr: Cominius means to say that 
‘Menenius is always the same—retains his old humour,’ [see Text. Notes]. So in 
Jul. C@es., V, i, upon a speech from Cassius, Antony only says, ‘Old Cassius 
still’, —-MALonE: By these words, as they stand in the Folio, I believe Coriolanus 
means to say, ‘Menenius is still the same affectionate friend as formerly.’ So, in 
Jul. Ces., ‘for always I am Ceasar,’ [I, ii, 212)—C. & M. Cowpren CLARKE 
(Shakespeare): Cominius, assenting to their old friend’s cheerfully philosophic way 
of taking the old ‘crab-trees’’ sourness, exclaims ‘Ever right’; and Coriolanus 
seconds his general’s assent by adding, ‘Menenius, ever, ever’; meaning ‘our old 
friend always takes the right view of these fellows’ crabbedness.? We explain 
this because the passage has been altered as if it were incorrect. 

216. change of Honors] THEOBALD: ‘Change of honours’ is a very poor ex- 
pression, and communicates but a very poor idea. I have ventur’d to substitute 
charge, i. e., a fresh charge or commission. These words are frequently mistaken 
for each other. So, afterwards, in this play: ‘And yet to change the sulphur with 
a bolt,’ [V, iii, 164]. For here we must likewise read charge; and so in Ant. & Cleo., 
‘Oh that I knew this husband, which, you say, must change his horns with gar- 
lands!’ [I, ii, 5]. In the Maid’s Tragedy (Beaumont & Fletcher) Charge is vice 
vers@ printed instead of change, ‘For we were wont to charge our souls in talk,’ 
[III, ii, p. 373, ed. Dyce]. This, ’tis evident, is nonsense; but friends, by the 
communication of their thoughts to each other, are finely said to exchange souls 
in talk—Warsurton: Mr Theobald had better have told the plain truth, and 
confessed that ‘change of honours’ communicated no idea at all to him. However, 
it has a very good one in itself, and signifies variety of honours; as change of raiment, 
amongst the writers of that time, signified variety of raiment.—CareE LL, I, pt 
i, p. 86): Meaning new honours and various; the expression is copied from a 
very frequent one in the Old Testament—changes of garments, which we under- 
stand in a sense something similar—C. & M. CowprNn CLARKE (Shakespeare): 
‘Change of honours,’ we think, here means exchange of titles, in reference to his 
new surname of Coriolanus, by which he is to be henceforth known and addressed, 
in lieu of the former one, Caius Marcius. ‘The good Patricians’ have confirmed 


202 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Volum. I haue liued, 


To fee inherited my very Wifhes, 
And the Buildings of my Fancie : 
Onely there’s one thing wanting, 


[ACT aT aSGias 


avy 


220 


Which (I doubt not) but our Rome 


Will caft vpon thee.. 
Cor. Know, good Mother, 


I had rather be their feruant in my way, 


Then {way with them in theirs. 


219-222. As two lines, ending: want- 
ing...vpon thee Johns. Var. ’73. Lines 
end: Onely...but...thee Mal. Dyce i, 
Cam.+, Craig, Neils. Lines end: 
there...but...thee (and reading there Is... 
for there’s) Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Hal. 
Dyce ii, Words. Huds. ii. 

219-221. And...wanting...Rome] As 
two lines, reading: And buildings of my 
fancy; only one thing Is wanting, which 
I doubt not but our Rome Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. 


225 

219. Buildings] beguilings Anon. ap. 
Cam. 

Fancie] An omission marked 
Ktly. fancy turn’d to sense Id. conj. 
(Expositor 362). 

220-222. Two lines, ending: doubt 
not...vpon thee Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 
Knt, Coll. Sta. Ktly, Wh. i, Huds. i. 
Lines end: not, but...vpon thee Del. 

220. there’s] there is Ktly. 

223, 224. Know...I] As 
Pope,+. 


one line 


225. Then] Ten Fo. 


the title which Cominius bestowed upon him on the battle-field, and he must now 
‘visit them’ to acknowledge their favour. His mother has just said by ‘deed- 
achieving honour newly-named,—What is it? Coriolanus must I call thee?’ 
Shakespeare occasionally uses ‘change’ for exchange; While Coriolanus—esteem- 
ing his own family name an honourable title, one of honourable distinction— 
might very naturally and characteristically speak of adopting this new surname 
as a ‘change of honours.’—Scumipt (Coriolanus): The elucidators apparently find 
no difficulty in this phrase since they explain it as variety of honours, new honours, 
which is nevertheless somewhat unusual, especially as it is not plain just what 
honour is meant. Perhaps Shakespeare wrote ‘chance of honours.’ That is, the pos- 
sibility, the outlook of honour, as in Macbeth, ‘chance of goodness,’ the outlook or 
hope of a fortunate issue. If ‘change’ is correct it must be somewhat like in Tam. 
of Shrew, ‘a double change of bravery,’ and thus mean a new decoration of honour. 
218. inherited] W. A. Wricut: That is, literally, possessed; and hence realised, 
enjoyed. Compare Rom. & Jul., I, ii, 30: ‘Even such delight Among fresh female 
buds shall you this night Inherit at my house.’ And Tit. Andron., II, iii, 3: ‘To 
bury so much gold under a tree And never after to inherit it.’ [For ‘the Buildings 
of my Fancie’ in next line WricuT compares ‘All the building in my fancy,’ Lear, 
IV, ii, 85.] 
219-222. And the. . . vpon thee] Asport (§ 499), under the heading Apparent 

Alexandrines, rearranges these lines thus: 

‘And the buildings of my fancy 

Only— 

There’s one thing wanting which, I doubt not, but 

Our Rome will cast upon thee.’ [See Text. Notes.] 


224, 225. I had rather... in theirs] Verity (Student’s Sh.): A significant 


ACT: SC) 1.] CORIOLANUS 203 


Com. On, to the Capitall. Flourifh. Cornets. 226 
Exeunt in State, as before. 


Enter Brutus and Scicinius. 


Bru. All tongues fpeake of him, and the bleared fights 229 


226. Cornets] Om. Cap. ward. Cap. Mal. Steev. The Tribunes 
SCENE Iv. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. remain, and come forward. Coll. ii. 
227, 228. Exeunt...Scicinius.] Ff, The Tribunes remain. Var. ’o3 et cet. 
Rowe, Pope, Han. Brutus and Sicinius 228. Scicinius] Sicinius Ff (through- 
come forward. Theob. Warb. Johns. out). 
Varr. Ran. Cam.+, Dyce ii, Words. 229. bleared] blearéd Dyce, Words. 


Huds. ii, Neils. Tribunes come for- 


foreshadowing. Coriolanus is, to a singular degree, a tragedy of premonitory 
hints and casual utterances which the after-course of events makes terribly 
momentous. 

225. sway with them] BrEecuinc (Falcon Sh.): That is, ‘Be king amongst 
them.’ This is a note of character. Coriolanus did not aim at tyranny as the 
Tribunes thought; he preferred helping the state to hurting it; but, above all, he 
preferred his own will. 

227. Exeunt, etc.] BErcaine (Henry Irving Sh.): Mr Daniel [Time Analysis] 
would mark a new scene here and a new day, thinking it improbable that Corio- 
lanus should be made to arrive in Rome, stand for the Consulship, and be ban- 
ished in one day. But such a criticism shows a misconception of the nature of 
time in tragedy, which is ideal, concerning itself only with the stages of an action. 

229. Bru.] E. K. CHamBers (Warwick Sh.): The discourse of the Tribunes shows 
that, at the very moment of Coriolanus’s triumph, he is near an unsuspected 
downfall. This elaborate description would be out of place in a modern play, 
because the increased capabilities of stage-effect would allow the scene to be repre- 
sented more effectually to the eye. But for the rudimentary condition of the 
Elizabethan theatre we should have lost some of Shakespeare’s finest descriptive 
passages.—S. BROOKE (p. 230): The Tribunes are not carried away by the triumph 
of Coriolanus. They see in it a fresh danger to the liberty of the People for which 
they are contending; they lay a plot for his destruction as the enemy of the Peo- 
ple, and it is just that they should do it. Coriolanus deserved death. The talk 
of Sicinius and Brutus, admirably conceived by Shakespeare, proves them masters 
of the situation. It is marked by that pitilessness towards the oppressing class 
which has characterised, in all revolutions of the people, the leaders of the people; 
and at the back of which is the long hatred of years, sometimes of centuries, as it 
was in the French Revolution. The enemy must be annihilated. And the way 
to destroy Coriolanus is clear—to work on his choleric pride till he insults the 
people. 

229-246. All tongues speake of him, etc.] Kocu (Einleitung, p. 13, foot-note): 
The influence of Shakespeare’s Coriolanus upon Goethe is noteworthy. George 
Lewes in his novel-like biography of Goethe refers to the parallelism between 
Egmont, V, i, and Coriolanus, Il, i, 221-237, [the present passage. This is not 
strictly true. Lewes quotes a passage from Egmont, V, i, which he translates as 


204 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACI IT, Sea: 


Are {peétacled to fee him. Your pratling Nurfe 230 
Into a rapture lets her Baby crie, 


231. rapture] rupture Huds. ii. (P. W. ap. Long MS. ap. Cam.). 


follows: ‘Stay! Stay! Shrink not away at the sound of his name, to meet whom ye 
were wont to press forward so joyously! When rumour announced his approach, 
when the cry arose, “Egmont comes! he comes from Ghent!” then happy were 
they who dwelt in the streets through which he was to pass. And when the 
neighing of his steed was heard, did not every one throw aside his work, while a 
ray of hope and joy like a sunbeam from his countenance, stole over the toil-worn 
faces which peered from every window. ‘Then as ye stood in doorways ye would 
lift up your children and, pointing to him, exclaim, “See! that is Egmont! he who 
towers above the rest! ’Tis from him ye must look for better times than those 
your poor fathers have known!”’ Lewes says in his general criticism of Egmont 
that it ‘was conceived in the period when Goethe was under the influence of 
Shakespeare; it was mainly executed in the period when he had taken a classical 
direction. It wants the stormy life of Gétz and the calm beauty of Iphigenia.’ 
Lewes does not, however, compare this with the present lines in Coriolanus. The 
parallelisms between the passage in Egmont and Jul. C@s., I, i, 42-52 is, to me, 
much more striking. Marullus there berates the Citizens for their forgetfulness of 
Pompey in a strain similar to that in Egmont, and ina like situation —Ep.]— VERITY 
(Student’s Sh.) compares this present passage with the above lines in Jul. C@s., adding: 
‘In either case the street-architecture seems that of Elizabethan London. Another 
example of Shakespeare’s power of suggesting to the mind’s eye some crowded, mov- 
ing pageant is that wonderful picture (praised so by Dryden) of Bolingbroke’s state- 
entry into London with King Richard in his train, Richard II: V, ii, 1-40. No 
doubt the use of these long passages of description was due to the lack of scenery 
on the Elizabethan stage, 7. e., of means to appeal to the physical eye. The 
classical example is the scene in King Lear (IV, vi, 11-22), where the blind Glou- 
cester wishes to throw himself from what he supposes to be Dover Cliff. Compare 
also the description of the cliff at Elsinore, Hamlet, I, iv, 70-78. The same thing 
is felt in the prologues of Henry V, especially Prol. iv. (describing the camp-scenes 
on the eve of Agincourt).’ 

230. spectacled] HALLIWELL gravely tells us that Mr Fairholt has communicated 
to him that spectacles were not in use in the time of Coriolanus and the mention 
of these aids to vision is, therefore, an anachronism. 

231. Into a rapture...crie] THEOBALD, in a letter to Warburton dated 
Feb. 12, 1729-30, says: ‘This passage, I remember, stuck with us when I 
read this Play in company. What means a baby crying into a rapture? That, I 
suppose, can never signify crying itself into fits. We struck out this conjecture, 
which I beg leave to submit to you, ‘F’en to a rupture lets her baby cry,’ i. e., 
lets it cry till its navel starts; till it is ready to burst with the agony’ (Nichols, 
Illust. of Lit., vol. ii, p. 483). Warburton either forgot this or was unimpressed 
by its merit; in his edition his only note on this line is as follows: ‘“Rapture,” 
a common term at that time used for a fit, simply. So, to be rap’d, signified to be 
in a fit. —S. W.: If the explanation of Bishop Warburton be allowed, a ‘rapture’ 
means a fit; but it does not appear from the note where the word is used in that 
sense. The right word is, in all probability, ruptwre, to which children are liable 


ACTAITESCenie] CORIOLA NUS 205 


[231. Into a rapture lets her Baby crie] 
from excessive fits of crying. The emendation was the property of a very ingenious 
scholar long before I had any claim to it. [These initials, S. W., stand for Stephen 
Weston, the erudite and versatile antiquary who contributed a number of notes to 
Johnson and Steevens edition, 1785; later these were privately printed and issued 
in 1808 under the title: Short Notes on Shakespeare by way of Supplement to John- 
son, Steevens, Malone, and Douce. This small volume is now a very rare Shakespear- 
ian item, but the notes, as may be seen by the foregoing, are not of any very great 
value as Shakespearian commentary. The ‘ingenious scholar’ to whom Weston 
refers is undoubtedly Theobald, possibly he was informed of this emendation by 
one of those present ‘in company’ when Theobald read the play and ‘stuck’ at 
this line-—Ep.]—StrEvens: That a child will ‘cry itself into fits’ is still a com- 
mon phrase among nurses. That the words jit and raplure were once synonymous 
may be inferred from the following in The Hospital for London’s Follies, 1602, 
where Gossip Luce says, ‘Your darling will weep itself into a rapture, if you take 
not good heed.’ [This very apposite illustration has been frequently repeated by 
later commentators, but thus far no one has verified it by reference to the work 
itself, This has doubtless caused the plainly voiced suspicion of E. K. Chambers 
that The Hospital for London’s Follies existed in the fertile imagination of Steevens. 
That the Puck of Commentators was not above such a prank is not to be gainsaid; 
examples of such are unfortunately quite frequent, but in no case with such cir- 
cumstance of detail as here. That is, with full title, date, and name of inter- 
locutor. The form Steevens chose was generally a vague title, without date or 
any means of identification. Thus: Old black-letter ballad of sixteenth century, 
the exact title of which he conveniently had forgotten. In the present case the 
work to which he refers is evidently a composition in prose, anonymous, and is 
now lost. A careful search through the voluminous catalogue of the library of 
Isaac Reed, which required thirty-eight days for the complete sale, and one 
also through the list of works comprising Steevens’s own library, has been bar- 
ren of certain results in placing this work to which Steevens refers. In the Reed 
Catalogue, No. 8349, among a mixed lot of plays there is one entitled Hospital 
for Fools, which is given in Baker’s Biographia Dramatica, with the date of produc- 
tion at Drury Lane Theatre, 1739; this is, of course, so late as to throw it out of 
court. In the Steevens list item No. 914 is The Hospital of Incurable Fools, 1600. 
These are the nearest approaches to the title given by Steevens that I have been 
able to discover. A careful search of Arber’s Transcript of the Stationer’s Registers 
from 1599 to 1604 has failed to bring to light this very rare composition. It is 
not included in Halliwell’s Dictionary of Old English Plays; in Hazlitt’s Manual; 
in W. W. Greg’s Lists of Plays and Masques, or in Chambers’s exhaustive list. 
It is thus evidently one of those prose tracts in dialogue form which were so com- 
mon at that period.—Ep.]—Briacxstone (Shakespeare Society Papers, i, 99): 
A rapture is an odd effect of crying in babies. Dr * * * * would read it rupture. 
Only Qu. If crying ever produces this Effect? I have since enquired, and am 
told it is usual.—[‘ Probably most fathers and mothers know that such is the fact,’ 
remarks Ingleby (Sh. Hermeneutics, p. 149), ‘but Blackstone might have learned it 
from a sixteenth century work, viz., Phioravante’s Secrets, 1582, p. 5, where we 
read: “To helpe yong Children of the Rupture. The Rupture is caused two 
waies, the one through weakness of the place, and the other through much crying.” 
This emendation was independently proposed by two other critics; and it seems 


206 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. i. 


While fhe chats him : the Kitchin Malkin pinnes 232 


232. chats] cheers Coll. ii, iii. (MS.). 232. Malkin] Maukin Rowe, Pope, 
shouts Sta. conj. chats of Ktly.  ex- Han. 
tols Orson. chats o’ Kinnear. 


as good as an emendation can be; yet it has never been adopted, because it was 
conceived that the word in the text admitted of explanation and defense. Cer- 
tainly “rapture” is just sezzwre; cf. Chapman’s Iliad, xxii. (Taylor’s ed., ii, 192); 
and Pericles, II, i, where “‘rupture” is, as was pointed out by Dr Sewell, an error 
of the press for rapture: “And spite of all the rupture of the sea, This jewel holds 
his biding on my arm.” Mr J. P. Collier (Farther Particulars, p. 41) quotes the 
parallel passage from the novel on which Shakespeare’s play was founded: the 
hero says he got to land “with a jewell whom all the raptures of the sea could not 
bereave from his arme.”’ But there seems no sufficient authority for the em- 
ployment of “rapture” in the sense of fit or convulsion; and that being so, we ad- 
here to Blackstone’s emendation, and believe that just as raptwre in Pericles was 
misprinted rupture, so rupture in Coriolanus was misprinted rapture. At the same 
time we must bear in mind that Steevens adduced, in support of the old text a 
quotation which at least must give us pause.’ The passage from Hospital for 
London’s Follies, given, see ante.|—R. G. WuitE: The reading ‘Into a rupture,’ 
&c., has been proposed by some one, I quite forget whom—probably Sairey 
Gamp, or some other good woman who ‘monthlies. —W. A. Wricut: If ‘rapture’ 
be the right reading, it must be used in the sense of a fit. It has been, however, 
suggested that ‘rapture’ is a misprint for rupture to which children are subject 
from excessive fits of crying. That this is a medical fact there can be no doubt. 
(Wright here gives Ingleby’s quotation from Phioravante and adds in conclusion: 
‘Nevertheless I sincerely hope that Shakespeare did not write ‘Into a rupture 
lets her baby cry.”’—Detcuron, likewise, in reference to the reading rupture 
says: ‘It is difficult to believe that Shakespeare would employ such coarse real- 
ism.’—I am quite in accord with the sincere hope expressed by Wright.—Ep.] 

232. While she chats him] Cottier (Notes & Emendations, etc., p. 353): 
‘Chats him’ is certainly intelligible in the sense of talks about him, though ‘chats 
of him’ would be more proper, but a note in the Folio, 1632, induces us to believe 
that Shakespeare did not use the term ‘chats’ at all, and that the word has 
been misprinted, the compositor taking double ee for a, and ¢ (the commonest 
blunder) for r, ‘While she cheers him.’ This change is quite consistent with the 
context. [It would, I think, have been better had Collier been content with giving 
the MS. emendation without any attempt at explaining how it came about. The 
word cheers is perhaps consistent with the context, but his explanation is very far 
from consistent with the handwriting of the time. By no possibility could double 
ce be mistaken for a; the written e was then the reverse of our present form of the 
letter (more nearly resembling our written 0); @ was an open letter like « with the 
first minim above the line; the written 7 was a double letter much like the modern 
German script 7, and ¢ was a single stroke with the cross mark projecting towards 
the right —Ep.]—Sincrr (Sh. Vindicated, etc., p. 214): That ‘chats him’ is a 
misprint there can be no doubt, but much doubt whether ‘cheers him’ is the word 
wanted. It savours too much of recent times. I have no doubt we should read, 
‘While she claps him.’ For in Jul. Cas. the rabblement ‘clap their chapped hands’ 
in approbation of Cesar. Cheers is never used by Shakespeare in the sense of 


ACTH1 SC. 1.) CORIOLANUS 207 


[232. While she chats him] 
applauding.—Anon. (Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p. 321): Mr Singer sug- 
gests claps; but a woman with an infant in her arms would find some difficulty, 
we fancy, in clapping her hands; though, perhaps, this very difficulty and her 
attempt to overcome it may have been the cause of her baby crying himself ‘into 
a rapture.’ We are disposed, however, to adhere to the old lection, ‘while she 
chats him,’ that is, while she makes Coriolanus the subject of her gabble. For it 
ought to be borne in mind that Coriolanus has not as yet made his appearance, 
and, therefore, both cheering and clapping would be premature. We observe that 
instead of ‘a rapture’—1. e., a fit—one of the wiseacres of the Variorwm proposes 
to read a rupture! She lets the baby cry himself into a rupture! This outflanks 
even the margins. The annotator subscribes himself ‘S. W.’—which means, we 
presume, Something Wanting in the upper story.—Sraunton: If any alteration 
[of the word ‘chats’] is desirable, shouts would perhaps be more suitable than 
either cheers or claps. Thus in I, ix, 63, Coriolanus remonstrates, ‘You shout 
me forth,’ etc.—Dyce (ed. ii.): These alterations, [cheers, claps, shouts] (none of 
them happy), still leave the metre imperfect, unless, indeed, we suppose it can 
be propped by laying a strong emphasis on ‘him.’—Hunson (ed. i.): It seems to 
us that ‘chats’ is just the right word, as it agrees precisely with ‘prattling.’ Of 
course ‘she chats him’ means ‘she makes him the theme of chat.’—INcLEBY (Sh. 
Controversy, p. 161): A weekly paper called The Bulletin came out in 1859. It 
did not attain an extensive circulation, nor, judging from the few numbers which 
I have seen, did it deserve one. The number for June 11° of that year contained 
an article on the Perkins Folio [Collier’s annotated Folio of 1632.—Ep.]. The 
writer pretended to prove that the manuscript notes were a modern fabrication, on 
the single ground that, in Coriolanus, II, i, in the passage ‘While she chats him’ 
the Corrector had superseded ‘chats’ by cheers. The writer in The Bulletin 
argued thus: ‘The verb “ to cheer,” in the amended passage, is used in its modern 
sense of hurrahing, or shouting approvingly. Now in Shakespeare’s time, and 
for 150 years afterwards—we believe we might state a longer period—the word 
had no such signification, and therefore it is evident that the ‘‘old corrector’s” 
alteration is a:‘modern deception.’ . . . The first statement is ‘begged.’ If ‘to 
cheer’ in the passage ‘While she cheers him,’ be taken in the sense of fo enliven, the 
sense is perfect, and ¢o cheer is used in an Archaic sense. The second statement 
is utterly untrue. To cheer in Shakespeare’s day was used in the ‘sense of hurrah- 
ing or shouting approvingly.’ Thus, in Phaer’s translation of the 4ineid, the words 
‘Excipiunt plausa pavidos’ (v, 575) is rendered, ‘The Trojans them did chere’; 
and this book was first published in 1558. [Fifteen years later Ingleby, in SA. 
Hermeneutics (p. 148), dismisses this same passage with this brief remark: ‘Let us 
premise that “him” here means Marcius, not the baby. ‘Chats him” is, we 
think, corrupt; and many conjectures have been made, all alike inadmissible. 
Perhaps “claps him” is the best, but the metre halts for it.—Ep.J—C. & M. 
Cowpbrn CLARKE (Shakespeare): The word ‘chats’ seems to us thoroughly char- 
acteristic in expressing gossips of, talks about; and of or about being elliptically 
understood after ‘chats’ gives a touch of familiar flippancy and slip-shod effect 
to the sentence which we think appropriate. The phrase almost anticipates the 
more modern commonism, or nursemaid idiom, ‘while she chats him over.’— 
W. A. Wricur: That is, while she gossips about him. ‘Chats’ is looked upon as a 
suspicious word, and ‘chats fo’ or ‘chats of’ have been proposed. The former is ob- 


208 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act 11, sc. i. 


Her richeft Lockram ’bout her reechie necke, 233 

Clambring the Walls to eye him: 

Stalls, Bulkes, Windowes,are {mother’d vp, 235 

Leades fill’d, and Ridges hors’d 

With variable Complexions;all agreeing 237 
234-236. Two lines, ending: Win- 235. Stalls] stalks Cap. (corrected in 

dowes,...hors’d Pope et seq. Errata). 


viously impossible. [Not surprising; it is Seymour’s proposal.—Ep.] But, after 
all, there is no absolute reason for change. Although we have no other instance of 
‘chat’ being use transitively, there is the analogous use of ‘speak,’ to which ScumIpT 
(Lex.) refers. See II, ii, iii, and Cymbeline, I, i, 24, ‘You speak him far.’ Again 
in Henry VIII: IV, ii, 32, ‘Yet thus far, Grifhth, gives me leave to speak him. 
[In reference to Singer’s ‘claps him’ Wright urges the same objection as that by the 
anonymous writer in Blackwood’s Maga., viz., that it is not explained how the 
nurse could hold the baby and clap her hands at the same time. I am loath to 
add another to the several conjectural changes in the word ‘chats’; but with great 
diffidence suggest that, as it is evident that the populace is supposed to be in 
expectation of the appearance of Coriolanus, the word here may be waits; the close 
proximity of the two words, almost synonymous, ‘prattling’ and ‘chats,’ seems 
hardly in Shakespeare’s manner. Thus the prattling nurse while waiting for Corio- 
lanus lets her baby weep itself into a fit. In the handwriting of the time watts 
and ‘chats’ are not very dissimilar —EDb.] 

232. Malkin] Brapitey (NV. £. D.): A familiar diminutive of Matilda, Maud 
(2). An untidy female, especially a servant or country wench; a slut, slattern, 
drab; occasionally a lewd woman. [The present line quoted. In the Variorum, 
1821, there is almost an entire page devoted to the different meanings of this word 
with accompanying illustrative extracts, but, as DycE says (Remarks, etc., p. 161), 
whether it mean mop, cat, scare-crow, or vulgar wench is beside the point, since 
‘kitchen malkin’ here means only kitchen-maid.—En.] 

233. Lockram] Brap.ey (NV. EL. D., s. v. 1.): A linen fabric of various qualities 
for wearing apparel and household use. Also an article made of lockram. (From 
Locronan, literally ‘cell of St Ronan,’ the name of a village in Brittany, where the 
fabric was formerly made.) [The present line, among other examples, quoted.] 

233. reechie] W. A. Wricut: Literally, smoky, reeky; hence, begrimed with 
dirt, filthy. In Much Ado, III, ili, 143, the proper reading is, ‘Like Pharaoh’s 
soldiers in the reechy painting,’ where veeky has been substituted. See also 
Hamlet, ‘A pair of reechy kisses,’ III, iv, 184. 

235. Bulkes] Murray (N. E. D., s. v. sb’.): A framework projecting from the 
front of a shop; a stall. [The present line quoted. For the origin of this word, 
see SKEAT (Dict., s. v. 3.) or Inm. (Notes on English Etymology, s. v.).—Ep.] 

_ 237: Complexions] W. A. Wricut: ‘Complexions’ is here used for dispositions, 
temperaments, and not in its usual sense of colour or aspect. This is evident from 
what follows. People of the most various dispositions, having nothing else in 
common, all agreed in their curiosity to see Coriolanus. Compare Hamlet, I, iv, 
27, ‘By the o’ergrowth of some complexion Oft breaking down the pales and forts 
of reason.’ There were four complexions, or temperaments, in the language of 
old medical writers—the sanguine, melancholy, choleric, and phlegmatic. [Com- 


ACT I, SC. i] CORIOLANUS 209 


In earneftneffe to fee him : feld-fhowne Flamins 238 
Doe preffe among the popular Throngs, and puffe 

To winne a vulgar {tation : our veyl’d Dames 240 
Commit the Warre of White and Damaske 


238. Flamins] flamens Han. Cap. et 241, 242. Commit...In] As one line 
seq. Pope et seq. 
239. among] ’mong Ff. 241. Warre] ware Warb. 


pare also, ‘Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was fledged; and then it is the 
complexion of them all to leave the dam.’—Mer. of Ven., III, i, 31.—En.] 

238. seld-showne Flamins] STEEVENS: That is, priests who seldom exhibit 
themselves to public view. The word is used in Humour out of Breath, John Day, 
1608, ‘O seld-seen metamorphosis,’ [V, ii; p. 74, ed. Bullen]. The same adverb 
likewise occurs in the old play of Hieronimo, ‘Why is not this a strange and seld- 
seen thing.’ [This line is from The Spanish Tragedy (not Hieronimo), Act IV; 
p. 107, ed. Dodsley. Compare also, ‘The seld-seene Phenix ever sits alone,’ Humour 
out of Breath, I, i; p. 9, ed. Bullen. That this form of the adverb should be thus 
frequently connected with ‘seen’ is, perhaps, significant. WRIGHT enters upon a 
detailed discussion of the connection between ‘seld’ and seldom, with an ety- 
mology of the two forms; showing that these both are found in the Anglo-Saxon 
as well as the Icelandic.—Ep.]—Grey (ii, 164): Might not Shakespeare have 
wrote Fell-shown from their caps, which were sometimes made of sheeps wool? 
Or might not Pile-shown be as proper? as Plutarch observes: ‘That some of these 
Priests were called Pileamines, from the Greek word pilos, or the Latin one pileus, 
which signifies a sort of kat, which was peculiar to them. Varro derives the word 
Flamen, a Filo, quo caput cinctum erat, from a bonnet made of wool, or flax, 
which the Flamines wore in hot weather; but, according to others, the word came 
from a linen fillet they used to bind round their heads. Hence, say they, came 
the word Filamen, and by contraction Flamen.’ 

238. Flamins] Case (Arden Sh.): Flamens were priests devoted to the service 
of a particular deity. See North’s Plutarch, 1579, Life of Numa, ed. 1595, p. 
71: ‘His second act was that he did adde to the two priests of Iupiter and Mars a 
third, in the honour of Romulus, who was called Flamen Quirmalis.’ The word was 
sometimes applied more generally by English writers, as perhaps by Shakespeare 
himself in Timon, IV, iii, 155, ‘hoar (z. e., make white with disease) the flamen.’ 
The WN. E. D. gives only one example earlier than that in the text, from Bellenden’s 
Livy, 1553, ed. 1822, p. 34: ‘Yit we institute the sacrifice that pertenit to the flamin 
diall.’ The form flamin, reflecting the 7 of the oblique cases and nominative plural 
of the Latin word, is also Shakespeare’s, and common. 

240. a vulgar station] MAaLonr: That is, a station among the rabble. So, in 
Comedy of Errors, ‘A vulgar comment will be made of it,’ [III, i, 100].—STEEVENS: 
‘A vulgar station,’ I believe, signifies only a common standing place, such as is 
distinguished by no particular convenience. 

241. Warre of White and Damaske] WarsurTon: This commixture of white 
and red could not, by any figure of speech, be called a war, because it is the agree- 
ment and union of the colours that make the beauty. We should read, ‘the 
ware of white and damask,’ 7. e., the commodity, the merchandise.-—EDWARDS 
(p. 164): Perhaps some other profess’d critic, disliking Mr Warburton’s commodity, 


14 


210 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. 1. 


In their nicely gawded Cheekes,toth’ wanton fpoyle 242 


242. nicely gawded] nicely-guarded Lettsom. 


and being offended with the idea of veniality, which the word merchandise gives 
in this place, may tell us we should read, Commit the Wear, i. e., haazrd the wearing 
out—commit from commetre, an old French word, which is no small recommendation 
to it. But a poor poetical reader would let this figure pass, and not be alarm’d 
(except for his own heart) on account of this innocent war between the roses and 
lilies in a lady’s cheek; remembering that beautiful, though simple, description of 
it in the old Ballad of Fair Rosamund: 


“The blood within her crystal cheeks 
Did such a colour drive 

As though the lily and the rose 
For mastership did strive.’ 


Tf Mr Warburton should object to the authority of this unknown poet, I hope he 
will allow that of Shakespeare himself, who in his Lucrece has these lines: 


‘Their silent war of lilies and of roses 
Which Tarquin view’d in her fair face’s field,’ [l. 71]. 


So also in Taming of Shrew, ‘Such war of white and red within her cheeks,’ [IV, 
v, 30]. There is also a like passage in Venus & Adonis: 


“To note the fighting conflict of her hue 
How white and red each other did destroy,’ [l. 346].— 


HEATH (p. 415): The author of the Canons of Criticism hath very justly and with 
great pleasantry exploded this most homely conjecture of Mr Warburton’s, and 
at the same time fully vindicated the ancient reading——JoHNsoN: Has the com- 
mentator (7. e., Warburton) never heard of roses contending with lilies for the 
empire of a lady’s cheek? The opposition of colours, though not the commixture, 
may be called a war. [MALOoNE, justly, terms Warburton’s emendation ‘absurd,’ 
and quotes in support of the text the lines from Venus & Adonis already given by 
Edwards, without acknowledgment however; and STEEVENS, in answer apparently 
to Johnson’s query, gives, besides those passages from Lucrece and Taming of Shrew 
already quoted by Edwards, one from Chaucer, The Knight’s Tale, ll. 1038-1040; 
one from a madrigal by Wootton in England’s Helicon; one from Massinger’s 
Great Duke of Florence. I have not quoted these at length, as it is evident from 
those already given that this idea of a conflict between the white and red was 
a favorite one not only with Shakespeare, but with other writers also. See, if 
needful, for several other quotations in somewhat the same vein, King John, 
III, i, 55, 56 (p. 166), this edition —Ep.] 

242, nicely gawded] Scummr (Coriolanus): This is commonly interpreted as 
adorned so daintily, but ‘gawd’ (from Latin gaudiwm) evidently does not mean 
ornament, but rather something wherein one takes pleasure, even though it be not 
very valuable, and what one regards and protects as an ornament. Thus the only 
admissible meaning of ‘nicely-gawded’ here is protects with pains and with care, 
or, by means of a veil, carefully escapes the stroke of the sun. [In his Lexicon, a 
few years later, Scumrpr places these words, nicely-gauded, under a separate caption 


ACT II, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 211 


Of Phebus burning Kiffes : {uch a poother, 243 
As if that whatfoeuer God, who leades him, 
Were flyly crept into his humane powers, 245 


And gaue him gracefull pofture. 
Scicin. On the fuddaine, I warrant him Confull. 
Brutus. Then our Office may, during his power, goe 
fleepe. 


Scicin. He cannot temp’rately tranfport his Honors, 250 
From where he fhould begin, and end, but will 
Lofe thofe he hath wonne. 252 
243. poother| pother Rowe et seq. 251. and end] t’ an end Johns. conj. 
246. pofture] action Cap. 252. he hath] he ’ath Pope, Han. 
247-249. Lines end: /uddaine...may that he hath Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, 721, 
.. fleepe Pope et seq. Sing. 


with the definition, ‘scrupulously treated as a precious thing, carefully guarded 
and preserved,’ with the present passage as the only example of this usage— 
KINNEAR (p. 310) refers the words ‘nicely-gauded’ to the scarfs or veils with 
which the ladies covered their faces, on the strength of ll. 299-301: ‘Matrons 
flong gloves, Ladies and Maids their scarfs and handkerchers Vpon him as he 
pass’d.’—W. A. Wricut interprets this compound adjective as daintily adorned, 
referring it to the cheeks.—Miss C. PortER (Folio Sh.) is in favor of Schmidt’s in- 
terpretation as given in his Lexicon, since it suits the context, and ‘seems preferable 
to any allusion to painted cheeks.—Both Schmidt’s and Kinnear’s interpretation 
seem to me equally far-fetched and needless, when so simple a meaning can be 
given as that of Wright. It is to be borne in mind that Brutus is here speaking 
quite as contemptuously of the Ladies as of the Kitchen Malkin. The one he 
considers beneath him, the others he despises simply because they are aristocrats, 
he a representative of the common people. The words ‘nicely gauded’ are used 
as a covert sneer.—Ep.] 

244. As if that whatsoeuer God] JoHnson: That is, ‘as if that god who leads 
him, whatsoever god he be.—MAtone: So, in our author’s Sonnet xxvi, ‘Till 
whatsoever star that guides my moving, Points on me graciously with fair aspect.’ 
Again, in Ant. & Cleo., ‘he hath fought today, As if a god in hate of mankind had 
Destroy’d in such a shape,’ [IV, viii, 25]—Asxorr (§ 286): Here ‘that’ is probably 
the demonstrative. It might, however, be the conjunctional that, [as in] ‘If that 
the youth of my new interest here Have power to bid you welcome,’ Mer. of Ven., 
IH, ii, 224. 

247-249. On the suddaine... sleepe] Verity (Student’s Sh.): A significant 
indication of the motives of the Tribunes in regard to Coriolanus. From this 
point of view the remainder of the scene is very important.—BrEcuinc (Falcon 
Sh.): It must be remembered in extenuation of the Tribunes’ subsequent action 
that Brutus here says no more than the truth. 

250, 251. He cannot...and end] Caprezzy (vol. I, pt i, p. 86): The au- 
thor’s intended sense in these lines can be no other than that Marcius could 
not carry his honours temperately from beginning to end, but it will be hard to 
find from beginning to end of his works one that is worse express’d.—MALONE: 


212 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act u, sc. i. 


Brutus. In that there’s comfort. 253 
Scict. Doubt not, 
The Commoners, for whom we ftand, but they 255 
Vpon their ancient mallice, will forget 
With the leaft caufe,thefe his new Honors, 257 


254-257. Lines end: /tand...will...Honors Steev. Var. ’03, 13, ’21, Sing. Knt, 
Coll. Del. Hal. Ktly, Huds. i, Craig. 


Our author means, though he has expressed himself most licentiously, he cannot 
carry his honours temperately from where he should begin to where he should end. 
The word ‘transport’ includes the ending as well as the beginning. He cannot 
begin to carry his honors, and conclude his journey, from the spot where he should 
begin, and to the spot where he should end. I have no doubt that the text is right. 
The reading of the old copy is supported by a passage in Cymbeline, where we find 
exactly the same phraseology: ‘—the gap That we shall make in time, from our 
hence going And our return, to excuse,’ [III, ii, 64]. Where the modern editors 
read ‘Till our return,’ etc WHITELAW: That is, He will make shipwreck by the 
way, for he will begin by claiming too much, and he will not know where to 
stop. ‘From where he should begin and end’ is usually explained as, from where 
he should begin, to where he should end; and a similar expression is quoted from 
Cymbeline. The passage in Cymbeline admits of no other explanation, but here 
it seems better to connect ‘transport ... and end’—He will not know how 
to advance temperately, step by step of honour, from a modest and wise begin- 
ning—and so temperately end.—Hupson in his ed. i. accepts without question 
Malone’s interpretation; in his ed. ii. he adopts, however, a conjectural reading 
by Seymour, ‘to th’ end,’ acknowledging that at the time of receiving this into the 
text he was not aware that he had thus been anticipated; as his reason for mak- 
ing this change he says: ‘I have tried in vain to make any sense out of the Folio 
reading; and the strained yet futile attempts which have been made at explain- 
ing it are, to me, strong argument of its being wrong; for by the same methods 
almost any words may be made to yield almost any sense. Another reading has 
occurred to me, “’Tween where he should begin and end.” This would give the 
same sense, or nearly the same, as the reading in my text. And as the capitals 
F and T are commonly written, either might easily be mistaken for the other; 
under which mistake the rest of the word would naturally be assimilated accord- 
ingly.’—[{That the capitals F and T are somewhat alike in modern script is quite 
true, but they did not resemble one another in the handwriting of Shakespeare’s 
time. Capital F was represented by simply doubling the minuscule f, while T 
was a crescent-shaped curve opening to the right with a cross mark and dot 
on the upper part—Ep.]—TuckeEr Brooke (Yale Sh.): That is, He cannot, as a 
self-restrained man could, derive honor from both the beginning and the com- 
pletion of his performances. He cannot go an equable pace and conclude with the 
same honors with which he begins. 

254-259. Doubt not .. . prowd to doo’t] Pacr (Moffat’s Sh.): The construc- 
tion is rather involved: Doubt not (i. ¢., be sure) that the commoners, whom we 
represent, will, by reason of their ancient ill-will to him, forget these new honors 
of his, if they have the least cause, which I am as sure he will give them as (I am 
sure that) he is proud of doing so. 


ACT I, Sc. i.] CORIOLANUS 213 


Which that he will giue them,make 1 as little queftion, 258 
As he is prowd to doo’t. 

Brutus. I heard him fweare, 260 
Were he to ftand for Confull,neuer would he 
Appeare i’th’Market place,nor on him put 
The Naples Vefture of Humilitie, 
Nor fhewing(as the manner is)his Wounds 


Toth’People, begge their ftinking Breaths. 265 
257, 258. With...Which] As one line 258. them] Om. Pope,+. 
Pope,+, Cap. Varr. Mal. Dyce, Sta. I) Om. Var. ’03, 713, ’21, Sing. 
Cam.+, Words. Huds. ii, Neils. Hal. Lettsom. 
258. he will] he'll Steev. Varr. Knt, 263. Naples] napless Rowe et seq. 
Sing. Coll. Del. Hal. Ktly, Wh. i, 265. Toth] To the Cap. Varr. Mal. 
Huds. Craig. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Dyce. 


255, 250. they Vpon their ... mallice] For other examples of this redundant 
object see, if needful, ApBort, § 414. 

259. As he is prowd to doo’t] Warsurton: I should rather think the author 
wrote prone, because the common reading is scarce sense, or English—HEATH 
(p. 415): I own the contruction is a little embarrassed, which is occasioned by the 
omission of the particle, that, in the last line, whereas in compleat construction the 
text should have been, ‘As that he is proud to do’t.’ But this is a peculiarity not 
uncommon in Shakespeare’s phraseology. This irregularity, however, is not in 
the least helped by Mr Warburton’s alteration, which, besides, teaches the reader 
nothing, whereas the common reading informs him of the ground of the speaker’s 
assurance, to wit, the known pride of Coriolanus. For the sense is, Which cause 
I make as little question that he will give, as I do, that he hath pride enough to 
do so.—CaPpett (vol. I, pt i, p. 86): ‘As that he is proud to do’t’ or has pride 
enough to do’t; and, indeed, ’twere advisable, and no breach of the rules of 
severest criticism, to suppose a printer’s omission, and let the particle stand where 
it does, [z. e., in Capell’s own text.—The CowDEN CLaRKES accept Warburton’s 
interpretation, adding as comment on this and the preceding line: ‘This sentence 
affords an instance of Shakespeare’s using a pronoun in reference to a not last- 
named antecedent, and of his elliptical mode of making a comparison.’—Ep.] 

263. The Naples Vesture] J. M. Rospertson (Baconian Heresy, p. 191): It is 
now perfectly established that Shakespeare drew for his Roman plays mainly on 
North’s translation of Amyot’s Plutarch; that where North errs, following Amyot, 
Shakespeare errs, following North; that at no point does he supplement him; 
and that, in his ignorance or disregard of chronology, he makes additional mis- 
takes of his own. The blunder of making Lartius speak of Cato as a contempo- 
rary or predecessor is one of these. The blunder about ‘the napless vesture of 
humility’ is another, made through following North, who took Amyot’s ‘robbe 
simple’ to mean ‘a poor gown.’ The Baconians and the critics who persist in 
assigning Titus Andronicus to Shakespeare have alike failed to realize that the 
writer of the ‘Candidatus’ passage in that play knew the fact that public men 
seeking office in Rome wore a white toga, whereas the writer of Coriolanus knew 
of no such usage. To ascribe to him profound and exact knowledge of Roman 


214 


Scicin. 
Brutus. 


’Tis right. 
It was his word : 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACE IESSCser. 


266 


Oh he would miffe it, rather then carry it, 
But by the fuite of the Gentry to him, 


And the defire of the Nobles. 
Scicin. 
pofe, and to put it in execution. 
Brutus. 
Scicin. 
fure deftruction. 
Brutus. So it muft fall out 


To him,or our Authorities, for an end. 


267-273. Lines end: rather...Gentry 
...better,...put it...he will (omitting to 
him, |. 269) Pope,+, Cap. Lines end: 
rather...to him...betier...put it...he will 
Var. ’73 et seq. (Del. ends 1. 269 at 
Gentry, otherwise as Var. ’73.) 

269. of the] Ff, Rowe, Cap. 
Pope,t+. o’the Var. ’73 et cet. 

270. of the] o’th’ Pope,+. 

274-276. As two lines, ending: wills; 
...fall out Rowe et seq. 


oth’ 


’Tis moft like he will. 
It fhall be to him then, as our good wills; a 


270 


I with no better, then haue him hold that pur- 


275 


277 


274. as our] at our Coll. ii, iii. 

(MS.). 

good wills] good will is Theob. 
(Nichols ii, 483). good will’s Johns. 
Tyrwhitt, Var. ’78, ’85. good wills it 
Ktly. 

277. Authorities,...end.| Ff, Rowe, 
Schmidt. authority's at an end. 
Thirlby (Nichols, ii, 483). authorities. 
...end, Pope et cet. 

an]\ our Han. 


history in the face of such facts as these is but to exhibit superficiality and in- 
accuracy. 

271, 272. then haue...to put] Apsorr (§ 350): With the infinitive the fo is 
often omitted in the former of two clauses and inserted in the latter, particularly 
when the finite principal verb is an auxiliary or like an auxiliary. [In corrobora- 
tion AppotT furnishes many examples.—ED.] 

274. as our good wills] THEOBALD, in a letter to Warburton, dated Feb. 12, 
1729, says: ‘I read, “As our good will is,”’ but does not so read either in his 
first or second editions.—JoHNSON has ‘will’s,’ which is also the reading of the 
Variorwm of ’78, and ’85; and Tyrwuirt in a note in the former edition says ‘this 
should be written will’s for will is.—MALOoNneE explains the passage thus, ‘It should 
be to him of the same nature as our dispositions towards him: deadly.,—Mason: 
Neither Malone nor Tyrwhitt have justly explained this passage. The word 
‘wills’ is here a verb, and ‘as our good wills’ means ‘as our advantage’ requires. 
{It is somewhat unusual to find three commentators apparently independently 
proposing the same emendation. The Cambridge Edd. assign the reading will’s 
to Johnson, but Theobald is entitled to priority, while Tyrwhitt seemingly was 
unaware that he had been ancitipated—Eb.] 

277. for an end] HEATH (p. 416): The sense seems to require that we should 
read, ‘For that end,’ that is, for the end which had been just mentioned by 
Sicinius.—Scamipt: All the modern editors here, departing from the Folio, place 
a period after ‘authorities,’ and connect ‘for an end’ with what follows. But 
in order that such an alteration be permissible it must be remembered that ‘for 


ACT II, sc. i] CORIOLANUS 215 


We mutt fuggeft the People,in what hatred 278 
He ftill hath held them : that to’s power he would 
Haue made them Mules, filenc’d their Pleaders, 280 


And difpropertied their Freedomes; holding them, 
In humane Action, and Capacitie, 
Of no more Soule, nor fitneffe for the World, 


Then Cammels in their Warre, who haue their Prouand 284 
279. to’s] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Wh. 284. their] the Han. Cam.+, Dyce ii, 

Cam.+, Huds. ii. to his Cap. et cet. Words. Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. 
280, 281. Haue...And] As one line Warre] wars Ktly. 

Pope et seq. (except Knt, Sta.). Prouand| provender Pope,+, 
281. difpropertied| difproportioned Cap. 

Ff, Rowe. 


an end’ has here the meaning which they attribute to the phrase in short or 
lastly. It is not found elsewhere and is only thus explained in this passage, where 
it is most naturally to be understood as finally, in the end. [Wright cites in sub- 
stance the foregoing, adding that Schmidt ‘in his Lexicon took a different view, 
and there renders it ‘“‘to cut the matter short.’’’—This is a slight inadvertance 
on the part of Wright; Schmidt quotes the present passage as his last example 
under (2) preceding it by the words, ‘In the same sense,’ which refer to the 
heading ‘fimally’ a few lines above; but Wright has evidently taken the words 
as referring to a preceding heading ‘there is no more to say about it’ near the 
middle of the paragraph. Schmidt is at least consistent in his interpretation —Ep.] 

278. suggest] C. T. Ontons (NV. E. D.,s. v. 2.): To prompt (a person) to evil; 
to tempt fo or to do something; to seduce or tempt away. TwoGentlemen: ‘Know- 
ing that tender youth is soon suggested, I nightly lodge her in an upper tower,’ 
III, i, 34. [Under 6 ‘To insinuate into (a person’s mind) the (false) idea that, 
etc.’ Onions quotes the present line; and also, ‘Some persons have endeavored 
to suggest and insence ye minds of the good people, That the Governor had a 
designe.’ 1689, Coll. Rec. Pennsylvania, I, 297.—Eb.] 

279. to’s power] STEEVENS explains this, ‘as far as his power goes, to the ut- 
most of it’; but it is, I think, rather as ABBorT (§ 186) takes it ‘in proportion to, 
according to’; he compares ‘The Greeks are strong and skilful to their strength,’ 
Tro. & Cress., 1, i, 7, and ‘That which we have we prize not to the worth,’ 
Much Ado, IV, i, 220. Abbott does not give any examples of to used in the sense 
to the utmost.—ED. 

281. dispropertied their Freedomes] WuHITELAW (Rugby Ed.): That is, Made 
their freedom no freedom; taken from it all properties of freedom. [Murray 
(NV. E. D., s. v. disproperty vb.) quotes the present line as the only example of 
the verb in the sense ‘to deprive of property; to dispossess.’—Casr (Arden Sh.) 
arrives at the same conclusion as Whitelaw, arguing that since Shakespeare uses 
‘propertied’ in the sense of possessed of a quality the present phrase should mean, 
literally, dispossessed of the qualities of freedom and freely interpreted ‘dispos- 
sessed them of their liberties. —Eb.] 

284. in their Warre] M. Mason (Comments, etc., p. 249): In what war? Camels 
are mere beasts of burden, and are never used in war.—We should certainly read, 
‘As camels in their way.—STEEVENS: I am far from certain that this amend- 


216 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act m1, sc. i. 


Onely for bearing Burthens, and fore blowes 285 
For finking vnder them. 

Scicin. This(as you fay) fuggefted, 
At fome time, when his foaring Infolence 


Shall teach the People, which time fhall not want, 289 
288. foaring| searing Anon. ap. stored), Pope ii, Warb. Johns. Cap. 
Cam. Varr. Ran. Sta. Del. ii. touch Han. 
289-291. People, which...Sheepe,] peo- Sing. ii, Dyce, Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), Wh. 
ple (which...sheep) Pope et seq. Cam. Huds. Leo, Knt ii, Glo. Words. 


289. teach] reach Theob. (Sh. Re- Neils. Beeching (Irving Sh.). 


ment is necessary. Brutus means to say that Coriolanus thought the people as 
useless expletives in the world, as camels would be in the war. I would read the 
instead of ‘their.’ ‘Their,’ however, may stand, and signify the war undertaken 
for the sake of the people. Mr Mason is, however, not correct in the assertion 
with which his note begins; for we are told by Aristotle that shoes were put upon 
camels in the time of war. See Hist. Anim., ii, 6, p. 165, ed. Scaligeri—MALone: 
‘Their war’ may certainly mean, the wars in which the Roman people engaged 
with various people, but I suspect Shakespeare wrote ‘in the war.’ [W.S. WALKER 
(Crit., i, 299) also proposes this change. That all three commentators were ap- 
parently unaware that in this they had been long since anticipated a reference to 
the Text. Notes will show.—Ep.J—Mirrorp (Gentleman’s Maga., Nov., 1844) like- 
wise objects to Mason’s assertion, remarking that ‘Alexander used camels with 
his armies in the east’; and cites the foregoing note by STEEVENS.—E. K. CHAMBERS 
(Warwick Sh.): I think the pronoun ‘their’ has its point. Coriolanus and the 
patricians think that the wars concern them alone; they, not the plebeians, are the 
city. 

284. Prouand] Murray (NV. £. D.,s. v.): Food, provisions, provender; espe- 
cially the food provided foran army. 1590. Sir J. Smyth: Disc. Weapons, Ded. 
iij b. That their Souldiers instead of pay with money, should be payed in Prouand, 
which was bread and cheese. [The present line also quoted. The forms provant, 
provend, provender are all variants of the same word, provend being the earliest 
form. Murray connects the earlier forms with the French; the later with the 
Flemish.—Eb.] 

289. teach the People] THEOBALD: Why should it be imputed as a crime to 
Coriolanus that he was prompt to teach the people? Or how was it any soaring 
ambition in a Patrician to attempt this? The Poet must certainly have wrote 
‘Shall reach the people,’ 7. e., When it shall extend to impeach the conduct or 
touch the character of the people. A like mistake upon this word has pass’d 
the Maid’s Tragedy in all the copies: 


‘Tf thy hot soul had substance with thy blood, 
I would kill that too; which being past my steel, 
My tongue shall teach.’ 


For here, too, we must correct reach.—M ALONE: This may mean ‘When he, with 
the insolence of a proud patrician, shall instruct the people in their duty to their 
rulers.’ Mr Theobald reads, I think, without necessity, ‘shall reach the people.’— 


ACT Il, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 217 


[289. teach the People] 
STEEVENS: The word ‘teach,’ though left in the text, is hardly sense, unless it 
means ‘instruct the people in favour of our purposes.’ I strongly incline to 
the emendation of Mr Theobald——Knicut: We do not alter the text, but we in- 
cline to think that touch is the word, as in Othello, ‘Touch me not so near,’ [II, 
iii, 220.—Hanmer has, however, anticipated Knight in this; it is also the read- 
ing of Collier’s MS. Corrector. Of Knight’s proposed change Collier was as un- 
aware, as Knight was unaware, of Hanmer’s reading —Ep.]—Detivs: No altera- 
tion is necessary if ‘teach’ be taken in the sense of instruct, and if we understand 
that the inserted parenthesis has, as so frequently with Shakespeare, confused 
the construction: If we, at some time, suggest to the people wherein Coriolanus’s 
insolence shall teach them—what is to be done, should follow—instead of which 
the inserted clause follows: which time shall not lack, if one incites him to it, that 
is, to such insolence, and that is as easy as to set dogs on sheep—then, without 
concluding the sentence, ‘teach the people,’ the first clause is resumed; this sug- 
gestion will be as a fire to Coriolanus to set the stubble of the people in a blaze — 
W. S. WALKER (Crit., iii, 210): What can ‘teach’ mean? Possibly touch, i. e., 
annoy, provoke. Reach (which was suggested to me by soaring) seems still less 
unlikely. [Lettsom, Walker’s editor, remarks in a foot-note that neither of these 
conjectural readings is original. It is, however, well to remember that Walker’s 
facilities for consulting the work of his predecessors were of the meagrest.—Ep.]— 
Leo (Coriolanus,: If the Tribunes must ‘suggest to the people’ they cannot 
hope that ‘teaching’ would do for the purpose; only touching will teach the peo- 
ple, whose mental power is not very great.—KEIGHTLEY (Expositor, p. 362): There 
is, perhaps, an aposiopesis here; otherwise I should incline to read touch, as 
Knight and Collier’s Folio also read.—WuiTtELAW: ‘Teach’; that is, what man- 
ner of man he is; open their eyes. Or, perhaps, as Gideon ‘taught’ the men of 
Succoth, [Judges, viii, 16]—Scumipt (Coriolanus): ‘Teach’ may be explained 
through a logical anacoluthon, which is caused by the following parenthesis. 
The infinitive which should follow is thereby forgotten by the speaker. At the 
same time it is to be remembered that ‘to teach’ is used by Shakespeare at times 
in wider sense for, incite, prevail upon, as in ‘Tf thou teach thy spleen to do me 
shame,’ King John, IV, iii, 97; ‘His false cunning taught him to face me out 
of his acquaintance,’ Twelfth Night, V, i, 91.—W. A. Wricut: If ‘teach’ be the 
true reading, the sentence is perhaps abruptly broken off. Sicinius was perhaps 
an early believer in the mob, and regarded it as an act of insolence to presume 
to teach them.—CasE (Arden Sh.): Mr Craig left in the text the emendation 
reach, which he had recently adopted in The Litlle Quarto Sh., but his collections 
for a note show that he had come to prefer touch, as do many editors. He cites 
for its meaning (sting, hurt), Cymbeline, IV, ili, 4: ‘Heavens, how deeply you 
at once do touch me!’ and concludes, ‘The reading of Folio is “teach,” which 
can hardly be right.’ For this reason I place ouch in the text, but record my own 
opinion strongly against any alteration. I take the intended meaning to be: 
‘When his insolence shall teach the people their mistake, and the danger of put- 
ting this present hero in authority.’ His insolence is to begin their enlighten- 
ment, and the Tribunes will continue the instruction and better it by their in- 
sinuations—BrrEcuinc (Falcon Sh.): Hanmer’s reading, touch, gives the right 
sense. Cf. Bacon’s Essay 32, ‘Speech of touch towards others.’ If ‘teach’ be 
read, the sentence may be regarded as unfinished; supply ‘his true disposition,’ 


218 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. i. 
If he be put vpon’t,and that’s as eafie, 290 
As to fet Dogges on Sheepe, will be his fire 

To kindle their dry Stubble : and their Blaze 

Shall darken him for euer. 


Enter a Meffenger. 


Brutus. What’s the matter ? 295 
Meff. You are fent for to the Capitoll : 

’Tis thought, that -Aartius fhall be Confull : 

I haue feene the dumbe men throng to fee him, 

And the blind to heare him fpeak:Matrons flong Gloues, 


Ladies and Maids their Scarffes,and Handkerchers, 300 

Vpon him as he pafs’d : the Nobles bended 

As to Joues Statue,and the Commons made 302 
291. will] we'll Rowe i. Lines end:  thought...feene...blind... 


his| the Pope,+, Varr. Ran. 


as Cap. 
292. their Blaze] the blaze Lettsom. 
296-299. You are...Glowes] Ff, Rowe, 
Knt, Sta. Lines end: thought...Con- 
full:...and...Gloues, Dyce, Cam.-+, 
Words. Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. Lines 
end: Capitoll...I...and...Gloues, Ktly. 


Gloues, Pope et cet. 

296. You are] You're Pope,+. 

299. Matrons...Gloues| the Matrons... 
their gloves Pope,+, Cap. Var. ’78. 
matrons...their gloves Ktly. 

300. Handkerchers|] F.F;, Dyce, 
Cam.+, Words. Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. 
Handkerchiefs F, et cet. 


‘what to expect from him.’ [In his previous text prepared for the Henry Irving Sh. 
Beeching adopted Hanmer’s reading; but in the later text he retains the Folio 
reading —Ep.]—Tucker BrooxeE (Yale Sh.): If we time our incitement to some 
occasion when his insolence shall confirm it in the people’s mind. Hanmer’s 
reading is a very plausible correction, but not inevitable. 

291-293. his fire... for euer] Eaton (p. 126): A passage very similar in 
metaphor to this is to be found in the 18 verse of the book of the prophet 
Obadiah: ‘The house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, 
and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and devour 
them.’ 

291. his fire] MALone: Will be a fire lighted by himself. Perhaps the author 
wrote—as fire. There is, however, no need of change. [One instance, among 
several others, of the fact that Malone did not examine the texts of his predeces- 
sors, and particularly Capell’s, with the care demanded by ‘the dull duty of an 
editor.’ See Text. Notes —En.] 

299, 300. Matrons flong Gloues, Ladies ...Scarffes] Matone: Here our 
author has attributed some of the customs of his own age to a people who were 
wholly unacquainted with them. Few men of fashion in his time appeared at a 
tournament without a lady’s favour upon his arm; and sometimes when a noble- 
man had tilted with uncommon grace and agility, some of the fair spectators 
used to fling a scarf or glove ‘upon him as he pass’d.’ 


{ 
} 


ACT I, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 219 


A Shower, and Thunder, with their Caps,and Showts: 303 
I neuer faw the like. 
Brutus. Let’s to the Capitoll, 305 


And carry with vs Eares and Eyes for th’time, 
But Hearts for the euent. 


Scicin. Haue with you. Exeunt. 308 
[Scene IT.] 
Enter two Officers, to lay Cufhions as it were, I 
in the Capitoll. 
308. you.] you; come. Words. 1-36. Om. Bell. 
SCENE II. Cap. et seq. SCENE V. 1. to lay] laying Cap. 
Pope,+. I, 2. as...Capitoll.] Om. Pope et seq. 
The Capitol. Pope,+, Var. ’78, ’85, 1. it were] Om. Rowe. 
Ran. The Same. The Senate-House. 2. Capitoll] Capitall F.. Capitol 
Cap. The Same. The Capitol. Mal. F,F;,. 
et seq. 


303. A Shower, and Thunder, etc.] W. A. Wricut: For a similar distribution 
compare V, iii, 110, and Macbeth, I, iii, 60: ‘Speak then to me, who neither beg 
nor fear your favours nor your hate’; that is, neither beg your favours nor fear 
your hate. And Winter’s Tale, III, ii, 164: ‘Though I with death and with Re- 
ward did threaten and encourage him.’ 

306. carry with vs Eares and Eyes] JoHNSoN: That is, let us observe what 
passes, but keep our hearts fixed on our design of crushing Coriolanus. 

I. as it were] MALONE: This ‘as it were’ was inserted because, there being no 
scenes in the theatres in our author’s time, no exhibition of the inside of the Capitol 
could be given. See The Account of our old Theatres, vol. iii. [To this last STEEVENS 
subjoins, ‘In the same place the reader will find this position controverted.’ 
The controversy occupies pages 81 to 106 in vol. iil. of the Prolegomena to the 
Vartorum of 1821. The question is, however, one that concerns the history of 
the stage rather than the present play—Ep.]—R. C. Ruopes (Stagery of Sh., 
p- 88) compares, for this form of stage-direction, ‘Martius . . . as before the City 
Corialus, . . . I, iv, 1-3, and Richard IT: ‘ Enter as to the Parliament, Bullingbroke,’ 
etc., remarking: ‘Here the directions are clearly opposed to the use of ‘‘perspec- 
tive.” The place was merely “supposed” without any pictorial device. Actually 
they prescribe manner as much as place, or rather the manner imposed by the 
place, like the ‘‘as to her triall” in Winter’s Tale.’ [Ina letter to the Editor of 
The Times Literary Supplement, August 31, 1922, Rhodes, on this same point, says: 
‘As an example of Elizabethan stagery Coriolanus bears a close affinity to r Henry 
VI. in its continuous exploitation of the permanent and peculiar architectural 
features of an Elizabethan playhouse. I retain the word “stagery,” which Milton 
used in a cognate but slightly different sense, because I mean much less than 
“stage-craft””—indeed, only that part of stage-craft which concerns the problems 
of the producer or stage manager, who has to move his actors and appointments 
about the stage like pieces on a chess-board. For that reason I should like to 
make what may seem the trivial suggestion that a comma in the First Folio 


220 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Acti Sena 


1. Off. Come, come, they are almoft here : how many 2 
ftand for Confulfhips ? 

2. Off. Three, they fay : but ’tis thought of euery one, 5 
Coriolanus will carry it. 

1. Of. That’s a braue fellow : but hee’s vengeance 
prowd,and loues not the common people. 

2. Off. ’Faith,there hath beene many great men that 
haue flatter’d the people, who ne’re loued them;and there 10 
be many that they haue loued,they know not wherefore : 
fo that if they loue they know not why, they hate vpon 
no better a ground. Therefore, for Coriolanus neyther to 
care whether they loue, or hate him, manifefts the true 
knowledge he ha’s in their difpofition, and out of his No- 15 
ble carelefneffe lets them plainely fee’t. 

1.0f. If he did not care whether he had their loue, or 


no, hee waued indifferently, ’twixt doing them neyther 18 
9. hath] have F, et seq. 18. hee waued| he’d wave Blackstone. 
16. lets] he lets Han. Cap. Ran. Ktly. he'd waved Lettsom, Huds. ii. he 
17-24. Mnemonic Warb. waived Abbott (Grammar, 361). 


should be deleted from the direction in Coriolanus: ‘Enter officers, to lay cushions, 
as it were, in the Capitol,” reading instead, ‘‘as it were in the Capitol.” The 
present reading seems to me likely to convey “‘pretending to place imaginary 
cushions’”’—“‘‘to lay cushions as it were.”’? Cushions seem to have been used instead 
of stools when a number of players had to be seated between their fellows and the 
audience, as again in the duel in Hamlet, according to the direction in the Second 
Quarto. The reason was, of course, for convenience of sight.’] 

3. 1. Off. Come, come, etc.] Drtius (Jahrbuch, v, 269): The judgment of the 
two Officers on Coriolanus and his attitude towards the people is, in relation to 
the vicious party-standpoints of the Patrician as well as the Plebeians, the expres- 
sion of a temperate, impartial discretion, and is therefore set forth in simple prose. 
—E. K. Cuampers (Warwick Sh.): The officers are in sympathy by birth with the 
plebeians, and by office with the patricians. They are not, therefore, extreme on 
either side, and their judgment of Coriolanus has the more weight. 

7. vengeance] Dricuron: Terribly proud; so we still use such expressions col- 
loquially, as ‘true with a vengeance,’ using a preposition to give the adverbial 
force which here is elliptical—Casr (Arden Sh.): This adverbial sense occurs 
only here in Shakespeare, but compare Thersites (Haz. Dods., i, 405), ‘for they are 
vengeance heavy.’ Vengeable (see Eng. Dial. Dict.) is similarly used in some dia- 
lects. The word also occurs as an adjective; see Damon and Pithias (Haz. Dods., 
iv, 64), ‘a vengeance knave and rough.’ [See Cratcre (NV. E. D., s. v. Vengeance 
5.) for other examples wherein this word is used as an intensive adverb. The 
present line is there quoted. The earliest example given by Craigie is 1548; 
that quoted by Case, above, antedates this, as Thersites was written as early as 
1537, see Haslewood’s Preface, Hazlitt’s Dodsley, i, 392.—Ep.] 

18. hee waued] Jounson: That is, ‘he would wave indifferently.’ [Thus 


ACHAT SCH] CORIOLANUS 22% 


good,nor harme : but hee feekes their hate with greater 
deuotion,then they can render it him; and leaues nothing 20 
vndone, that may fully difcouer him their oppofite. Now 
to feeme to affect the mallice and difpleafure of the Peo- 
ple, is as bad,as that which he diflikes, to flatter them for 
their loue. 24 


19. nor] no Var. 773. 


Johnson’s paraphrase appears in his own and subsequent editions until that of 
STEEVENS, 1793, where it is given, ‘he would have waved indifferently,’ and is so 
repeated in the following Varioruwm editions. This is, perhaps, due to confusion 
with Monck Mason’s paraphrase which is given in his Comments, published in 
1785, and from which Steevens frequently quotes——Ep.]—Assorr (§ 361): The 
subjunctive (a consequence of the old inflectional form) was frequently used, not 
as now with would, should, etc., but in a form identical with the indicative, where 
nothing but the context (in the case of past tenses) shows that it is the subjunctive, 
as, ‘But if my father had not scanted me . . . Yourself, renowned prince, then 
stood as fair.’ [The present passage, also IV, vi, 141, 142, quoted in illustra- 
tion.—Ep.| 

18, 19. indifferently . .. harme] W. A. Wricut: A confusion of two construc- 
tions, ‘he waved indifferently ’twixt good and harm’ and ‘doing them neither 
good nor harm.’ 

21. opposite] That is, opponent, adversary. Scumipt (Lex., s. v. 1.) furnishes 
many examples of the word used in this sense. 

22-24. to seeme to affect . . . their loue] That is, to appear to desire or aim 
at their malice is as bad as to flatter them for their love—MacCativm (p. 604) 
quotes from Plutarch’s Comparison of Alcibiades with Martius Coriolanus, ‘he is 
lesse to be blamed, that seeketh to please and gratifie his common people: then he 
that despiseth and disdaineth them, and therefore offereth them wrong and injurie, 
bicause he would not seeme to flatter them, to winne the more authoritie. For 
it is an evill thing to flatter the common people to winne credit; even so it is besides 
dishonesty, and injustice also, to atteine to credit and authoritie, for one to make 
him selfe terrible to the people, by offering them wrong and violence.’—‘This 
passage,’ says MacCallum, ‘has inspired the criticism of the Officer of the Capitol, 
who, however, impartially holds the scales. With this temper it is natural that 
the arrogance of success, lack of nous, and want of adaptability—which is often 
merely another form of self-will—should bring about Coriolanus’s ruin; and it is 
these characteristics, or a modicum of them, to which Aufidius, in point of fact, 
attributes his banishment (IV, vii, 39-47).’—[SHeERMAN (Tudor Sh.) also calls 
attention to this passage from North’s Comparison in connection with the present 
passage.—Ep.]—Casr (Arden Sh.): Perhaps it is unnecessary to look beyond the 
ordinary meaning of ‘seem to’ here, although, from what we have just been told, 
there is no doubt about the fact that Coriolanus affects the malice of the people. 
It is, however, right to note the peculiar use of seem in Shakespeare’s time. The 
N. E. D. cites numerous examples of seem = think, deem, and gives a second 
meaning, ‘think fit,’ which would suit the passage under consideration, quoting 
Jonson’s Alchemist (1610), I, iii, “The rest they’ll seem to follow.’ [Case gives 
other examples wherein ‘seem to’ may bear this meaning. His first thought is, 


222 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT II, SC. ii. 


2.0f. Hee hath deferued worthily of his Countrey, 25 
and his affent is not by fuch eafie degrees as thofe, who 
hauing beene fupple and courteous to the People, Bon- 
netted, without any further deed, to haue them at all into 28 


26. affent] afcent Ff. 
thofe| theirs Han. Cap. Ran. 


27. hauing| have Rowe,+, Cap. Var. 


°78, ’85. 


ple, unbonnetted...all into Johns. conj. 
people, bonnetted,...all, into Del. 
Schmidt. 

28. haue] heave Pope,+, Cap. Var. 


78, ’85, Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Sta. John 
Hunter, Dyce ii, Coll. iii, Words. 


27, 28. People, Bonnetted,...all into] 
people bonnetted,...all into Han. peo- 


I think, the better, that we need not seek a meaning here other than the ordinary 
one; particularly as MacCallum’s felicitous quotation from North seems to be the 
source of Shakespeare’s very phrase here.—Eb.] 

26. as those] MaLone: That is, the ascent of those. [For other examples of 
this ellipsis after ‘as,’ see ABBOTT § 384.] 

27, 28. supple and courteous... Bonnetted] Jonson: The sense, I think, 
requires that we should read wnbonnetted. Who have risen only by pulling 
off their hats to the people. ‘Bonnetted’ may relate to people, but not without 
harshness.—CaPELL (vol. i, pt i, p. 87): The Oxford editor’s removing the comma 
from ‘people’ gives a meaning that could not be intended; namely—standing 
cover’d, videlicet when address’d by the candidates for their favour: the proper 
sense of it seems to be,—bonnetted by them, meaning—those candidates; who 
were ‘supple and courteous to the people’ and did them the honours of the cap 
‘without any further deed. —M. Mason: Bonneter, Fr., is to pull off one’s cap. 
See Cotgrave. So, in the academic style, to cap a fellow is to take off the cap 
to him.—Matone: J have adhered to the original copy in printing this very obscure 
passage, because it appears to me at least as intelligible as what has been sub- 
stituted in its room. [See Text. Notes, ll. 27, 28.] ‘Bonnetted’ is, I apprehend, a 
verb, not a participle, here. They humbly took off their bonnets, without any 
further deed whatsoever done in order to have them, that is, to insinuate them- 
selves into the good opinion of the people. To have them, for to have themselves 
or to wind themselves into, is certainly very harsh; but to heave themselves, 
&c., is not much less so.—STEEvENS: I continue to read—heave. ‘Have’ in 
Henry VIII: Il, ii, 83, was likewise printed instead of heave in the First Folio, 
though corrected in the Second. The phrase in question occurs in Hayward, 
‘The Scots heaved up into high hope of victory,’ &c. Many instances of Shake- 
speare’s attachment to the word heave might be added on this occasion KNIGHT: 
The context appears to us to give exactly the contrary meaning [to that given by 
Malone]. That is: ‘His ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who, having 
been supple and courteous to the people,’ put on their bonnets ‘without any further 
deed.’—De ius: ‘To bonnet,’ a verb not previously appearing, which evidently 
could mean to take off the cap, must here mean to obtain something by off- 
capping, as in V, i, ‘knee the way into his mercy.’—‘Bonnetted’ would then be 
connected with ‘into their estimation and report,’ and thus explains the paren- 
theses ‘without any further deed to have them’ (i. ¢., their estimation and report). 
Those who complimented themselves into the estimation and report of the people, 
without any further act, to win the same. [This somewhat novel interpretation 
is dependent upon the punctuation which Delius has adopted, for which see Text. 


ACT Il, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 223 


eee eee rere ener NEP ES CWPeNe NOON) Pada eM Avy oh Se re 
[27, 28. supple and courteous . . . Bonnetted] 
Notes. Schmidt, both in text and interpretation, follows Delius without referring, 
however, to his predecessor.—Ep.]—C. & M. Cowpren CLARKE (Shakespeare): 
We believe that ‘bonnetted’ here means saluted with the cap, made a gesture of 
salutation with the cap. ‘Have’ seems here to be used idiomatically, as we use 
it in such phrases as, ‘I’ll have them into the basket in no time’; ‘He’ll have them 
into the post before five,’ where ‘have’ has the force of get, put, or place. It 
has the effect of a rapid action, which is precisely the effect here required.— 
STAUNTON: ‘Bonnetted’ is accepted as meaning took off the cap, but it may sig- 
nify invested with the badge of consular office—W. A. Wricut: If the reading 
of the whole passage be right, the meaning must be that given by Malone. But 
I cannot help suspecting that something is lost. [Referring to Staunton’s sugges- 
tion Wright says: ‘A cap or bonnet was not among the insignia of a consul, nor 
is there any evidence that Shakespeare thought it was.’-—Ep.]—Hunson (ed. ii, 
Pp. 338) transposes the order of these lines thus: ‘bonnetted into their estimation 
and report, without any further deed to have them at all’; and thus comments: 
‘The right construction is, I think, clearly that given in this text; but it is, to say 
the least, not easy to get the sense of that construction from the old order of the 
words. Nor is the transposition which I have made a whit more free or bold than 
a great many others that are commonly thought needful, as indeed most of them 
are. —J. D. (Notes & Queries, 7 May, 1881, p. 362): The phrase [to have them] 
was commonly used in the west fifty years ago, and is probably used still. It 
meant to be in, or more fully to come into, a certain state. If some persons who 
had become embarrassed had recovered their position, it would be said of them, 
‘They hau (have) themsels neaw aw reet,’ and sometimes, though more rarely, 
‘They hau them aw reet.’.. . It is a genuine Teutonic idiom. The German 
ironical phrase, ‘Es hat sich wohl,’ answers to our vulgar English ‘That is a good 
one.’ The meaning, I think, is that Coriolanus was not like those ‘supple and 
courteous’ men, who took off their bonnets to the people in order to come into 
their estimation, and (good) report, but by his deeds had deserved worthily of his 
country.— KINNEAR (p. 311): ‘Having been thus supple,’ having given their hats, 
having been off to the people, these popular men, ‘without any further deed,’ 
‘bonnetted,’ 7. e., resumed the hats they had given, and went their way. Compare 
Marcius’s speech on this point, II, iii, 97-102; and also Volumnia’s instructions to 
her son, III, ii, 92, 93: ‘I prithee now my son Go to them with this bonnet in thy 
hand.’—BrrEcuine (Falcon Sh.): To ‘bonnet’ has been taken to mean put on the 
hat, as though this were the insignia of a consul; but the use of ‘unbonneted’ in 
Othello I, ii, 22, where it plainly means without taking off the bonnet, is against this 
interpretation. ‘Heave,’ Pope’s reading, gives the right sense, but compare 
Tam. of Shrew, Ind., ii, 39, ‘Or wilt thou sleep? We’ll have thee to a couch.’ 
The preposition ‘into’ seems to be constructed with both verbs, ‘bonneted’ and 
‘have them.’ ‘They bowed themselves into estimation with the people, doing 
nothing else that could lift them into their good report.’—Veriry (Student's Sh.): 
That is, merely took off their bonnets, their caps, by way of compliment to the 
people, and did nothing that might deservedly get them the people’s good will. 
He means a cheap and easy popularity, won by flattering the mob, not by rendering 
the State solid services like those of Coriolanus. There is no need to change 
‘have’ to heave—Casr (Arden Sh.): That is, merely took off their caps and 
nothing more. [Among the many interpretations of this much-discussed passage 


224 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Bs 


[ACT 0, SC. 


their eftimation, and report : but hee hath fo planted his 
Honors in their Eyes, and his actions in their Hearts, that 30 
for their Tongues to be filent,and not confeffe fo much, 
were a kinde of ingratefull Iniurie : to report otherwife, 
were a Mallice, that giuing it felfe the Lye, would plucke 
reproofe and rebuke from euery Eare that heard it. 

1.0ff. No more of him, hee’s a worthy man: make 35 
way,they are comming. 


A Sennet. Enter the Patricians, and the Tribunes of 
the People, Lictors before them: Cortolanus, Mene- 
nius, Cominius the Conful: Scicinius and Brutus 
take their places by themfelues : Corto- 40 
lanus flands. 

Menen. WHauing determin’d of the Volces, 
And to fend for Titus Lartius: it remaines, 
As the maine Point of this our after-meeting, 
To gratifie his Noble feruice, that hath 45 


35. hee’s] F.F;. he’s Fy, Dyce, Sta. unes take theirs also by themselves. 


Hal. Cam.+. he is Rowe et cet. 
SCENE vI. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 
37. Sennet.] Sonnet. Ff. Om. 

Pope,+. 

37-40. Enter the...themfelues] Ff, 

Rowe,+, Ktly. Enter with Lictors 

before them, Coriolanus, Menenius, 


Mal. et cet. 
39. Scicinius] Sicinius Ff. 
Brutus] Brutus, as Tribunes, 
Varr. Ran. 
40, 41. Coriolanus ftands.] Ff, 
Cam.+. Om. Rowe et cet. 
42, 43. Hauing...And] As one line 


Cominius, divers other Senators, 
Brutus, and Sicinius: Senators take 
their seats; Tribunes theirs by them- 
selves. Cap. Enter with Lictors be- Cap. Volsces Coll. et seq. 

fore them, Cominius the Consul, 43. Lartius] Lucius F, (through- 
Menenius, Coriolanus, many other out). 

Senators, Sicinius and Brutus. The 45. To...that] As one line Pope et seq. 
Senators take their places; the Trib- (exc. Knt, Sta.). 


Pope et seq. (exc. Knt, Sta.). 
42. Volces] Volcies F;. Volfcies F,, 
Rowe. Volscians Pope,+. Volcians 


that given by J. D., in V. &Q., and also by Verity is, to me at least, the most 
satisfactory, since it takes fully into account what precedes and follows. The 
deeds of Coriolanus deserve recognition by the people much more than the empty 
compliments of those who merely flattered the people for their own ends.—Ep.] 

42. of the Volces] That is, concerning; compare, for this use of of, the titles of 
Bacon’s Essays. 

45. gratifie] That is, requite; compare ‘And she did gratify his amorous works 
With that recognizance,’ Othello, V, ii, 213. 

45. his Noble seruice, that] ABBorrt (§ 218): ‘His,’ her, etc., being the genitives 
of he, she, etc., may stand as the antecedent of a relative. Thus, ‘In his way 
that comes in triumph over Pompey’s blood,’ Jul. Ces., I, i, 55. 


ACT II, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 225 


Thus ftood for his Countrey. Therefore pleafe you, 46 
Moft reuerend and graue Elders,to defire 
The prefent Confull, and laft Generall, 
In our well-found Succeffes, to report 
A little of that worthy Worke, perform’d 50 
By <Martius Caius Coriolanus: whom 
We met here, both to thanke,and to remember, 
With Honors like himfelfe. 
1.Sen. Speake, good Cominius : 


Leaue nothing out for length, and make vs thinke 55 

Rather our ftates defectiue for requitall, 

Then we to ftretch it out. Mafters a’th’People, 57 
51. Martius Caius] Ff. Caius Mar- 56. fiates] flate’s Fy. 

tius Rowe, Pope, Theob. i. Caius 57. we to] that we Han. 

Marcius Theob. ii. et seq. Maflers...|) [to the Tribunes] 


52. We met] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Masters... Cam.+, Dyce ii, Words. 
Warb. Johns. Cam.+. we are met Cap. Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. 


Ktly. we're met Wh. ii. we've met ath] oth’ F,, Rowe, Pope, 
Anon. ap. Cam. we meet Han. et cet. Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Wh. o’the 
53. [Coriolanus sits. Neils. Cap. et cet. 


49. In our well-found Successes] W. A. Wricut: That is, in the successes we 
have fortunately met with. In the other passages in which ‘well-found’ occurs 
it is derived from the other sense of ‘find,’ to provide, and is synonymous with 
well-seen, that is, well-furnished or well-equipped, and so, skilled. See All’s Well, 
II, i, 105: ‘Gerard de Narbon was my father; In what he did profess, well found.’ 

51, 52. whom We met. . . to thanke] Matone: The construction, I think, is 
whom to thank, &c. (or, for the purpose of thanking whom), we met or assembled 
here—W. A. Wricut: According to modern usage we should say ‘We are met,’ 
but the past tense is not infrequently found in such cases. See I, ix, 14. Com- 
pare also Every Man in his Humour, III, i: ‘Mat. Yes, faith, sir, we were at your 
lodging to seek you too. Wel. Oh, I came not there tonight.’ 

55-57. make vs thinke...to stretch it out] CapEtt (vol. I, pt i, p. 87): 
‘Defective for requital’ is—defective in the means of it; which, says the speaker, 
I would rather have thought of the state, than that we are defective in willing- 
ness (for that must be understood) to stretch what means she has to the utter- 
most.—MAtoneE: I once thought the meaning was: ‘And make us imagine that the 
state rather wants inclination or ability to requite services, than that we are 
blameable for expanding and expatiating upon them.’ A more simple explication 
is, perhaps, the true one. And make us think that the republic is rather too nig- 
gard than too liberal in rewarding his services—STEEVENS: The plain sense, I 
believe, is: Rather say that our means are too defective to afford an adequate 
reward for his services, than suppose our wishes to stretch out those means are 
defective—W. A. Wricut: I take ‘it,’ 1. 57, to refer to ‘state’ and not to ‘re- 
quital.’ There is a similar change of construction above, Il. 42, 43, ‘Having deter- 
min’d of . . . and to send,’ &c. So here ‘defective for requital Than we (de- 
fective) to stretch,’ &c. [Wright’s paraphrase of the first part of this sentence is 


15 


226 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


We doe requeft your kindeft eares: and after 58 
Your louing motion toward the common Body, 
To yeeld what paffes here. 60 


Scicin. We are conuented vpon a pleafing Treatie, and 
haue hearts inclinable to honor and aduance the Theame 


of our Affembly. 63 
58. eares] care F,. ear F3F,, Rowe,+, uented...hearts...aduance...rather...re- 
Var. °78, ’85, Ran. ears Mal. et member...then...that’s off: ...Pleafe you... 
seq. willingly...pertinent...People...Bed-fellow 
60. what] to what Han. ... place. Pope et seq. 
61-72. As verse, ending lines: con- 63. our] your Warb. conj. 


substantially the same as Capell’s—Ep.]—Brrcuine (Henry Irving Sh.) adopts 
Capell’s explanation; later in the Falcon Sh. he interprets thus: ‘Make us think 
that the state is unable to requite his deserts, rather than (think yourself that) 
we are unwilling to put it to the utmost strain to do so.’ 

59. Your... Body] Jonson: Your kind interposition with the common 
people. : 

60. To yeeld what passes here] W. A. WricuT: To grant whatever is resolved 
on by the Senate. Or ‘to yield’ may mean ¢o report, as in Ant. & Cleo., II, v, 28, 
‘But well and free if thou so yield him, there is gold.—Brrcutne (Falcon Sh.): 
That is, ‘to deliver,’ ‘to report,’ in explanation of ‘motion.’ ‘We deserve your 
interest with the Commons to report favorably what passes here.’ Compare 
All’s Well, III, i, 10, ‘The reasons of our state I cannot yield.’ Others explain 
‘yield’ by grant. But compare ll. 153-165 below. Shakespeare’s Senate cer- 
tainly regards itself as the electing body. 

61. Treatie] Cottier (Notes & Emendations, &c., p. 353): The Corrector of 
the Folio, 1632, directs us to substitute éreatise for ‘treatie,’ a change supported 
by ‘theme,’ which immediately follows.—SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, &c., p. 215): 
That the old copy is right in reading ‘treatie,’ and that the Corrector’s freatise is 
wrong, will appear from the poet’s own use of the latter word twice only, and 
then in the sense of a dissertation, which is not the meaning here required. Treaty, 
according to Huloet, is, ‘Traictement de quelque matiere,’ which is exactly what 
is wanted. The same authority has, ‘To treate and debate some matter, Traicter 
quelque matiere et la debattre.’ There can be no doubt, therefore, that the old 
reading is what the poet intended, and that the corrector’s substitution would be 
mischievous. The Senators were assembled to discuss the meritorious actions of 
Coriolanus, and what honour should be conferred upon him; he was the theme of 
the assembly.—SINGER (ed. ii.) calls attention to the spelling of this word in The 
Folio as Treatic. It is plainly “Treatie’ in the Verner and Hood reprint of 1807, 
in the Staunton lithograph, and in the Booth reprint of 1864, and also in my own 
copy of the Folio, but in the Lee Facsimile of the Devonshire Folio it is quite as 
plainly Treatic as Singer gives it. This, I think, points to the copy which Singer 
had before him, and is but another example of variations in different copies of the 
First Folio —Ep. 

63. our Assembly] WARBURTON: Here is a fault in the expression. And had it 
affected our Author’s knowledge of nature, I should have adjudged it to his tran- 
scribers or editors; but as it affects only his knowledge in history, I suppose it to 


ACT II, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 227 


Brutus. Which the rather wee fhall be bleft to doe, if 
he remember a kinder value of the People, then he hath 65 
hereto priz’d them at. 

64. blefi] bless’d Steev. Varr. Sing. (MS.), Coll. ii. (MS.), Huds.i. biass’d 


Knt, Dyce i, Sta. Hal. Wh. Cam.+, Badham. pleased Nicholson (ap. Cam.). 
Craig. blessed Coll. Del. prest Sing. ii. 66. hereto) hitherto Rowe,+. 


be his own. He should have said ‘your Assembly.’ For till the Lex Attinnia 
(the author of which is supposed by Sigonius to have been contemporary with 
Quintus Metellus Macedonicus) the Tribunes had not the privilege of entering the 
Senate, but had seats placed for them near the door on the outside of the house.— 
STEEVENS (Var. 1773): Had Shakespeare been as learned as his commentator, 
he could not have conducted this scene otherwise than as it stands at present. 
The presence of Brutus and Sicinius was necessary, and how was our author to 
have exhibited the outside and inside of the Senate-house at one and the same 
instant?-—Ism. (Johns. & Steev., 1793): Though I was formerly of a different opin- 
ion, I am now convinced that Shakespeare, had he been aware of the circumstance 
pointed out by Dr Warburton, might have conducted this scene without violence 
to Roman usage. The presence of Brutus and Sicinius being necessary, it would 
not have been difficult to exhibit the outside and inside of the Senate-house in a 
manner sufficiently consonant to theatrical probability ——MAtong, in reply to the 
query by Steevens in his first note as to how Shakespeare could show both inside 
and outside at the same time, remarks: ‘He certainly could not. Yet he has at- 
tempted something of the same kind in Henry VIITI.’—[This refers to V, ii, where 
Cranmer is shown waiting outside the Council chamber and then approaches the 
table where the Council are seen seated; they have several speeches assigned 
them before Cranmer speaks.—Ep.]—BosweELt refers to the stage-direction in the 
Folio at the beginning of this present scene, and the notes thereon. 

64. blest to doe] CortreR (Notes & Emend., &c., p. 353): The scribe clearly 
misheard the word, and wrote ‘blest’ for prest, i. e., ready—of perpetual occurrence 
in all writers of the time. Even the grudging Tribunes might declare themselves 
ready ‘to honour and advance the theme of their assembly,’ but there seems no 
reason why they should state that they should be ‘blest’ in doing so.—SINGER 
(Sh. Vindicated, p. 215): The substitution of prest for ‘blest’ is a good and legitimate 
emendation, which I also find confirmed in my corrected copy of the second folio.— 
Anon. (Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p. 322): We cannot approve of the change 
prest for ‘blest.’ . . . Sicinius has just remarked that the Senate has assembled 
to do honour to Coriolanus, on which Brutus says: ‘Which the rather We shall be 
blest to do if he remember,’ etc. Does not this mean—Which honour we shall be 
most happy to do to Coriolanus, if, etc.e Why then change ‘blest’ into prest? 
a very unnatural mode of speech—MommseEn (Der Perkins-Sh., p. 96): ‘Blest’ 
is too dainty a word in the mouth of the sobre demagogue; prest is altogether 
right.—Dvce (ed. i.): That prest (i. e., ready) suits the present speech very well 
there is no denying, but ‘bless’d’ (z. ¢., most happy) is supported by a passage in 
King John, TU, i, 251, ‘And then we shall be blest. To do your pleasure and con- 
tinue friends. —KricutLy (Expositor, p. 363) refers to the MS. correction, but 
considers that ‘no change is needed’; in support of the Folio he quotes the line 
from King John as given above by Dyce, remarking that ‘blest’ is ‘the same as 
happy of the present day.’ 


li 

228 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 

Menen. That’s off,that’s off: I would you rather had 
been filent : Pleafe you to heare Cominius {peake ? 

Brutus. Moft willingly : but yet my Caution was 
more pertinent then the rebuke you giue it. 

Menen. He loues your People, but tye him not to be 
their Bed-fellow : Worthie Cominius {peake. 

Coriolanus rifes,and offers to goe away. 

Nay, keepe your place. 

Senat. Sit Coriolanus : neuer fhame to heare 
What you haue Nobly done. 

Coriol. Your Honors pardon : 
I had rather haue my Wounds to heale againe, 
Then heare fay how I got them. 

Brutus. Sir, hope my words dis-bench’d you not ? 

Cortol. No Sir: yet oft, 
When blowes haue made me {ftay,I fled from words. 
You footh’d not,therefore hurt not: but your People, 
I loue them as they weigh-— 


67 


7O 


75 


80 


84 


70. giue it] give Pope, Han. giv’t 75. Sit] Sir, Ff, Rowe. 
Words. 77. Honors} Ff. honour’s Rowe, 
73. Coriolanus...away.] To Corio- Pope, Han. honours’ Theob. et cet. 


lanus, who rises, and is going out. 
Cap. 
rifes, and] Om. Cam.-+. 
75. senat.| 1. Ss. Cap. First Sen: 
Dyce, Cam.+, Craig. 1 Sen. Rowe 
et cet. 


79, 80. Then... hope] As one line 
Pope et seq. 

81. yet] yes F2. 

83. footh’d] footh Pope,+. 

84. weigh—| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. weigh. Han. et cet. 


67. That’s off] JoHnson: That is, that is nothing to the purpose——J. D. 
(Notes & Queries, May 7, 1881, p. 362): This explanation is not in accordance 
with the meaning of the phrase as it was and is still used in the west of England. 
It refers to something that has passed away, and ought not to be referred to now. 
If a man were reproached for some past fault that had been condoned or put 
away he would say: ‘That’s off, that’s off; yo munna bring that agen me.’ It 
will be seen that Shakespeare uses the phrase in this sense. Brutus has alluded 
to the contempt that Coriolanus had formerly shown for the people, and intimates 
that he would be more readily honoured ‘If he remember A kinder value of the 
people than He hath hereto prized them at.’ Menenius does not deny the fault, 
but pleads that it belongs to the past and ought not now to be recalled. He gives 
a rebuke, as Brutus calls it, to a charge that seemed to him ill-timed. 

84. weigh] ANon. (Times Literary Supplement, July 27, 1922, p. 482): For some 
inscrutable reason the dash of the Folio has been replaced by a full stop [see Text. 
Notes]. Dashes to mark interruption are not so plentiful in the Folio that we 
can afford to throw them away. Menenius, as ever, tries to stop Coriolanus 
from his furious outburst. We could supply Coriolanus’s unspoken words from 
this very play. Probably they were, ‘That’s lesser than a little!’ 


ACT II, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 229 


Menen. Pray now fit downe. 85 
Corto.1 had rather haue one {cratch my Head i’th’Sun, 
When the Alarum were ftrucke,then idly fit 


To heare my Nothings monfter’d. Exit Coriolanus 
Menen. Matters of the People, 
Your multiplying Spawne, how can he flatter? 90 


That’s thoufand to one good one, when you now fee 
He had rather venture all his Limbes for Honor, 
Then on ones Eares to heare it. Proceed Cominius. 
Com. I {hall lacke voyce : the deeds of Coriolanus 
Should not be vtter’d feebly : it is held, 95 
That Valour is the chiefeft Vertue, 
And moft dignifies the hauer : if it be, 
The man I fpeake of, cannot in the World 


Be fingly counter-poys’d. At fixteene yeeres, 99 
86. v’th’] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 7’ the Sta. Wh. Cam.+, Huds. Words. 
Cap. et cet. Craig, Neils. one o’s Fy. one of’s 
87. Alarum|] ’larum Words. Rowe,+, Cap. one of kis Var.’78, 85, 
88. Coriolanus] Om. Cam.+. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Del. 
89. of the] Ff, Rowe,+, Col. Dyce, Hal. one on his Ktly. 
Sta. Wh. Cam.+. o’the Cap. et cet. 93. heare it] hear’t Pope,+, Dyce ii, 
o1. That’s...one,| In parentheses Cap. Huds. ii. 
et seq. 95. Should] Sould F2. 
one,| one? Rowe,+. feebly: it] feebly. It Rowe et seq. 
now] Om. Pope,+. 96, 97. That Valour...And] As one 


93- on ones] one on’s F3, Coll. Dyce, line Ff et seq. (exc. Knt, Sta.). 


86. scratch my Head i’th’Sun] STEEVENs refers to 2 Henry IV: II, iv, 281 
(misprinted Henry VI. in Var. ’2r), where Doll is described as performing this 
office for Falstaff. Steevens has a note thereon in his ed. 1793 that this was a 
practise imported, among others, from France. [Both WaITELAW and ScHMIpT 
also cite this incident, but without reference to Steevens. Schmidt adds that to 
sit or lie in the sun was characteristic of the slothful and idle man. This last is 
undoubtedly true, and is, I think, all that is here implied; that Shakespeare had 
any such stuff in his thoughts as ascribed to him by these commentators seems 
quite inconsistent with his conception of Coriolanus’s character.—Ep.]—Rev. JOHN 
Hunter: Receive a scratch on the head from an enemy’s weapon. Coriolanus 
here implies that the praises bestowed on him are like stroking or patting his head, 
as if he were a child. 

87. Alarum] WALKER (Vers., p. 65) and AsBorrt (§ 463) quote this line as an 
example where, metri gratia, ‘alarum,’ is to be pronounced as a dissyllable. 

94. Com. I shall lacke, etc.] E. K. CaamBers (Warwick Sh.): In this speech 
Coriolanus’ greatness is brought prominently to the front for the last time. It 
comes with some irony just before his fall. 

99. At sixteene yeeres] MaLone: We learn from one of Cicero’s letters that 
the consular age in his time was forty-three. If Coriolanus was but sixteen when 
Tarquin endeavored to recover Rome, he could not now, A. U. C. 263, have been 


230 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


When Tarquin made a Head for Rome, he fought 100 
Beyond the marke of others: our then Di¢tator, 

Whom with all prayfe I point at, faw him fight, 

When with his Amazonian Shinne he droue 

The brizled Lippes before him : he beftrid 


An o’re-preft Roman, and i’th’Confuls view 105 

Slew three Oppofers: Tarquins felfe he met, 

And ftrucke him on his Knee: in that dayes feates, 107 
103. Shinne] Chin FF, et seq. 105. i’th’] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. @the 
104. brizled] bristled Rowe et seq. Gapset cet: 


more than twenty-one years of age, and should, therefore, seem to be incapable of 
standing for the consulship. But perhaps the rule mentioned by Cicero, as sub- 
sisting in his time, was not established at this early period of the republic. 

100. When... for Rome] Jonnson: When Tarquin, who had been expelled, 
raised a power to recover Rome. 

103. Amazonian Shinne] STEEVENS: That is, his chin on which there was no 
beard. [R. G. WarreE queries as to whether the spelling of the Folio here repre- 
sents the pronunciation in Shakespeare’s time? or was the word thus spelled to 
avoid confusion with the hard sound of ch as in chronicle? Exxis (Early Eng. 
Pronunciation, ch. vi, s. v. CH.) says: ‘Not used in Anglo-Saxon period, but in 
138 cent. found in the signification of (tsk), the sound into which (&) had fallen, 
and as such it has remained. In words from the Greek, as architect, it is (k) in 
194 cent. and probably was so in 14 cent. in words from the modern French, as 
chaise it is (sh) in 19'® cent., but for French words introduced before 18} cent. 
as chain, the sound (tsk) seems to have prevailed.’—Ellis’s exhaustive study 
was not published until a few years after White’s edition —Eb.] 

104, 105. he bestrid An o’re-prest Roman] MALONE: This was an act of similar 
friendship in our old English armies, but there is no proof that any such prac- 
tice prevailed among the legionary soldiers of Rome, nor did our author give 
himself any trouble on that subject. He was led into the error by North’s 
translation of Plutarch, where he found these words: ‘The Roman souldier being 
thrown unto the ground even hard by him, Martius straight bestrid him, and 
slew the enemy.’ The translation ought to have been: ‘Martius hastened to 
his asisstance, and standing before him, slew his assailant.’ See note 1. 108 where 
there is a similar inaccuracy.—STEEVENS: Shakespeare may on this occasion 
be vindicated by higher authority than that of books. Is it probable that any 
Roman soldier was so far divested of humanity as not to protect his friend who 
had fallen in battle? Our author (if unacquainted with the Grecian Hyperas pists) 
was too well read in the volume of nature to need any apology for the introduction 
of the present incident, which must have been as familiar to Roman as to British 
warfare. 

106. Tarquins selfe] For examples of this use of ‘self? as a noun see ABBOTT, 
§ 20, p. 30. 

107. strucke him on his Knee] STEEVENS: This does not mean that he gave 
Tarquin a blow on the knee, but gave him such a blow as occasioned him to fall 
on his knee: ‘—ad terram duplicato poplite Turnus,’ [Virgil, Znezd, xii, 927.—Ep.]. 


ACT II, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 231 


When he might act the Woman in the Scene, 108 

He prou’d beft man i’th’ field, and for his meed 

Was Brow-bound with the Oake. His Pupill age 110 

Man-entred thus, he waxed like a Sea, 

And in the brunt of feuenteene Battailes fince, 112 
109. bei] th’ best Theob. ii, Warb. li, Words. 

Johns. the best Var. ’73. 111. Man-entred] man-enter’d Johns. 

?th’] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 7’the et seq. 

Cap. et cet. waxed] wated F,. waited F;F,, 
110. Pupill age] Pupil-age Ff, Rowe, Rowe. 

Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Dyce, Huds. 112. of] Om. Var. ’85 (misprint). 


108. might act ...in the Scene] StrEveNs: The parts of women were, in 
Shakespeare’s time, represented by the most smooth-faced young men to be 
found among the players——Matone: Here is a great anachronism. There were 
no theatres at Rome for the exhibition of plays for about two hundred and fifty 
years after the death of Coriolanus—C. & M. CownENn Criarke (Shakespeare): 
Neither Steevens nor Malone seem to perceive that here the poet uses an expression 
implying ‘when his youth might have warranted his behaving with no more 
martial prowess than a woman.’—Axsport (§ 312): That is, ‘when he was young 
enough to be able to play the part of a woman.’ ‘Might,’ the past tense of may, 
was originally used in the sense of ‘was able’ or ‘could.’ 

110, 111. His Pupill age Man-entred thus] Dettus: He was therefore regarded 
as a grown man in his pupilage-—WuiTELAw: Having entered as a man the age 
of boyhood. [To both of these interpretations Scummt (Coriolanus) dissents; his 
own explanation is: ‘After his minority treated as in the class of grown men, he 
was dedicated to manhood.’ And for this use of ‘entered’ in the sense initiated 
he compares I, ii, 2. W. A. Wricut’s paraphrase is simply, ‘being thus initiated 
into manhood.’—CasrE (Arden Sh.) in reference to this interpretation remarks: 
‘But as Coriolanus was now, however remarkably, beginning his apprenticeship 
to war it is simpler to understand: Having thus begun his pupil age in a way 
worthy of a full grown man.’—Eb.] 

112. seuenteene Battailes] THEOBALD (ed. i.): I cannot help making a remark 
upon this circumstance of our Author’s conduct, whether casual or designedly. 
It is said, and the fact is true, that he has followed Plutarch very closely in this 
story, but he deviates from him in one point, by which he seems to decline a strange 
absurdity in the calculation of time. Shakespeare tells us that at sixteen years 
old, Coriolanus began his soldiership, when Tarquin made head to regain his 
kingdom; and that in seventeen batiles he distinguished himself with exemplary 
bravery and success. Plutarch likewise says that our Hero set out in arms a 
youth, that his first expedition was when Tarquin made this push, and that he 
signalized himself in war for seventeen years successively. Now it happens a 
little unluckily for Plutarch’s account that this attempt of Tarquin was made 
A. U. C. 258, and Coriolanus was banished, nay, and killed within the period of 
eight years after his first Campaign, A. U. C. 266. There is something again lies 
cross on the other side, that if Coriolanus was so young when he commenced 
soldier, and if the interval was so short between that and his banishment, he was 
too young to have been admitted a candidate for the Consulship. The compli- 


232 THE TRAGEDIE OF ; [ACT U1, SC. ii. 


He lurcht all Swords of the Garland : for this laft, 113 


113. of the] Knt, Coll. Dyce, Wh. Cam.+. o’th’ Ff, Rowe,+. o’the Cap. et 
cet. 


ment of that office so early to any man was a prostitution of dignity that, I think, 
was never made till the times of the Emperors, when servitude had debased the 
very spirits of the Romans. ’Tis certain there is some mistake in the computation 
of this great man’s years. I should conjecture (were there any proofs to second it) 
that he started into notice as a soldier when Tarquin was expelled Rome, A. U. C. 
245; and allowing him to be only eighteen years of age then, at the time of his own 
banishment (A. U. C. 264) we shall find him 37 years old, a period of life at which 
the City could scarcely have refused one of his extraordinary merit the Consulship. 
But this is no more than an attempt to reconcile improbabilities by guess. 
[Maton likewise calls attention to this inconsistency between the figure seventeen 
and the number of years covering the career of Coriolanus; he also exonerates 
Shakespeare since he was evidently misled by Plutarch both in the translation and 
the original. On this latter point MacCattum (p. 490) says: ‘In Plutarch the 
number of years is prescribed by his mythical chronology, for he dates the beginning 
of Marcius’s career from the wars with the Tarquins, which were supposed to 
have broken out in 245 A. U. C., while Corioli was taken in 262; but when trans- 
ferred to the battles it becomes a mere survival which serves at most to give appa- 
rent definiteness.’-—Eb.] 

113. He lurcht ... the Garland] SreEvens: Ben Jonson has the same ex- 
pression in The Silent Woman: ‘—you have lurch’d your friends of the better 
half of the garland,’ [V, i.; ed. Gifford, p. 495]. MALONE: To ‘lurch’ is properly 
to purloin; hence Shakespeare uses it in the sense of fo deprive. So, in Christ’s 
Teares over Jerusalem, Thomas Nashe, 1594, ‘I see others of them sharing halfe 
with the bawdes, their hostesses, and laughing at the punies they have lurched,’ 
[ed. McKerrow, p. 150, |. 36]. I suspect, however, I have not rightly traced the 
origin of this phrase. To ‘lurch,’ in Shakespeare’s time, signified to win a maiden 
set at cards, &c. See Florio’s Italian Dict., 1598: ‘Gioco Marzo. A maiden set, 
or lurch, at any game.’ See also Cole’s Latin Dict., 1679: ‘A lurch, Duplex palma, 
facilis victoria.’ ‘To lurch all swords of the garland,’ therefore, was to gain from 
all other warriors the wreath of victory with ease and incontestable superiority. — 
Pye (p. 248): Did Mr Malone never play, or sit by when others have played, at 
whist, picquet, or cribbage? He must then have known what a ‘lurch’ is, and 
also that what he calls ‘a maiden game,’ though it is a ‘lurch,’ is distinguished 
from a common lurch by the appellation of a Jove game. I wish the critics would 
think that a little acquaintance with the common language and habits of life is 
almost as necessary as black letter reading to a commentator on Shakespeare. 
Having said this, I must add that the drift of the whole sentence cannot be better 
explained than it is in the conclusion of Malone’s note.—W. S. Baynes (Shake- 
speartan Glossaries, Edinburgh Review, July, 1869; reprinted in Sh. Studies, 
p- 251): Although the noun, ‘lurch,’ is found in this technical sense [‘to win a 
maiden set at cards’] in most European languages, there is no proof that the word 
existed in English, nor, if it did, would it suit the context. Shakespeare evidently 
uses the English verb ‘lurch’ literally, to devour eagerly, ‘ravin up,’ gulp down, and 
in the secondary sense to seize violently upon, rob, engross, absorb. Both noun 
and verb were in use among the Elizabethan writers in the sense of seizure, rob- 


ACT II, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 233 


ae a eT eS ea I Nee Pee ee PO ey 
{t13. He lurcht all Swords of the Garland] 
bery, and it is the more important to illustrate this meaning, as the noun is wholly 
unknown to our lexicographers. An instance of its use occurs, however, in the 
poems prefixed to Coryat’s Crudities, where one of the author’s friends commemo- 
rates his achievements abroad, and amongst others the robbery of a waxen image 
from the Virgin’s shrine in a church at Brixia: ‘Briefly for trial of a religious lurch 
Thou nimbd’st an image out of Brixia’s church,’ [lines by Richard Badley]. 
Again the verb is used more than once, in precisely the same sense, by Warner, 
and an example or two will sufficiently bring out its special meaning. In reference 
to the rage of the vulgar wealthy for titles and territorial distinction he says: 
‘Hence country louts land-lurch their lords, and courtiers prize the same,’ [Albion’s 
England, Bk ix, ch. 46, ed. 1602, p. 217.—Ep.]._ And again, referring to the grasping 
ambition of Spain as the nominal champion of the Romish Church, ‘For these | 
elsewhere, and ever Spayne when Spayne would sceptres lurch,’ [Albion’s England, 
Bk x, ch. lx, ll. 15, 16]. In the sense of engrossing, of seizing and carrying off with 
a high hand, ‘lurch’ is also used amongst others by Bacon and Milton. To 
‘lurch all swords of the garland’ means, therefore, not only to rob all swords of the 
garland, but to carry it away from them with an easy and victorious swoop. [The 
foregoing in regard to this word ‘lurch’ was seriously questioned, among other 
statements in Baynes’s Review, by Bolton Corney in Notes & Queries, Nov. 27, 
1869, and in particular the concluding interpretation of the present passage, 
which, it will be noticed, is substantially the same as that offered by Malone. 
Corney ends his review thus: ‘I request particular attention to this matchless 
instance of parallelism! It appears that the solution of a Shakespearean problem 
published by an author of note in 1790 [Malone] may be unfairly stated, denounced 
as a misinter pretation, and re-produced by the same critic as a discovery, and as a 
special illustration, in 1869.’—Ep.]—W. A. Wricut: If we may regard the passage 
in Ben Jonson’s Silent Woman, V, i, as a reminiscence of the expression in Corio- 
lanus, Shakespeare’s play must have been written before 1609, the year in which 
The Silent Woman appeared. Malone first called attention to the resemblance 
between the two passages, thinking that Jonson intended a sneer at Shakespeare, 
but he afterwards abandoned this view on finding a similar expression in a pamph- 
let by Nashe, and he supposed it to be a common phrase of the time. [See Gifford’s 
Jonson, vol. iii, p. 495, note——Ep.] But in Nashe there is only the word ‘lurch,’ 
which is of frequent occurrence, and the combination of this with ‘the garland’ by 
Ben Jonson seems to me to indicate that he had Shakespeare’s phrase in mind, 
whether he intended to sneer at it or not, and I am inclined to attach to the coin- 
cidence more weight than Malone felt himself justified in doing. [Wright in 
his note on this line quotes the two examples of ‘lurch’ as given by Steevens and 
Malone above, and adds: ‘Cotgrave has, “Bredowille: f. A lurch at cards, at 
tables.”? Again, showing whence the word came to us, “Lourche: £. The game 
called Lurche; or,a Lurchingame. Ildemeuralourche. He was left in the lurch.” 
Further: ‘‘Ourche. The game at Tables called Lurch. Among sites to be avoided 
in building Bacon (Essay xlv, ed. Wright, p. 681) enumerates: “Too farre off from 
great Cities, which may hinder Businesse; Or too neare them, which Lurcheth all 
Provisions, and maketh every Thing deare.” Here “lurch” is used in the sense 
of absorb, swallow up, like the Latin lurcare, from which it is probably derived.’— 
Beecuine (Henry Irving Sh.): There are at least two words, lurch (1) a verb, a 
form of lurk, as in Merry Wives, II, ii, 26, ‘I . . . am fain to shuffle, to hedge, and 


234 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. ii. 


Before,and in Corioles, let me fay 

I cannot fpeake him home: he ftopt the flyers, II5 

And by his rare example made the Coward 

Turne terror into fport : as Weeds before 

A Veffell vnder fayle,fo men obey’d, 

And fell below his Stem : his Sword, Deaths ftampe, ‘19 
114. Corioles] Ktly, Schmidt. Co- Cap. Varr. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Sing. 

riolus Ff, Rowe. Corioli Pope et Hal. Words. Huds. ii. (Wayes F,, 


cet. Methuen facsimile). 
117. Weeds] Waues Ff. Rowe,+, 119. Stem] stern Pope,+, Cap. 


to lurch,’ from which sense arose that of stealing; and (2) a game at cards, from the 
French Jourche. . . . In the present passage there seems to be a suggestion of 
these various meanings: Coriolanus stole the honors from his companions, yet at 
a fair game leaving them in the lurch—Sxeat (Dict. s. v.) differentiates three 
significations of ‘lurch’: (1) To lurk, dodge, steal, pilfer (Scand.). In illustra- 
tion of these meanings he gives the passage from Merry Wives quoted above by 
Beeching and the present passage. (2) The name of a game. Skeat quotes the 
references to Cotgrave as given by Wright; and since Cotgrave gives Ourche as the 
name, suggests that ‘lourche stands for l’ourche, the initial / being merely the definite 
article.’ (3) To devour. Under this head, in illustration, Skeat quotes the passage 
from Bacon already given by Wright, deriving it, as does Wright, from Late Latin 
lurcare, to devour greedily. ‘Perhaps,’ adds Skeat, ‘lurch (3) is really lurch (x), 
to filch, the Latin verb being falsely mixed up with it.’ [The WV. £. D. likewise 
gives these same three significations besides other technical meanings. Under vb. 
1, 2. To defraud, rob, steal, the present line is quoted —Eb.] 

115. I cannot speake him home] For other examples of ‘home’ thus used in 
the sense completely see ABBOTT, § 45. 

I17-119. as Weeds... his Stem] MAtone: The editor of the second Folio 
for ‘weeds’ substituted waves, and this capricious alteration has been adopted in 
all the subsequent editions. In the same page of that copy, which has been the 
source of at least one-half of the corruptions that have been introduced in our 
author’s works, we find defamy for ‘destiny,’ sir Coriolanus, for ‘sit Coriolanus,’ 
trim’d for ‘tim’d,’ and painting for ‘panting’; but luckily none of the latter sophis- 
tications have found admission into any of the modern editions except Mr Rowe’s. 
Rushes falling below a vessel passing over them is an image as expressive of the 
prowess of Coriolanus as well can be conceived. A kindred image is found in 
Tro. & Cress., ‘—there the strawy Greeks, ripe for his edge, Fall down before 
him, like the mowers swath,’ [V, v, 24].—STEEVENS: Waves, the reading of the 
second Folio, I regard as no trivial evidence in favour of the copy from which it 
was printed. ‘Weeds’ instead of falling below a vessel under sail cling fast about 
the stem of it. The justice of my remark every sailor and waterman will confirm. 
But were not this the truth, by conflict with a mean adversary, valour would be 
depreciated. The submersion of weeds resembles a Frenchman’s triumph over a 
soupe aux herbes; but to rise above the threatening billow, or force a way through 
the watery bulwark, is a conquest worthy of a ship, and furnishes a comparison 
suitable to the exploits of Coriolanus. Thus in Tro. & Cress., “The strong-ribb’d 
bark through liquid mountains cuts, Bounding between the two moist elements, 


ACT II, SC. ii] CORIOLANUS 235 


Where it did marke, it tooke from face to foot : 120 
He was a thing of Blood, whofe euery motion 


119, 120. his Sword...tooke]) Om. 120, 121. tooke...to foot: He] tooke;... 
Words. to foot He (Tyrwhitt), Var. ’78 et seq. 


Like Perseus’ horse,’ [I, iii, 41]. If Shakespeare originally wrote weeds, on finding 
such an image less apposite and dignified than that of waves, he might have intro- 
duced the correction which Mr Malone has excluded from his text. The stem 
is that end of the ship which leads. From ‘stem to stern’ is an expression used by 
Dryden in his translation of Virgil, ‘Orontes’ bark . . . From stem to stern by 
waves was overborne,’ [Bk i, ll. 162-164]——BoswetL: ‘Weeds’ is used to signify 
the comparative feebleness of Coriolanus’s adversaries—KnicutT: Of the correct- 
ness of the original [‘weeds’] we think there can be no doubt. Waves falling before 
the stem of a vessel under sail is an image which conveys no adequate notion of a 
triumph over petty obstacles; a ship cuts the waves as a bird the air; there is 
opposition to the progress, but each moves in its element. But take the image of 
weeds encumbering the progress of a vessel under sail, but with a favoring wind 
dashing them aside, and we have a distinct and beautiful illustration of the prowess 
of Coriolanus. Steevens says: ‘Weeds, instead of falling below a vessel under 
sail, cling fast about the stem of it.’ But Shakespeare was not thinking of the 
weed floating on the billow; the Avon or the Thames supplied him with the image 
of weeds rooted at the bottom.—VERPLANCK: The weeds of the flats of the Hudson 
and the inlets of Long Island Sound have so often furnished the American editor 
with a practical illustration of this image, that he has no hesitation in adopting 
this as the true reading —Dettus: The reading of the Folio is here undoubtedly 
correct. As the weeds bend before the stem of the advancing ship, so do the 
enemies fall together before Coriolanus. The word ‘stem,’ particularly applic- 
able to a vessel, is here not so particularly applied to Coriolanus or his sword.— 
SINGER (ed. ii.): I think, with Steevens, that a vessel stemming the waves is an image 
much more suitable to the prowess of Coriolanus than the displacing of weeds.— 
C. & M. CowpDEN CriarkE (Shakespeare): We think that the original word gives 
the effect of contemptible impediments overcome better than the substituted 
word, which presents the idea not of opposers or opposition, but of due medium, 
waves being the natural upbearers of a ship, and forming its path or course.— 
Lerrsom (ap. Dyce ii.): Read waves with the Second Folio. The sense requires 
a circumstance that happens usually, not exceptionally, to ships under sail.— 
WuireLtaw: The reading of the 15‘ Folio is more appropriate, expressing in the 
helplessness of the Volscians before Coriolanus his heroic and superhuman prowess, 
whereas the image of a ship stemming the waves would rather suggest that his 
courage triumphed over superior strength. Again, ‘waves’ could hardly be said 
to fall under the vessel’s stem. 

120. marke, it tooke ... foot:] ANon. (Times Literary Supplement, July 27, 
1922, p. 482): All editors have followed Tyrwhitt [see Text. Notes]. It may seem 
that a change in punctuation is trivial. But here the whole meaning of the passage 
is changed by it, and changed for the worse. The crucial passage to elucidate 
this elaborate metaphor is Hamlet, I, i, 162: ‘The nights are wholesome; then no 
planets strike, No fairy takes.’ ‘Takes’ is in its good Elizabethan sense of infect. 
‘Struck Corioles like a planet’ shows that the metaphor is continued to the end. 


236 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


Was tim’d with dying Cryes : alone he entred 122 

The mortall Gate of th’Citie, which he painted 

With fhunleffe deftinie : aydeleffe came off, 124 
122. tim’d] trim’d F.. trimm’d F3F,, 123. of th’] o’th’ Ff, Rowe,+. of the 


Rowe. tun’dColl.MS. timed Cam.+. Coll. Del. Dyce, Sta. Wh. Words. 
123. mortall Gate...he painted] gate... Cam.+. o’the Cap. et cet. 
he mortal painted Han. — painted) parted Ktly. 
mortall] mural G. Gould. 124. deftinie] defamy Ff, Rowe. 


Coriolanus’s sword infects ‘from face to foot.’ He is ‘a thing of blood,’ not in the 
sense that he was covered with blood, but like the Avenging Angel. The ‘shunless 
destiny’ with which he paints ‘the mortal gate of the city’ is a reminiscence of the 
plague-mark on the door of an infected house [W. A. Wright]. And finally he 
‘struck Corioles like a planet,’ because ‘planet-stricken’ was the name for sudden 
death for which the doctors could assign no cause. The metaphor is splendidly 
sustained, and it is simply because Tyrwhitt did not recognise that ‘takes’ bore 
the still familiar sense of vaccination, ‘taking,’ that he altered the punctuation of 
the passage, and made it difficult for us to understand it. [SHERMAN (Tudor Sh.) 
anticipated this interpretation of ‘took’ in the sense of ‘a fatal disease marked by 
a plague-spot, or like the influence of a malign spirit,’ quoting in illustration also 
the line from Hamlet, I, i, 163. His notes on this play were published ten years 
before the foregoing article in the Times Literary Supplement; but as the anonymous 
writer dealt with other parts of this sentence preceding the word ‘took,’ I have 
here placed his remarks ahead of Sherman’s. Fiat justitia, etc—En.] 

122. tim’d with dying Cryes] Jonnson: The cries of the slaughter’d regularly 
followed his motion, as music and a dancer accompany each other. 

122, 123. alone... The mortall Gate] Capex (vol. I, pt i, p. 87): ‘Mortal’ 
is us’d often for deadly; in which sense it is no unfit epithet for the gate of this 
city; he who enter’d that gate fitted it for a name beyond deadly; painting it with 
death unavoidable, ‘shunless destiny.” This is the true idea of the passage before 
us, which is mangl’d in very strange sort in the Oxford edition, [Hanmer’s, see 
Text. Notes—Ep.]. 

123. The mortall Gate] Jonnson: The gate that was made the scene of death.— 
Case: Probably ‘mortal’ is here used in the sense of deadly, fatal, and not as 
Johnson explains it. Compare the sense of ‘mortal’ in III, i, 360 post (‘Mortal, 
to cut it off’). Shakespeare has ‘mortal engines’ (Othello, III, iii, 355); ‘mortal 
drugs’ (Rom. & Jul., V, i, 66). 

123. which he painted] Kr1cutTLry (Expositor, p. 363): I do not see the meaning 
of ‘painted’ here. Perhaps the right word is parted, i. e., burst open, as it had 
been closed on him. In Rom. & Jul., I, v, [16], we have the same change of ar 
to ain. [This last is Keightley’s own reading of the line, which is obelised in the 
Globe Sh., ‘But old folks many faine as they were dead,’ Keightley reading fare; 
he has thus far had but one follower, viz., R. G. Waritre.—Ep.]—Wu5uitELaAw: 
The inevitable doom of the city was as it were portrayed on the gates in the blood 
that splashed them. Shakespeare often speaks of the stains of blood as painting: 
as above, I, vi, 85, ‘this painting Wherein you see me smeared,’ and 3 Henry VI: 
I, iv, 12, ‘with purple falchion, painted to the hilt in blood,’ but here the word 
expresses representation as well as colour. So perhaps Tro. & Cress., I, i, 93, 
“Helen must needs be fair When with your blood you daily paint her thus.’— 


ACT II, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 237 


And with a fudden re-inforcement ftrucke 125 
Carioles like a Planet : now all’s his, 

126. Carioles] Coriolus Ff, Rowe. 126. now all’s his] now all’s this Ff. 
Corioles Ktly, Schmidt, Craig. Corioli nor all’s this Rowe,+. nor’s this all 
Pope et cet. Han. 


Scumipt (Coriolanus): ‘Which’ is here commonly related to gate, but perhaps 
it is to be related to ‘city,’ and ‘painted’ a word falsely read by the compositor, 
conformably haunted. Shakespeare is fond of using to haunt as applied to a cease- 
lessly hostile follower—W. A. Wricut: The figure of his sword being death’s 
stamp and marking his victims is here carried on. Coriolanus set his bloody mark 
upon the gate, or upon the city, indicating that it was his by an inevitable fate, 
as plague-stricken houses were painted with a red cross.—Casr (Arden Sh.): 
‘Shunless destiny’ may be simply blood destined to flow, the blood of men for 
whom there was no escape at his hands—Suerman (Tudor Sh.) refers to Wright’s 
remark on the sign placed on a plague-stricken house, and adds: ‘Possibly there is 
a reminiscence also of the blood-painted doors by which the Israelites avoided the 
“shunless destiny” of the first-born of the Egyptians.’ [Shakespeare was, I 
think, too well versed in Old Testament History to have been unmindful of the 
fact that the blood was struck upon the lintels and was to be a sign of immunity 
to the dwellers, not a mark of doom.—Ep.]—OrGER (Sh’s Histories and Tragedies, 
p. 62): As the author calls Coriolanus’s sword ‘Death’s stamp,’ I can hardly con- 
ceive he would so soon change his metaphor and speak of his ‘painting’ the gate 
with death; but he may more consistently be said to have printed it with ruin, as 
he left on it the mark of inevitable fate. We may compare Tit. And., III, i, 170, 
‘Writing destruction on the enemies castle.’ 

125,126. strucke .. . like a Planet] SrEEVENS: So in Timon, ‘Be asa planet- 
ary plague, when Jove Will o’er some high-vic’d city hang his poison In the sick 
air,’ [IV, iii, 108]—-W. A. Wricut: Shakespeare frequently alludes to the sup- 
posed malignant influence of the planets, which was a subject of popular belief in 
his time. Compare I, i, 162. See also Othello, I, iii, 182, ‘As if some planet had 
outwitted men.’ The word ‘moonstruck’ for lunatic still remains in the language 
as an evidence of this belief —E. K. Coampers (Warwick Sh.): The idea of ‘destiny’ 
is continued. But I am not sure that Shakespeare has not before him the visual 
image of a building physically struck not by a planet, but by a thunderbolt.— 
Case (Arden Sh.): Compare Jonson, Every Man in his Humour, IV, v. (ed. Gifford- 
Cunningham, i, 47a): ‘Bobadil . . . by Heaven! sure I was struck with a planet 
thence, for I had no power to touch my weapon. E. Knowell. Ay, like enough; 
I have heard of many that have been beaten under a planet.’ Gifford refers to 
the use of planet-stricken ‘for any sudden attack for which the physician could 
not readily find a proper name,’ and quotes Observations on the Bills of Mortality, 
by Captain John Grant (‘printed before the middle of the seventeenth century’), 
p. 26: ‘... Again, if one died suddenly the matter is not great, whether it be 
reported in the bills, suddenly, apoplexy, or planet-strucken, and a few pages further 
on, in An Account of the Diseases and Casualties of this Year, being 1632, ‘apoplex 
and meagrim, seventeen; Planet-struck, thirteen; suddenly, sixty-two.’ 

126. now all’s his] CAPELL (vol. I, pt i, p. 87): A reading of the First Folio, whose 
copyer, the Second, by changing ‘his’ into this, drew the moderns into three other 
changes in this and the subsequent lines, which are no ways defensible. [See Text. 


238 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


When by and by the dinne of Warre gan pierce "127 
His readie fence : then ftraight his doubled fpirit 
Requickned what in flefh was fatigate, 
And to the Battaile came he, where he did 130 
Runne reeking o’re the liues of men,as if’twere 
A perpetuall fpoyle : and till we call’d 
Both Field and Citie ours, he neuer {tood 
To eafe his Breft with panting. 
Menen. Worthy man. 135 
Senat. He cannot but with meafure fit the Honors 
which we deuife him. 


Com. Our f{poyles he kickt at, 138 
127, 128. When...then] For...when 134. panting] painting F2F3. 
Rowe, Pope,+. 136. fit] fill Han. 
131. Runne...as if] As one line Ff et 137, 138. As verse Rowe et seq. 
seq. 138. Our] All our Han. 
reeking] recking F>. kickt] keck’d Badham (Sh. Crit.). 


Notes.| The implication of the words that are quoted is, Now he thought all was 
his own, and his task done; ‘When by and by,’ etc. 

127. by and by] BrEcutne (Henry Irving Sh.): It is interesting to note as a 
point of morals that not only ‘by and by’ but also presently and anon, all of which 
formerly meant at once, have come to mean after an interval. 

129. fatigate] W. A. Wricut: That is, wearied, fatigued. In Sherwood’s English- 
French Dictionary, printed as a supplement to Cotgrave (ed. 1632), we find ‘to 
fatigate,’ ‘fatigated,’ and ‘a fatigating.’ Minsheu (Guide into Tongues, 1617) gives: 
‘To fatigate or make wearie,’ and this was the earlier form of the word, ‘fatigue’ 
being subsequently introduced. For the participial termination compare ‘articu- 
late,’ 1 Henry IV: V, i, 72; ‘suffocate,’ Tro. & Cress. I, iii, 125, and many others. 

131, 132. Runne reeking o’re ... spoyle] W. A. WricuT: Coriolanus is com- 
pared to a stream of reeking blood, which marked the course of his slaughtering 
sword. ‘Spoil’ appears here to be a term of the chase as it is in Jul. Ces., II, i, 
206, ‘Here thy hunters stand Sign’d in thy spoil,’ etc.—BAYFIELD (p. 195): Editors 
correct by beginning the second line with ‘’T were,’ but ‘if’? and ‘’twere’ get in- 
tolerable emphasis and the rhythm is ruined. Clearly the second line must begin 
with ‘It were,’ so that the words may run, ‘as | if it | were a per | petual | spoil.’ 

136. He cannot ... Honors] Jonson: That is, no honor will be too great 
for him; he will show a mind equal to any elevation——Gorpon, in reference to 
Johnson’s paraphrase, says: ‘This is what the speaker meant, but the irony of 
“measure” is unmistakable. To observe “measure” in his course of honour was 
precisely what Coriolanus could never do.’ 

137, 138. which we... kickt at] For those whose hypersensitive metrical ears 
are offended by the lack of a syllable in this compound line, HANMER’s addition will 
doubtless afford relief; ABBorr’s cure is less drastic: ‘our’ is here a dissylable as 
in many other cases. It is, however, to be noticed that |. 137 is printed as prose 
in the Folio, and 1. 138 is a short isolated line. Rowe is responsible for the verse, 
and it is his, not perhaps Shakespeare’s, verse that is at fault—Ep. 


ACT It, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 239 


And look’d vpon things precious, as they were 

The common Muck of the World : he couets leffe 140 
Then Miferie it felfe would giue, rewards his deeds 

With doing them, and is content 


To {pend the time,to end it. 143 

140. of the] Sta. Dyce, Cam.-+, 142. is] his Han. (misprint). 
Words. Neils. o’th’ Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 143. the] his Rowe,-+, Var. ’78, ’85, 
o’the Cap. et cet. Ran. 


142, 143. and...it] Om. Words. 


139-143. And look’d vpon...to end it] CARTER (p. 458) compares: ‘But 
the things that were vantage to me, the same I counted losse .. . and do judge 
them to be dongue, ...’ Philippians, iii, 7, [Genevan Vers.]. ‘Brethren, I count 
not myselfe that I have attained to it, but one thing I doe; I forget that which 
is behinde, and endeavour myselfe unto that which is before. And folow hard 
toward the marke for the prize of the high calling.’—Jbid., verse 13. 

140. Muck of the World] BAyLry (p. 92) compares: ‘I am a gentleman . . 
though I have not the mucke of the world,’ Heywood, If You know not Me 
(1606), [pt 2, ed. Pearson, p. 329]. He quotes besides this twelve other passages 
from various writers of the period wherein wealth is thus referred to as ‘muck,’ 
in regard to which Bayley adds: ‘I have quoted more of these “muck” passages 
than I should otherwise have thought necessary because the idea is so peculiarly 
unpoetic and because many of them considered by themselves would be very 
obscure.’ 

141. Miserie] WARBURTON: ‘Misery’ for avarice, because a miser signifies 
avaricious —W. A. Wricut: [Warburton’s signification] is doubtful, as Shakespeare 
elsewhere always uses the word in the ordinary sense of wretchedness. 

142, 143. is content ...to end it] Jonson: I know not whether my conceit 
will be approved, but I cannot forbear to think that our author wrote thus: 


‘—he rewards 
His deeds with doing them, and is content 
To spend his time, to spend it.’ 


Matone: I think the words afford this meaning [Johnson’s] without any altera- 
tion— WARBURTON: The last words of Cominius’s speech are altogether unin- 
telligible. Shakespeare, I suppose, wrote the passage thus: 


< . 
—and is content 
To spend his time— 
Men. To end it. He’s right noble.’ 


Cominius in his last words was entering on a new topic in praise of Coriolanus; 
when his warm friend, Menenius, impatient to come to the subject of the honors 
designed him, interrupts Cominius and takes him short with—to end it, i. e., to 
end this long discourse in one word, he’s right noble. Let him be called for. This is 
exactly in character, and restores the passage to sense. [Warburton so prints it in 
his ed., but thus far has not had any followers.—Ep.]—Lro (Coriolanus): To end 
—what? The time—of his life. He is content to have no other occupation but 
to sacrifice himself for his country—P. A. DanteL (Notes, etc., p. 61): End 
Cominius’ speech at ‘content,’ and give the rest to Menenius, thus: 


240 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


Menen. Hee’s right Noble, let him be call’d for. 
Senat. Call Coriolanus. 145 
Off. He doth appeare. 


Enter Coriolanus. 


Menen. TheSenate,Coriolanus, are well pleas’d to make 
thee Confull. 


Corio. I doe owe them ftill my Life,and Seruices. 150 
Menen. It then remaines, that you doe fpeake to the 
People. 152 
143-145. Lines end: WNoble...Corio- 148-153. As verse, ending lines: 
lanus Pope et seq. pleas’d...fiill..remaines...you, Rowe ii. 
145. Senat.] 1. S. Cap. et seq. 
Coriolanus] for Coriolanus 151. the] th’ Rowe ii,+. 


Steev. Var. ’03, 713. 


‘Com. . . . rewards his deeds 
With doing them, and is content. 

Menen. Wespend the time. To end it, 
He’s right noble,’ &c. 


WuitELAW: That the time should pass, and the end come, bring no reward— 
no more to be said of it than that, the time having passed, the end has come— 
to this he is contented to look forward.—Scumipt (Coriolanus) dissents to White- 
law’s interpretation. ‘It is much better,’ he says, ‘to take only the first infinitive, 
“‘to spend the time,” as directly dependent on “content”; he is satisfied to bring 
the time to an end, to have a pastime; “‘to end it,” while he is bringing the time, 
or also his “doing his deeds, to an end”; compare II, ili, 201, 202, and such a passage 
as, “‘I fly not death, to fly this deadly doom,” ’ Two Gentlemen (III, i, 185), while 
I fly, etc—W. A. Wricut: To spend the time for the mere purpose of bringing it 
to an end, and without any object of an ulterior reward. All his achievements 
are a pastime, a means of killing time-—Gorpon: In all that Coriolanus does he 
has no ulterior motives. Great action, to him, is its own reward, an end in itself. 
He does great deeds (as Johnson puts it) for the sake of doing them, and spends 
his time for the sake of spending it, content that it should end there, and lead to 
nothing.—Verity (Student’s Sh.): To do great deeds is, for Coriolanus, its own 
reward, and he is content so to spend his time as merely to pass it. Cominius 
seems to mean by his last words that Coriolanus has no ulterior objects, cherishes 
no ambitious designs, in what he does (whereas the Tribunes accuse him of aiming 
at ‘tyrannical power,’ III, iii, 1, 2, 83-86); enough for him if his time be spent in 
doing, and end there, z. e., lead to nothing. The use of a literary artifice, here 
assonance (spend . . . end), often, I think, gives point to the style at the expense 
of clearness.—Craic (Arden Sh.): And whatever expenditure of time it takes to 
complete his work, he ungrudgingly gives it—Casr (Jbid.): This interpretation, 
however, would make ‘it’ refer to ‘deeds,’ whereas with ‘it’ referred to ‘time,’ as 
strict grammar requires, the passage is understood that, provided his time is used 
up, Coriolanus is content to spend it without reward for himself. 

I51, 152. It then...to the People] WarBurtTon: Coriolanus was banished 
U. C. 262. But till the time of Manlius Torquatus, U. C. 393, the Senate chose 


ACT Il, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 241 


Corto. I doe befeech you, 153 
Let me o’re-leape that cuftome : for I cannot 
Put on the Gowne, ftand naked, and entreat them 155 


For my Wounds fake, to giue their fufferage : 
Pleafe you that I may paffe this doing. 
Scicin. Sir, the People muft haue their Voyces, 


Neyther will they bate one iot of Ceremonie. 159 
153. I doe] I Pope,+. age F,. suffrages Rowe,+. suffrage 
156-162. Lines end: Pleafe vou... F, et cet. 

People...bate...too’t:...And Capell et seq. 157. paffe] overpass Han. 

(exc. Knt, Sta.). 158. the People muji] but the people 
156. Wounds] wounds’ Theob. et seq. too must Han. 

Jufferage] F;, Sta. Ktly. fuffer- 159. Neyther] Nor Pope,+. 


both Consuls. And then the people, assisted by the seditious temper of the Tribunes, 
got the choice of one. But if Shakespeare makes Rome a democracy, which at 
this time was a perfect aristocracy, he sets the balance even in his Timon, and turns 
Athens, which was a perfect democracy, into an aristocracy. But it would be 
unjust to attribute this entirely to his ignorance; it sometimes proceeded from the 
too powerful blaze of his imagination, which, when once lighted up, made all 
acquired knowledge fade and disappear before it. For sometimes again we find 
him, when occasion serves, not only writing up to the truth of history, but fitting 
his sentiments to the nicest manners of his peculiar subject, as well to the dignity 
of his characters or the dictates of nature in general—Matone: The inaccuracy is 
to be attributed not to our author, but to Plutarch, who expressly says, in his 
Life of Coriolanus, that ‘it was the custom of Rome at that time, that suche as dyd 
sue for any office, should for certen dayes before be in the market-place, only with 
a poor gowne on their backes, and without any coate underneath, to praye the 
people to remember them at the daye of election. —W. A. Wricut: It is not difficult 
to trace the origin of the mistake. Plutarch in his Life of Coriolanus (c. 14) merely 
says that it was usual for candidates for an office to stand in the Forum dressed 
in a toga (iuarwv) only, without the tunica (xirwv) or close-fitting garment under- 
neath. In the Questiones Romane, 49, he makes the same statement on the 
authority of Cato. Now Amyot in his French translation, which is the original 
of North, renders the expression correctly enough, ‘une robbe simple, sans saye 
dessoubs,’ and the whole appears in North as [given above by Malone]. 

155. stand naked] Cask (Arden Sh.): ‘Naked’ is often equivalent to unarmed, 
but here, no doubt, the display of wounds and the single garment suggests the 
word, as it does in the passage from Roman Questions, [cited by Wright]: ‘To the 
end, therefore, that such scarres might be better exposed to their sight whom they 
met or talked withall, they went in this maner downe to the place of election, 
without inward coats in their plaine gownes. Or haply, because they would seem 
by this nuditie and nakednesse of theirs, in humilitie to debase themselves, the 
sooner thereby to curry favor, and win the good grace of the commons,’ etc. 
[Case quotes but a part of the foregoing extract as in Bibl. de Carabas, pp. 78, 793 
the passage as here given is from Holland’s translation of The Philosophie or 
Morals of Plutarch, ed. 1603, p. 867.—Eb.] 

16 


242 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC! 115 
Menen. Put them not too’t : 160 

Pray you goe fit you to the Cuftome, 

And take to you,as your Predeceffors haue, 

Your Honor with your forme. 
Corio. It isa part that I fhall blufh in aéting, 

And might well be taken from the People. 165 
Brutus. Marke you that. 
Corio. To brag vnto them, thus I did, and thus 

Shew them th’vnaking Skarres, which I fhould hide, 

As if I had receiu’d them for the hyre 

Of their breath onely. 170 
Menen. Doe not ftand vpon’t : 

We recommend to you Tribunes of the People 

Our purpofe to them,and to our Noble Confull 

With we all Ioy,and Honor. 174 


160, 161. As one line, reading: Pray 
fit you Pope,+. 

161. you goe fit] you go, fit Var. ’78. 
you, go fit Var. ’73 et cet. 

162. to you] t’ye Pope,+. 

163-166. Lines end: part...well...that 
Pope et seq. 

163. your] the Han. 

166. that.] that? Rowe ii. et seq. 

168. wmmaking] Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. 


Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. i. 
unaching Knut et seq. 

168. fhould| would Rowe,+. 

172. to you] t’ye Pope,+. through or 
thro you Cowden Clarkes conj. 

173. purpofe to them, and...| purpose 
and to them:... Han. purpose. To 
them and... Johns. purpose;—to them 
and... Mason, Coll. Huds. i. 


163. your forme] M. Mason: I believe we should read, ‘Your honour with the 
form.’ That is, the usual form. [Mason was apparently unaware that herein 
he was anticipated, see Text. Notes——Ep.]—STEEVENS: ‘Your form’ may mean 
the form which custom prescribes to you. 

166. Marke you that.] Rowe is responsible for the interrogation point here, 
and though he has been uniformly followed by all succeeding editors in this, I am 
inclined to think that the admonitory form, as in the Folio, is the more expres- 
sive; it is, of course, an aside to Sicinius. The interrogation merely calls his 
attention to the words of Coriolanus; the other is equivalent to ‘Remember that 
well!’—Ep. 

171. Doe not stand vpon’t] W. A. Wricxut: That is, do not insist upon it. 

172-174. We recommend . . . and Honor] Matone: We entreat you, Tribunes 
of the people, to recommend and enforce to the plebeians what we propose to 
them for their approbation, namely, the appointment of Coriolanus to the con- 
sulship.—M. Mason (Comments, etc., p. 250): This passage is rendered almost 
unintellible by the false punctuation. It should evidently be pointed thus, and 
then the sense will be clear: 

‘We recommend to you, tribunes of the people, 
Our purpose;—to them, and to our noble consul 
Wish we all joy and honor.’ 


ACT Il, SC. ii.] 


Senat. 


CORIOLANUS 243 


To Coriolanus come all ioy and Honor. 175 


Flourifh Cornets. 


Then Exeunt. 


Manet Sicinius and Brutus. 


Bru. You fee how he intends to vie the people. 
Scicin.May they perceiue’s intent: he wil require them 
As if he did contemne what he requefted, 180 


Should be in them to giue. 
Brus 


Come, wee’! informe them 


Of our proceedings heere on th’Market place, 


I know they do attend vs. 


175. Senat.] Sic. Rowe ii, Pope. 
Senators. Dyce, Cam.+. 

176, 177. Flourifh...Brutus.] Flour- 
ish. Exeunt Senators. Cap. Coll. Del. 
Wh. i. Flourish. Then exeunt Sen- 
ators. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, 
Hal. Ktly, Huds. i. Flourish. Exeunt 
all except Sicinius and Brutus. Dyce, 
Sta. Cam.+, Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. 

177. Manet] Manent F,. 


184 


179. perceiue’s] perceive his Cap. 
Varr. Ran. Mal. Varr. Sing. Knt, Del. 
Hal. Ktly. 

179. intent: he wil] intent: He will F,, 
Rowe, Pope. intent. He that will Var. 
’03, 713. intent! He will Theob. et cet. 

183. heere on] Ff, Rowe, Pope. here. 
On Johns. Var. ’73, Ktly, Neils. 
here: on Theob. et cet. 

184. vs.] ws. [Exeunt. Rowe et seq. 


“To them’ means to the people, whom Menenius artfully joins to the consul, in the 
good wishes of the Senate-—Dycr: Mason’s pointing is proved wrong by the very 
next line-—Hupson in his first ed. adopted Mason’s pointing without comment; 
in his second, evidently influenced by Dyce, he follows the Folio and thus notes: 
‘Such is probably the right division of the line; though some have printed it with 
the (;) after purpose, thus connecting to them with what follows. But the last to 
is probably used for towards or in reference to—“‘our purpose towards them.”’— 
W. A. Wricut: That is, We trust you with the announcement of our intention to 
the people. 

175. Senat. To Coriolanus, etc.] THEOBALD (Letter to Warburton, Feb. 12, 1729; 
Nichols, vol. ii, p. 483): Blind and blundering Editors, to put this wish into one 
of the Tribunes’ mouths, when both the old folios place it to that of the Senate 
upon their breaking up! [See Text. Notes.] 

179. May they perceiue’s] Scummpr (Coriolanus): Not to be understood em- 
phatically in the optative, as modern editors take it, since they place an exclama- 
tion point after ‘intent,’ but rather corresponding to the German mégen sie seine 
absicht merken. 

179. he wil require them] W. A. Wricur: That is, he willask them. Generally 
‘require’ is used with the accusative of the thing asked, and now has the sense of 
asking with authority, like demand; but formerly both ‘require’ and demand were 
equivalent to the simple ask. Compare Henry VIII: I, iv, 144, ‘In humblest 
manner I require your highness.’ 

183. Of... heere on th’Market place] Turopatp: But the Tribunes were not 
now on the ‘Market place,’ but in the Capitol. The pointing only wants to be 
rectified, and we shall know what this Magistrate would say, viz., Come, I know 
the people attend us in the Forum; we’ll go and inform them what proceedings 
have been here in the Senate. [See Text. Notes.] 


244 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Il, SC. iii. 


[Scene IIT.) 


Enter feuen or eight Citizens. I 
1.Cit. Once if he do require our voyces, wee ought 
not to deny him. 
2.Cit. We may Sir if we will. 
3.Cit. We haue power in our felues to do it, but it is 5 
a power that we haue no power to do: For,if hee fhew vs 


ScENE ur. Cap. et seq. SCENE VI. 1. feuen or eight...) Ff, Rowe,-+-, 
Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. Varr. Ran. Cam.+, Neils. a number 
The Forum. Var. ’73, ’78, ’85, Ran. of... Cap. several... Mal. et cet. 
The Same. The Market-Place. Knt. 2. Once] Ff, Rowe. Oons! Pope. 
The Same. The Forum. Cap. et cet. Once for all Bell. Once, Theob. et cet. 


2. 1 Cit. Once if he do require, etc.] Dretrus (Sh’s Use of Prose, Jahrbuch, 
v, p. 269): The several citizens to whom Coriolanus must sue for their votes for 
the consulship speak in Plebeian prose. Coriolanus, who on his entrance in 
converse with Menenius had still spoken in blank verse, likewise becomes one of 
the people, since he addresses the Citizens in their own manner when he sets out 
to get their voices. He is not able to play this irksome part long. After he has 
happily answered the first voices he again resumes his blank-verse for the suing 
of the later voices. Blank-verse is likewise used by the Tribunes in announcing 
to the three Citizens the craftily determined plot to render null the choice of 
Coriolanus in the end. The political interests which there come into play justify 
the use of fluent verse by the higher-standing Tribunes, as well as the three Citizens. 

2. Once] WARBURTON: ‘Once’ here means the same as when we say once for 
all—F arMER: This use of the word ‘once’ is found in The Supposes, by Gascoigne, 
‘Once, twentyfour ducattes he cost me,’ [Act V, sc. v, p. 236, ed. Cunliffe—Ep.].— 
STEEVENS: Again in Com. of Errors, ‘Once this, your long experience of her wis- 
dom,’ [III, i, 89]—Matone: I doubt whether ‘once’ here signifies once for all; 
I believe it means ‘if he do but so much as require our voices,’ as in the following 
passage in Holinshed’s Chronicle: ‘—they left many of their servants, and men 
of war behind them, and some of them would not once stay for their standards.’ 
[This note appears first in Malone’s own edition; it is not repeated in the Variorum 
of 1821.—Ep.]—Asszort (§ 57) besides the present line gives three other examples 
wherein ‘once’ is used in the sense once for all. Under the sense in a word ABBOTT 
quotes the line from Comedy of Errors given by Steevens. Pope’s unfortunate 
emendation Oons! for ‘Once’ drew forth from Theobald the following note, which 
he omitted, however, in his ed. ii, ‘What, more anachronisms, and more than 
ever the Poet design’d or slipt into! But this, like the boiled Pig and Colliflower 
in the Farce, is of Squire Somebody’s own bespeaking, and ’twill be but kind to 
let him have the dish to himself. Mr Pope, I presume, hardly thinks that Blood 
and Wounds ever came into an oath till after the Crucifixion of our Saviour. 
But, to set that question apart, our citizens here are no such blustering blades. 
They say honestly, in all other editions, no more than this: “Once, if he do require 
our voices,” &c., 7. e., In a word, once for all, I’ve said it once and I’ll stand to it.’ 
[See Appendix: Shakespeare and the Masses, R. W. CHAMBERS, p.712.] 

5, 6. We haue power ... to do] WarBurtTon: I am persuaded this was in- 
tended as a ridicule on the Augustine manner of defining free will at that time in 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 245 


his wounds, and tell vs his deeds, we are to put our ton- 7 
gues into thofe wounds, and fpeake for them :'So if he tel 
7. and...deeds] Om. Anon. ap. Cam. 8. tel] tells Rowe,+. 


the schools.—JouNson: A ridicule may be intended, but the sense is clear enough. 
Power first signifies natural power or force, and then moral power or right. Davies 
has used the word with great variety of meaning: ‘Use all thy powers, that heavenly 
power to praise, That gave thee power to do.’—[Johnson was evidently trusting to 
his memory; this quotation is from Sir John Davies’ Nosce Teipsum, the concluding 
lines, and in Arber’s reprint (English Garner, vol. v, p. 202) runs thus: ‘Use all 
thy powers that Blessed Power to praise! Which gives thee power to Be, and 
Use the same.’—Ep.|—HEATH (p. 416): I am as well persuaded, as Mr Warburton 
can be of the contrary, that ‘this was mot intended as a ridicule on the Augustine’ 
(it should be the Augustinian) ‘manner of defining free-will at that time in the 
schools.’ The present expression, indeed, is no other than the natural dictate of 
an honest heart, which Shakespeare felt in its full force. The sense is, We have 
indeed a power by law to do it if we think proper, but this power amounts to the 
same as no power at all, because we should offer the greatest violence to our very 
natures if we should exert it. Thus much I thought it right to say in justification 
of this sentiment, which considered as Shakespeare intended it, as a moral senti- 
ment, is a very fine one, and a very serious one; not a ludicrous one, as Mr War- 
burton, wrapped up in his verbal metaphysics, would represent it. But to consider 
it in the metaphysical light in which he hath chosen to place it, I would beg leave 
to ask him one question. Doth he know what was the Augustinian definition of 
free will, which in Shakespeare’s time, or at any time before, or since, obtained 
in the schools? I am persuaded he doth not, or he could never have thought 
the ridicule, he hath gone out of his way to fasten upon it, would suit it. But 
I believe the truth of the case is this, Mr Warburton had formerly read the 
Provincial Letters, in the first of which the pouvoir prochain of the Dominican 
Thomists . . . is very finely and very strongly ridiculed, and that in a manner 
which bears a distant resemblance to the text of our poet. This probably might 
give the hint to his confused imagination to transfer a misunderstood ridicule 
upon a doctrine to which it is no way applicable. For let me ask him another 
question. Had he himself the power while he was writing this note to throw up 
the sash of his study window and leap out of it? I suppose he will scarce deny 
that he had the power to do so; but that power being under the control of another 
power, which belonged to him as a moral agent, I suppose too he will as little 
deny, that, upon the result of the combination of those two powers, he had not, 
as then circumstanced, the power to exert the physical power. If he should deny 
it, the common sense of mankind will bear witness against him. This is the very 
case in our poet’s text. The man had in himself the power to do it, but it was 
a power he had no power to exert. But thus it will always be with people who 
affect to know everything. They are at every turn betraying their ignorance of 
the very rudiments of what they will be talking about. 
7, 8. we are to... speake for them] W. A. Wricut: Not like Antony, who 

says (Jul. Cas., III, ii, 229): 

‘I tell you that which you yourselves do know; 

Show you sweet Czsar’s wounds, poor, poor dumb mouths 

And bid them speak for me.’ 


246 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iii. 


vs his Noble deeds, we muft alfo tell him our Noble ac- 
ceptance of them. Ingratitude is monftrous, and for the fe) 
multitude to be ingratefull, were to make a Monfter of 
the multitude; of the which, we beinglmembers, fhould 
bring our felues to be monftrous members. 

1.Cit. And to make vs no better thought of a little 
helpe will ferue: for once we ftood vp about the Corne, 15 
he himfelfe ftucke not to call vs the many-headed Multi- 
tude. 


3.Cit. We haue beene call’d fo of many, not that our 18 
15. once] once when Rowe,+, Cap. 15. we] he Pope ii. (misprint). 
Varr. Ran. Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Knt, 16, 17. Multitude] monster Han. 


Coll. MS., Hal. Craig. 


—Gorpon: As Antony did for Cesar, though he feigned the contrary: ‘Were I 
a Brutus, And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony Would ruffle up your 
spirits, and put a tongue In every wound of Cesar,’ III, ii, 230-233. 

12. of the which] For other examples of this construction see, if needful, 
AxBBott § 270.—P. Srupson (Sh. Punctuation, p. 52) gives several other passages 
wherein the relative is thus followed by a comma. 

15. for once] MALONE: That is, as soon as ever we stood up. This word is 
still used in nearly the same sense in familiar or rather vulgar language such as 
Shakespeare wished to allot to the Roman populace: ‘Once the will of the monarch 
is the only law, the constitution is destroyed.—STEEVENS: As no decisive evidence 
is brought to prove that the adverb ‘once’ has at any time signified as soon as 
ever, I have not rejected the word introduced by Mr Rowe, which, in my judgment, 
is necessary to the speaker’s meaning.—Scummpt (Coriolanus): We need not con- 
cern ourselves with the peculiar meaning of a word if we understand ‘for’ in the 
sense of because, as it not infrequently occurs—W. A. WricHT: This does not 
seem a natural construction—[ApBort (§ 244) includes this passage among the 
examples of those wherein the relative is omitted; the word when in this present 
case.—Ep.]—Casr (Arden Sh.): Shakespeare here obviously refers to the place 
in North’s Plutarch where it is related that Coriolanus, after he was refused the 
consulship, and when great store of corn was brought to Rome, made an oration 
against the insolency of the people and the proposal to distribute corn gratis. 
Shakespeare makes this opposition of Coriolanus to the distribution of corn pre- 
cede his going up for the consulship. 

16,17. the many-headed Multitude] WaireLaw: The zrockidov kai moAvKégadov 
Onptov of Plato (Republic, ix, par. 588) represents, in men or states, the multi- 
farious appetites of human nature, turbulent and strong: of the three principles— 
rational, ambitious appetitive—the last and lowest in the scale. So Horace to 
the Roman public: ‘Bellua multorum es capitum. Nam quid sequar aut quem?’ 
[Epistola, i, 1. 76. See BayLey, pp. 159-164, for a remarkable culling of ex- 
amples of phrases applied to the people from the authors and playwrights of the 
period.—Eb.] 


ACT I, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 247 


heads are fome browne, fome blacke,fome Abram, fome 
bald; but that our wits are fo diuerfly Coulord; and true- 20 
ly I thinke, if all our wittes were to iffue out of one Scull, 
they would flye Eaft, Weft, North, South, and their con- 
fent of one direét way, fhould be at once to all the points 
a’th Compaffe. 
2-(it. Thinke you fo? Which way do you iudge my 25 
wit would flye. 
3-Cit. Nay your wit will not fo foone out as another 
mans will, ’tis {trongly wadg’d vp in a blocke-head : but 
if it were at liberty, ’twould fure Southward. 
2Cit. Why that way? 30 
3Cit. To loofe it felfe in a Fogge, where being three 
parts melted away with rotten Dewes, the fourth would 


returne for Confcience fake, to helpe to get thee a Wife. 33 
19. Abram] F.F3;, Beeching (Irving 24. ath] o’th F,, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 
Sh.; Falcon Sh.), Chambers, Craig, o’the Cap. et cet. 
Herford, Tucker Brooke. auburn F, 28. wadg’d] wedg’d Ff. 
et cet. 28-35. but if...you may.) Om. Bell. 
20. Coulord] Color’d F;F,. 29. fure] soar Grey (ii, 166). 
21. one Scull] our sculls Han. 31-33. Mnemonic Warb. 
23. fhould] would Rowe,+. 31. loofe] lofe F3F,. 
all the] all Rowe,+. 32. fourth] forth F.. 


19. Abram] Murray (NV. E. D.,s. v. Abraham, Abram): Corruption of Auburn, 
formerly often written abern, aborn; [the present line quoted; also, 1599, Solim. 
& Pers. (Haz. Dods., v, 363): “Where is the eldest son of Priam, That Abraham- 
colour’d Trojan? Dead.’ 1627 Peacham. Compleat Gentleman, 155 (1661). ‘I 
shall passe to the exposition of certain colours—Abram-colour, 7. e., brown, Auborne 
or Abborne, 7. e., brown or brown-black.’—STEEVENS, in reference to the spelling of 
the Folio, makes this cryptic remark: ‘I should unwillingly suppose this to be the 
true reading; but we have already heard of Cain and Abram-coloured beards.’— 
Wricat, in illustration of the spelling abron, quotes Hall’s Satires, ili, 5, 8, ‘A 
lusty courtier whose curled head With abron locks was fairly furnished.’ 

at. if all our wittes ... out of one Scull] Warpurton: Meaning though our 
having but one interest was most apparent, yet our wishes and projects would 
be infinitely discordant—M. Mason (Comments, p. 250): To suppose all their 
wits to issue from one skull, and that their common consent and agreement to go 
all one way, should end in their flying to every point of the compass, is a just 
description of the variety and inconsistency of the opinions, wishes, and actions of 
the multitude. 

22, 23. their consent .. . direct way] W. A. Wricut: That is, their agreement 
to go in one direction. 

32, 33. the fourth... to get thee a Wife] Warpurrton: A sly satirical in- 
sinuation how small a capacity of wit is necessary for that purpose. But every 
day’s experience of the Sex’s prudent disposal of themselves may be sufficient 


248 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iii. 


2Cit. You are neuer without your trickes, you may, 
you may. 35 
3Cit. Are you all refolu’d to giue your voyces ? But 
that’s no matter, the greater part carries it, I fay. If hee 
would incline to the people, there was neuer a worthier 
man. 
Enter Coriolanus in a gowne of Humility, with 40 
Menenwus. 
Heere he comes, and in the Gowne of humility, marke 
his behauiour : we are not to ftay altogether, but to come 
by him where he ftands, by ones, by twoes, & by threes. 


He’s to make his requefts by particulars, wherein euerie 
45 


34, 35. you may, you may.) Ff, 
Cam.+, Craig. —you may, you may.— 
Rowe,+, Ran. Ktly. —you may, you 
may. Var. ’78 et cet. 

37. i, I fay.) Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Schmidt. i. JI say Theob. et cet. 

40, 41. Enter...with Menenius.] En- 
ter..in a gown, with Menenius. 
Pope,+. Enter Coriolanus and Men- 
enius. Cap. (after 1.42). Enter Corio- 


Coriolanus and Menenius Var. ’78, ’85, 
Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, 
Coll. Del. Huds. i. (after 1. 49 Dyce, 
Sta. Wh. i, Words. Huds. ii.). Re-enter 
Coriolanus and Menenius. Craig. 

43. altogether] al together F.. all 
together F3F,. 

44. & by threes] by & threes F, (& by 
threes Methuen facsimile). 

45. wherein] where F,. 


lanus with Menenius. Var. ’73. Enter 


to inform us how unjust it is—Scumipt (Coriolanus): What jocosity has the speaker 
in mind? Does he wish to imply that in order to win and wed a wife requires the 
least part of one’s mother-wit; or that one must be reduced to a fourth part of his 
wit in order to think of marriage? 

34, 35. you may, you may] STEEVENS: This colloquial phrase, which seems to 
signify ‘you may divert yourself as you please at my expence,’ has occurred 
already in Tro. & Cress.: ‘Hel. By my troth, sweet lord, thou hast a fine forehead. 
Pand. Ay, you may, you may,’ [III, i, 118]. 

37. carries it, I say.] Scummr (Coriolanus): Modern editors place the period 
after ‘it,’ beginning the next sentence with ‘I say.’ But, not to mention that a 
comic twist is thereby lost, it may perhaps be worth noting that Shakespeare 
never begins a sentence with this emphatic ‘I say.’ [‘Never’ and ‘always’ are 
somewhat perilous words to use in reference to Shakespearian usage. Here, then, 
are three examples taken at random which are contradictory, I think, to Schmidt’s 
assertion: ‘I say it is the moon that shines so bright,’ Tam. of Shr., IV, v, 4; 
‘I say she’s dead; I’ll swear’t,’ Wint. Tale, III, ii, 104; ‘I say the earth did shake 
when I was born,’ z Henry IV: III, i, 21.—Ep.]—W. A. Wricut, in reference to 
the Folio pointing, says: ‘But the Third Citizen is somewhat of a wit, and a truism 
of this kind has no comic effect in his mouth.’ 

45. by particulars] W. A. Wricut: That is, one by one, in detail.—CasrE 
(Arden Sh.): The phrase is ambiguous and might mean ‘in detail, point by point,’ 
but Coriolanus has only one request to make, and it is reasonable to distribute it 
by repetition as the context distributes the answers. 


ACT Il, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 249 


one of vs ha’s a fingle Honor, in giuing him our own voi- 46 
ces with our owne tongues,therefore follow me, and Ile 
direct you how you fhall go by him. 

All. Content,content. 

Men. Oh Sir,you are not right:haue you not knowne 50 
The worthieft men haue done’t? 

Corio. What muft I fay, I pray Sir ? 
Plague vpon’t, I cannot bring 
My tougne to fuch a pace. Looke Sir, my wounds, 
I got them in my Countries Seruice, when 55 
Some certaine of your Brethren roar’d, and ranne 
From th’noife of our owne Drummes. 

Menen. Oh me the Gods, you muft not fpeak of that, 
You mutt defire them to thinke vpon you. 


Coriol. Thinke vpon me? Hang ’em, 60 
I would they would forget me, like the Vertues 
Which our Diuines lofe by em. 62 
49. content.) Ff, Pope,t+, Var. ’78, 54. tougne] Fy. 
85. content. [Exeunt Citizens. Cap. 57- th’noife] Fi, Wh. i. noise Pope,+. 
Craig, Neils. content. [Exeunt. Rowe the noise Rowe et cet. 
et cet. 57-60. Lines end: Gods,...them... 
50, 51. As prose Johns. Var. 773. Hang ’em, Pope et seq. 
51. done’t] done it Var. ’03, 713, ’21, 61, 62. like...em] Om. Words. 
Sing. i. 61. Vertues] advices Han. 
52. fay, I pray Sir?] say?—I pray, 62. by] on Han. 
sir,— Theob. et seq. (subs.). em| them Cap. Mal. Steev. Varr. 
52, 53. 1 pray...bring] As one line Sing. i, Knt, Coll. Del. Hal. Wh. i, 
Pope et seq. Huds. i. 


59. thinke vpon you] BeEcurnc (Falcon Sh.): To ‘think upon,’ in the mouth 
of a suppliant, has the special sense of ‘to remember with compassion,’ as in Jonah, 
i, 6, ‘If so be God will think upon us’; so that there is a touch of epigram in Corio- 
lanus’s retort, ‘I would they would forget me.’ 

61, 62. like the Vertues . . . lose by em] THEOBALD: I wish they would forget 
me as they do those virtuous precepts which the divines preach up to them, and 
lose by them, as it were, by their neglecting the practice—CaPeE Lt (vol. I, pt i, 
p. 88): ‘Virtues’ are put poetically for precepts of virtue, which divines are 
properly enough said to lose by hearers upon whom they have no influence.— 
BapuHam (Criticism, p. 13): Anyone who can seriously maintain that there is a 
meaning in this passage as it now stands has much false ingenuity to unlearn. 
The following passage in North’s Plutarch (Life of Romulus, p. 26, ed. 1579) may 
perhaps afford us some clue: ‘Moreover other birdes are allwayes (as a man would 
saye) before our eyes, and doe daylie shewe themselves unto us: where the vulter 
is a very rare byrde and hardly to be seene, and men do not easily finde their 
ayeries. Which hath geven some occasion to holde a false opinion that the vulters 
are passagers, &c. The prognosticators also thincke that such things which are not 
ordinarie and but rarely seene, be not natural, but miraculously sent by the gods 


250 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iii. 


[61, 62. like the Vertues Which our Diuines lose by em] 
to prognosticate something.’ Now we have no doubt that Coriolanus here wishes 
that his dealings with the people were as transitory and rare as the visits of vultures 
are to the gaze of the soothsayers. He never wishes to encounter them more, not 
even to hear their praises. But then how is this passage to be moulded according 
to this view? Shall we read, ‘I wish they would forget me like the vultures 
Which our diviners lease by’; or, Which our divines lose sight of? Let the judicious 
determine or, rather, let them propose some more satisfactory way of introducing 
this word thus strangely corrupted into virtues. [It is, I think, doubtful that 
Badham’s extravagant emendation or explanation will appeal to any thoughtful 
reader. He himself would very likely have somewhat modified his view had he 
consulted the several passages wherein Shakespeare refers to the Vulture. In 
no instance is this bird taken except as the emblem of voracity, which honor it 
seems to share with the cormorant. The words ‘virtues’ and vultwres in the 
handwriting of the time do not in the least resemble each other.—Ep.]—VERPLANCK: 
‘I wish they would forget me, as they do the moral teachings of our divines.’ This 
(repeat a dozen critics) is ‘an amusing instance of anachronism.’ I do not see why 
the priestly teachers of morals in a heathen land may not well be termed ‘divines’ 
by an English poet without implying that he supposed them to be doctors of 
divinity of Oxford or Geneva. [As far as I know Verplanck himself is the first 
to call attention to the anachronism—his edition appeared in 1847—the ‘dozen 
critics’ are all named John Doe.—Ep.]—Hupson: This use of the term ‘divines’ 
has been set down as another anachronism. No doubt it isso. And so in North’s 
Plutarch we often find that the ancient Greeks and Romans had bishops among 
them. The poet simply uses the language of his time to represent what has been 
done at all times.—WELLESLEY (p. 26): None of the commentators have informed 
us what were the precepts by which Coriolanus imagines that the Roman divines 
of his day are as much losers as he is by his example. I should rather suppose that 
he borrowed his simile from the Faculty, and that we should read, ‘ Which medicines 
lose by time,’ the compositor having read our divines for medicines and them for time. 
—Jasez [C. M. IncteBy] (Notes & Queries, 11 Aug., 1877, p. 105): Undoubtedly 
time may have been read ‘them,’ which, in its turn, was contracted into ‘em.’ 
But if ‘our divines’ be a corruption, its place can hardly have been occupied by 
medicines; for men do not cease to care for the lost virtues of their drugs, but throw 
physic to the dogs when it is found to have survived its efficacy. On the contrary, 
men do not throw away their old wines, not even their tawny port, but they set 
store by them, prizing them for the very reason that their former virtues, have 
departed. I therefore propose to read, ‘Like the virtues Which old wines lose 
by time,’ conceiving that our d is a misprint for old, ivines for wines. Coriolanus 
might fitly compare himself (as valued by the plebs) to the virtues of a, wine, which 
men think they do well to dispraise and forget. [In Cam. ii. another emendation 
is accredited to Ingleby, ‘Which dry wines lose by time’; it is, however, marked 
as withdrawn. May we not add, wisely?—Ep.]—R. M. SPENCE (Notes & Queries, 
1 Sep., 1877, p. 163): In a reverent and diffident spirit I venture to suggest that 
Shakespeare’s words may possibly have been, ‘I would they would forget me, 
like the victims Which our diviners toss by ’em.’ J. ¢., as haruspices, having ex- 
amined the exta, toss the carcases of the victims aside, as having served their 
purpose, so wish I that the profanum vulgus of Rome, having got what they wanted 
from me—victory over their foes and security for themselves—may ever forget 


ACTAT SCe tits] CORIOLANUS 251 


Men. You'l marre all, 63 
Ile leaue you : Pray you fpeake to em, I pray you 
In wholfome manner. Exit 65 
Enter three of the Citizens. 
Corio. Bid them wath their Faces, 67 
64. Speake] to speak Pope. Johns. Var. 773, ’78, ’85. Ran. Two 
65. Exit.] Exit Menenius. Cap. Dyce Citizens approach. Han. Re-enter 
(after cleane, 1. 68), Words. Huds. ii. two of the Citizens (after cleane, 1. 68), 
66. Enter three of the Citizens.] Cam.+. Re-enter three of the Citi- 
Enter two of the Citizens. Rowe, Cap. zens. Neils. Enter two Citizens. Mal. 


Citizens approach. Pope, Theob. Warb. elicets 


me. Since this note was written I have seen Jabez’s proposed emendation of 
this passage. With all deference, I submit that my rendering, while taking no 
greater liberty with the text than his, is more in keeping with Coriolanus’s im- 
petuous manner. [The deferential tone of Spence’s note somewhat precludes 
severe criticism, still it may be pointed out that ‘victim’ is a word which does not 
occur in any of Shakespeare’s works; and, according to the N. E. D., was not in 
current use until towards the end of 1600. Of what use are Concordances of the 
plays and poems if not for the purpose of establishing such a fact as the first of 
these here givenP—Ep.]—W. Carew (lIbid., p. 163): I would suggest the passage 
is elliptical, and should read, ‘Like the virtues which our divines forget when they 
lose by enforcing or practising them.’—W. A. WricHT: That is, waste upon them 
by preaching to them in vain. If this be the true reading, Theobald’s explanation 
must be right. [Wright characterises the various emendations proposed as ‘all 
more open to objection than the original text.’]—Casr (Arden Sh.): Elliptical 
in the extreme. Divines lose their labour, not their virtues, but they may be re- 
garded as losing the plants of virtue which they vainly strive to set and cultivate in 
base minds. 

65. wholsome] STEEVENS: So in Hamlet, ‘If it shall please you to make me a 
wholesome answer,’ [III, ii, 328]—W. A. Wricut: That is, in a suitable, reasonable 
manner, and not in this wild way. 

66. Enter three of the Citizens] There is, it will be noticed, a discrepancy be- 
tween the number of Citizens here given and the words of Coriolanus, 1. 68. The 
Text. Notes show the various attempts to reconcile the two; on the whole, the 
arrangements adopted by the Cambridge Edd., for this and 1. 68, seem to be the 
best solution of the difficulty—Ep.—Scummpt: On account of the expression 
‘a brace’ editors have altered the ‘three’ of this stage-direction to ‘two,’ but it 
may be remarked that ‘brace,’ like the German ein Paar, is frequently used for a 
small number; and even were it not so, the three Citizens could enter one after 
the other, and at first only two be seen by Coriolanus.—BrEcuinc (Falcon Sh.): 
The Cambridge Edd. make a third citizen enter alone. This is possible, as the 
citizens had agreed to come ‘by ones, by twos, and by threes’ (1. 45). In that case 
he must step ahead of the ‘brace,’ as he is first to reply (Folio). On the other hand, 
in 1. 85, Coriolanus says, ‘There’s in all two voices begg’d’; which the Cambridge 
Edd. do not alter! 

67. Bid them wash their Faces] W. S. WALKER (Crit., iii, 210): Playing upon 
Menenius’s ‘wholesome manner.’ 


252 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iii. 


And keepe their teeth cleane : So, heere comes a brace, 68 
You know the caufe (Sir) of my ftanding heere. 

3Cit. We do Sir, tell vs what hath brought you too’t. 70 

Corio. Mine owne defert. 

2 Cit. Your owne defert. 

Corio. I, but mine owne defire. 

3 Cit. How not your owne defire ? 

Corio. No Sir, ’twas neuer my defire yet to trouble the 75 
poore with begging. 


68. brace,] brace. [Re-enter a third 73, 74. mine owne defire...defire?] As 
Citizen. Cam.+. Jeask Anon. ap. one line Cap. Steev. Varr. Sing. Coll. 
Cam. Ktly. 

69. (Sir)] Ff. Sirs, Rowe,+, Dyce. 75-78. As verse, ending lines: yet... 
sir, Cap. et cet. thinke...by you. Cap. Ktly. Ending 

70. 3 Cit.] Third Cit. Cam.+. 1. lines: yet...begging...by you. Var. 778, 
Cit. 1 Cit. Rowe et cet. 85, Ran. Mal. Coll. Sing. Hal. End- 


73. I, but] I, no F.. Ay, but not ing lines: No Sir...trouble...begging... 
Cam. Glo. Craig (Arden Sh.), Weiser. any thing...by you. Steev. Varr. 
I, not F;F,. Ay, not Rowe et cet. 


68. a brace] Murray (N. E£. D., s. v. III, 15. D.) gives several examples wherein 
‘brace,’ meaning couple, applied to persons is used in a slightly humorous or con- 
temptuous sense, its usual application being to designate a pair of dogs, from the 
strap or brace which holds them together. The word thus used by Coriolanus on 
this occasion is quite in character.—Ep. 

69. You know the cause (Sir)] Dyce: Rowe’s alteration (sirs) is perhaps right, 
for Coriolanus may now be speaking to the ‘brace,’ though he presently asks them 
for their voices one by one. In the more recent editions (Mr Knight’s excepted) 
the dialogue between Coriolanus and these two Citizens is arranged in a sort of 
verse, but the Folio gives it as prose; nor does it seem to have been intended by 
the author for verse any more than the dialogue between Coriolanus and the 
‘two other Citizens,’ of which no editor has attempted to make verse. 

70. 3 Cit.] E. K. Cuampers (Warwick Sh.): The Citizen insists on all the 
formalities being gone through. One feels that this particular citizen must be 
quite especially offensive in Coriolanus’s eyes. 

73. I, but mine owne desire.] StEEvENS: If ‘but’ be the true reading, it must 
signify, as in the North, without—Ru1tson: ‘But’ is only the reading of the 
First Folio. Not is the true reading—Matone: The answer of the Citizen fully 
supports the correction which was made by the editor of the third folio. ‘But’ 
and not are often confounded in these plays.—Scumipt, retaining the Folio read- 
ing, places a dash after ‘desire’ instead of a period, as though the speech were 
interrupted; and in justification says: ‘The following “How” as an exclamation 
of amazement, instead of what is thoroughly Shakespearean, and does not contra- 
dict the very simple alteration of the text.—‘But in this case,’ remarks W. A. 
WRIGHT, the interruption would not be “How! not your own desire!” which clearly 
must repeat his words.’ As other instances of the confusion between ‘but’ and 
not Wright cites III, iii, 155 supra, and As You Like It, Il, i, 5, ‘Here feel we 
but the penalty of Adam,’ where the Folios have ‘not.’—Epb. 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 


253 


3 Cit. You muft thinke if we giue you any thing, we i 
hope to gaine by you. 


Corio. Well then I pray, your price a’th’Confulfhip. 
I Cit. The price is, to aske it kindly. 80 
Corio. Kindly fir, I pray let me ha’t : I haue wounds to 


fhew you, which fhall bee yours in priuate : 
voice Sir, what fay you ? 

2 Cit. You fhall ha’t worthy Sir. 

Corio. A match Sir, there’s in all two worthie voyces 85, 
begg’d : I haue your Almes, Adieu. 


your good 


3 Cit. But this is fomething odde. 
2 Cit. And’twere to giue againe : but ’tis no matter. 
Exeunt. Enter two other Citizens. 
Coriol. Pray you now, if it may ftand with the tune 90: 


of your voices, that I may bee Confull, I haue heere the 
Cuftomarie Gowne. 92 


79-87. As verse, ending lines: Con- 
fulfhip...kindly...fhew you...voice Sir... 
worthy Sir...begg’d...odde. Cap. Varr. 
Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 

79. pray, your] pray your Pope. 

@th’| oi F,, Rowe,+.  o’the 
Cap. et seq. 

80. is,] is, sir, Cap. of, it is Ktly. 

81. Kindly fir] Kindly, sir, F,. 
Kindly, Sir? Johns. Knt, Huds. i. 
Kindly? A match, sir. Ran. Kindly? 


82. your] you Rowe ii. 

84. ha’t] have it Cap. Varr. Ran. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. Ktly,. 
Craig. 

89. Exeunt.] Ff, Rowe,+, Var. ’78, 
85, Ran. Sta. Ktly. Exeunt these. 


Cap. Exeunt the three Citizens. 
Cam.+, Neils. Exeunt two Citizens. 
Mal. et cet. 


Enter] Om. Pope,+. Re-enter 
Dyce, Cam.+, Coll. iii, Craig. 


Sir, Cap. et cet. 


85. A match Sir] Staunton: The meaning we take to be this: Coriolanus. 
having won the voice of one Citizen, turns to the other with the enquiry, 
Will you match it? and then proceeds: ‘There’s in all two worthy voices begged,’ 
&c. 

87. But... odde] Srrrvens: As this hemistich is too bulky to join with its 
predecessor, we may suppose our author to have written only, ‘This is something 
odd’; and that the compositor’s eye had caught ‘But’ from the succeeding 
line.—[Shakespeare is in nowise responsible for this halting verse into which his 
prose has been ruthlessly measured out; any errors in the prosody must be ascribed 
to Capell, as Steevens doubtless knew.—Eb.] 

88. And ’twere...no matter] C. & M. CowpEn Crarke (Shakespeare): 
The naturalness of the writing here, with this break in the speech, and with the 
half expressed but most expressive sentences of puzzled annoyance and grudged 
consent, is inimitable. There is no one like Shakespeare for conveying perfect 
impression through imperfect. expression—VERITY (Student’s Sh.): Another 
foreshadowing. The two remarks convey a fine idea of blank surprise and 
disgust. 


254 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACriai, Se-sit; 


1. You haue deferued Nobly of your Countrey, and 93 
you haue not deferued Nobly. 

Cortol. Your A*nigma. 95 

1. You haue bin a fcourge to her enemies, you haue 
bin a Rod to her Friends, you haue not indeede loued the 
Common people. 

Coriol. You fhould account mee the more Vertuous, 
that I haue not bin common in my Loue, I will fir flatter 100 
my f{worne Brother the people to earne a deerer eftima- 


035500,-11n. 1} 3).Cit. Mal> Varr: 100. Lowe,] love. Johns. et seq. 
Sing. Knt, Coll. Hal. Ktly, Wh. i, I will] but I will Han. TI will 
Huds. Third Cit. Dyce, Words. Craig. not Coll. MS. 
Fourth Cit. Cam.+, Neils. I will fir) I will, Sir, Fy. 

95. Ainigma.] Ff. enigma.— 1o1. Brother) brothers Coll. MS. 
Theob.+. cnigma? Rowe et cet. people] people, Fy. 


96-98. You haue... Common people] Verity (Studeni’s Sh.): This repre- 
sents the sole effort of the Citizens to put in practice the ‘lessoning’ of the Tribunes. 
And it is more than enough to stir the resentment of Coriolanus—MacCaLLum 
(p. 527): It is all very well for the candidate to turn this off with a flout, but it is 
the sober truth. That the despised plebeian should see both sides of the case 
shows in him more sanity of judgment than Coriolanus ever possessed; that he 
should nevertheless cast his vote for such an applicant shows more generosity as 
well. And the generosity, if also the simplicity, of the electors is likewise made 
more pronounced than in Plutarch by their persevering in their course despite the 
scorn with which Coriolanus treats them; of which Plutarch, of course, knows 
nothing. Even that they forgive till the tribunes irritate the wounds and predict 
more fatal ones from the new weapon that has been put into such ruthless hands. 
All these instances of right feeling and instinctive appreciation of greatness are 
in Shakespeare’s picture, while they are not at all, or in a much less degree, in 
Plutarch’s. 

100. common in my Loue] Verity (Student’s Sh.): Compare Polonius’s advice 
to Laertes, I, iii, 61-65, especially 61: ‘Be thou familiar but by no means vulgar’; 
and Sonnet |xix (where ‘the friend’ is compared to a flower): 


‘But why thy odour matcheth not thy show 
The solve is this, that thou dost common grow’ 


(z. e., not exclusive enough in choice of friends). 

101. my sworne Brother] W. A. Wricur: In the middle ages ‘fratres jurati’ 
were persons who had taken an oath to share each other’s fortunes. Cowel in 
his Law Dictionary says: ‘Fratres conjurati Are sworn Brothers or Companions. 
. . » Sometimes they are so called who were sworn to defend the King against 
his Enemies.’ Compare As You Like It, V, iv, 107, ‘They shook hands and swore 
brothers.’ Again Much Ado, I, i, 73, He hath every month a new sworn brother.’— 
Gorpon: As if he and the people had sworn, according to the old custom of 
comrades-at-arms, to stand by each other in everything. Coriolanus is bitterly 
ironical, for flattery in such a compact is the unpardonable sin. That the people 
are willing to be flattered shows that they are not fit for such comradeship. 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CORIOLA NUS 255 


tion of them, ’tis a condition they account gentle: & fince 102 
the wifedome of their choice, is rather to haue my Hat, 
then my Heart, I will praétice the infinuating nod, and be 
off to them moft counterfetly, that is fir, I will counter- 105 
fet the bewitchment of fome popular man, and giue it 
bountifull to the defirers : Therefore befeech you, I may — 
be Confull. 
2. Wee hope to finde you our friend : and therefore 
giue you our voices heartily. 110 
1. You haue receyued many wounds for your Coun- 
trey. 
Coriol. I wil not Seale your knowledge with fhewing 
them. I will make much of your voyces, and fo trouble 
you no farther. 115 
Both. The Gods giue you ioy Sir heartily. 
Coriol. Mott {weet Voyces : 
Better it is to dye, better to fterue, 


Then craue the higher, which firft we do defeure. 119 
102. ’tis] for ’tis Han. tog. 2.] Ff. 2 Cit. Rowe,+, Cap. 
103. Hat] cap Pope,+. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Fifth Cit. 
104, 105. be off] doff Badham (Crit. Cam.+. Fourth Cit. Var. ’o3 et 

13). cet. 

105. ts fir] is, Sor Fy. 115. farther] further Rowe,+. 

107. bountifull] Ff, Rowe i, Dyce, 116. toy Sir heartily.| Joy, Sur, 
Sta. Cam.+, Words. Huds. ii, Neils. heartily. [Exeunt. Rowe et seq. 
bountifully Rowe ii. et cet. 118. frerue] F.. sterve F;, Sing. ii, 

defirers] defires Ff. Ktly, Schmidt, Craig. fiarve F, et cet.. 
Therefore] Therefore, Fs. 119. higher] hire Ff. 
102. tis... gentle] Cask (Arden Sh.): ‘Condition’ is disposition, and also 


quality, trait. Either sense will serve here, according as we understand Corio- 
lanus to insinuate that the flatterer’s disposition is gentle in the people’s eyes, or 
that they regard flattery as a gentle trait. Compare Henry V: V, ii, 314, ‘Our 
tongue is rough, coz, and my condition is not smooth; so that, having neither the 
voice nor the heart of flattery about me, I cannot,’ etc. See also Mer. of Ven., 
I, ii, 143, ‘the condition of a saint.’ 

113. Seale your knowledge] Jounson: I will not strengthen or-complete your 
knowledge. The seal is that which gives authenticity to a writing. 

118-129. Better it is... will I doe] Coampers (Warwick Sh.): Heroic verse 
is not common in the play, but here it is used to express the excited, overstrained 
condition of Coriolanus. The Citizens have got upon his nerves, and he relieves 
himself in a moment’s interval with this angry outburst—Casre (Arden Sh.): 
An example of Shakespeare’s surviving use of rhyme for sententious reflection and 
emotional self-expression, both of which are united in this passage. 

119. higher] Matone: This is one of the many proofs that several parts of 
the original folio edition of these plays were dictated by one and written down by 


256 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iii. 


Why in this Wooluifh tongue fhould I ftand heere, 120 


120-129. In margin Pope, Han. ii, Craig. wolvish gown Var. ’85, Sing. 
120. Wooluifh tongue] Var. ’73, i. wolvish togue Del. i. wolvish toge 
Schmidt. woolvif/h Gowne Ff, Rowe,+, Sing: ii, Halt Huds? i- Del) 1, Cla: 
Var. ’78, Steev. Varr. Sta. Wh. i, Knt woolless togue Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), Ktly, 
ii, Craig. wolfish gown Cap. Knt i. Dyce ii, Words. Wh. ii, Neils. Sherman, 
woolvish toge Steevens conj. Ran. Mal. Dtn. Foolish toge Leo (Mason conj.). 


Coll. i, Dyce, Cam. Glo. Clarke, Huds. wolfish toge Tucker Brooke. 


another.—W. A. Wricut, in reference to the foregoing, says: ‘I have observed 
similar mistakes which could only have occurred by a compositor, while setting 
up the type, carrying several words in his mind, and so spelling as he pronounced 
them to himself. For instance, in Mr King’s Antique Gems and Rings, p. 234, the 
following appeared in a first proof: “Indifferent in themselves, but like the rest, 
not to be obtruded on the high”; and in the present play, “A vessell under sail” 
was first printed, ‘‘A vessell under sale.’’’ 

120. this Wooluish tongue] JoHNSON: ‘This woolvish gown’ signifies this rough 
hirsute gown.—STEEVENS (Variorum 1773): I own I was surprised, on consulting 
the old copy, to find the passage printed thus, ‘woolvish tongue.” Mr Rowe first 
substituted gown, which has been followed (perhaps without necessity) by all 
editors. [Steevens did not examine the Ff here-—See Text. Notes—Ep.] The 
white robe worn by a candidate was made, I think, of white lamb skins, how 
comes it then to be called woolvish, unless in allusion to the fable of the wolf in 
sheep’s clothing? Perhaps the poet meant only, Why do I stand with a tongue 
deceitful as that of the wolf, and seem to flatter these whom I could wish to treat with 
my usual ferocity? We may perhaps more distinctly read, with this woolvish 
tongue, unless ‘tongue’ be used for tone or accent. ‘Tongue’ might, indeed, be 
only a typographical mistake, and the word designed be toge, which is used in 
Othello. Shakespeare, however, does not appear to have known what the toga 
hirsuta was, because he has just before called it the napless gown of humility.— 
Is. (Variorum 1778): Since the foregoing note was written I met with the fol- 
lowing passage in A Merye Jest of a Man called Howleglas, bl. 1. no date, Howleglas 
hired himself to a taylor, who ‘caste unto him a husbandemans gowne, and bad 
him take a wolfe, and make it up, Than cut Howleglas the husbandmans gowne 
and made thereof a woulfe with the head and feete, &c. Then sayd the maister, 
I ment that you should have made up the russet gown, for a husbandmans gowne 
is here called a wolfe.’ By a wolvish gown, therefore (if gown be the true reading), 
Shakespeare might have meant Coriolanus to compare the dress of a Roman candi- 
date to the coarse frock of a ploughman, who exposed himself to solicit the votes 
of his fellow rustics—Mason (Comments, etc., p. 251): Whether we read gown 
or toge is of little consequence, as they have both precisely the same meaning, 
and I should be rather inclined to read gown than toge, merely because that is the 
language of Coriolanus in the scene preceding, where he says, ‘I cannot Put on 
the gown, stand naked,’ &c. The only difficulty of the passage lies in the word 
“woolvish.’ It cannot mean, as Johnson supposes, a rough hirsute gown, for 
Brutus calls it, a little before, ‘The napless vesture of humility.’ The supposing 
that there is an allusion to the wolf in sheep’s clothing is rather a ludicrous idea, 
and should be treated as such. Nor can I suppose that Shakespeare meant to 
compare the gown, which he calls the napless vesture of humility, and from the 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 257 


[120. this Wooluish tongue] 
whiteness of which the competitors for the consulate derived their name, to the 
coarse frock of a ploughman. I therefore suppose that the passage is corrupt, 
because it is inexplicable as it stands. Perhaps we should read woolen instead of 
‘woolvish’; yet that would not sufficiently distinguish it from any other gown, as 
they were probably all made of that material. I should, therefore, rather sup- 
pose that we ought to read foolish, which agrees with what Coriolanus says in 
the latter part of this speech, ‘Rather than fool it so, Let the high office and the 
honour go.’—Matone: So in Othello, ‘the toged consuls,’ [I, i, 25]. I suppose the 
meaning is: ‘Why should I stand in this gown of humility, which is little ex- 
pressive of my feelings towards the people, as far from being an emblem of my 
real character as the sheep’s clothing on a wolf is expressive of his disposition.’ 
I believe ‘woolvish’ was used by our author for false or deceitful, and that the 
phrase was suggested to him, as Mr Steevens seems to think, by the common ex- 
pression ‘a wolf in sheep’s clothing.’ Mr Mason says that this is ‘a ludicrous 
idea, and ought to be treated as such.’ I have paid due attention to many of the 
ingenious commentator’s remarks in the present edition [1790], and therefore I 
am sure he will pardon me when I observe that speculative criticism on these 
plays will ever be liable to error, unless we add to it an intimate acquaintance 
with the language and writings of the predecessors and contemporaries of Shake- 
speare. If Mr Mason had read the following line in Churchyard’s Legend of 
Cardinal Wolsey, Mirror for Magistrates, 1587, instead of considering this as a 
ludicrous interpretation, he would probably have admitted it to be a natural 
and just explication of the epithet before us, ‘O fye on wolves that march in 
masking clothes,’ [p. 516,ed. 1610. Seealso z Henry VI: I, iii, 55, and 2 Henry VI: 
II], i, 78.—Eb.]. The woolvish (gown) or toge is a gown of humility, in which Corio- 
lanus thinks he shall appear in masquerade, and not in his real or natural character. 
Woolvish cannot mean rough, hirsute, as Dr Johnson interprets it, because the 
gown Coriolanus wore has already been described as napless. The old copy has 
‘tongue’; which was a very natural error for the compositor at the press to fall 
into, who almost always substitutes a familiar English word for one derived from 
the Latin, which he does not understand. The very same mistake has happened 
in Othello, where we find ‘tongued consuls’ for ‘toged consuls.’ The particle ‘in’ 
shows that ‘tongue’ cannot be right. The editor of the Second Folio solved the 
difficulty as usual by substituting gown without any regard to the word in the 
original copy.—Douce: Mr Steevens has, in his note on this passage, cited the 
romance of Howleglas to show that a husbandman’s gown was called a wolf, but 
quaere if it be called so in this country? It must be remembered that Howleglas 
is literally translated from the French, where the word ‘loup’ certainly occurs, but 
I believe it has not the same signification in that language. The French copy also 
may be Jiterally rendered from the German. [Douce is probably correct in saying 
that the version from which Steevens quotes is a translation from the French, 
but the title Howleglas is undoubtedly a translation of the German Eulenspiegel; 
the French title is Eulespiegel. Fliigel (Dict., s. v. Wolf. 18. prov. b.) has, ‘A 
peasant’s coat of a grey color.’ Cotgrave, s. v. Louviere: A wolverin: a gowne 
or garment furred or lined throughout with wolves skinne—Ep.]—Rirson: Mr 
Steevens is, however, clearly right in supposing the allusion to be to the ‘wolf 
in sheep’s clothing’; not, indeed, that Coriolanus means to call himself a wolf, 
but merely to say: ‘Why should I stand here playing the hypocrite, and simulating 


17 


258 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iii. 


[120. this Wooluish tongue] 
the humility which is not in my nature?’—CoLERmGE (Notes on Coriolanus): 
That the gown of the candidate was of whitened wool we know. Does wolvish 
or ‘woolvish’ mean ‘made of wool’? If it means wolfish, what is the sense?— 
SINGER appropriates Malone’s note on ‘tongue’ and foge, and also Ritson’s in 
regard to the fable of the wolf in sheep’s clothing, adding as his own contribution 
to the discussion a comparison of the passage in All’s Well, ‘it will wear the sur- 
plice of humility over the black gown of a big heart,’ I, iii, 98—Knicut: We 
believe that the correction of ‘tongue’ to gown is right. It is difficult to say whether 
‘woolvish’ means a gown made of wool, or a gown resembling a wolf, or wolfish. 
We adopt the latter opinion; for it is no proper description of the gown of humility 
to call it woollen. By wolfish Coriolanus probably meant to express something 
hateful. The notion of Steevens that the allusion was to the wolf in sheep’s 
clothing seems merely fanciful—VERPLANCK: Steevens, I think, is right in inter- 
preting ‘woolvish’ as deceitful, in allusion to the familiar phrase of ‘a wolf in 
sheep’s clothing.’ ‘Why should I make myself like the wolf, affecting a humility 
I have not?’—Detius: That Coriolanus here by the words ‘wolvish togue’ means 
the despised gown, that he according to custom must wear to obtain the peoples 
voices, is clearer than in just what sense the word ‘wolvish’ is used; whether in 
reference to the coarse, repellant exterior, wherein Coriolanus appears like a wolf, 
or in reference to the contradiction between this humble outside show and his 
own inner feeling of spite and ferocity like a wolf in sheep’s clothing. The first 
elucidation is much the simpler and more natural. Perhaps, though, fogue is not 
the word to be sought in ‘tongue,’ but rather throng, and by ‘wolvish throng’ 
is meant the Plebeians who press around Coriolanus like wolves around their 
prey.—Co..ieER (Notes & Emendations, etc., p. 354): ‘Woolvish’ is nothing but a 
lapse by the printer, who, earlier in the play, did not know what to make of ‘nap- 
less’ and called it ‘Naples’—‘the Naples vesture of humility’; here, again, he did 
not understand what he was putting in type, and therefore committed a singular, 
and hitherto inexplicable, blunder. A manuscript note in the Folio, 1632, sets all 
right, and offers a most acceptable emendation—‘woolless togue.’ As the toga 
was ‘napless,’ so it was woolless, an alteration for the better, that carries con- 
viction on the very face of it. Are we to impute it merely to the sagacity of the 
early possessor of the Folio, 1632, when nobody since his time has had any notion 
of the sort? or are we to suppose that he had in this instance, and in some others, 
a guide by which his speculations were assisted?—SrIncER (Sh. Vindicated, 
p- 215): In the substitution of woolless for ‘wolvish’ there is another singular 
coincidence with a hint by Mr Collier in his edition where attention is called 
to the gown being napless. In regard to woolvish toge (or gown) the idea is quite 
evident; Coriolanus says, Why should I stand here playing the hypocrite, in this 
gown of humility, like the wolf in sheep’s clothing? Whether the gown had a 
nap on it or no would hardly enter here into the mind of the poet or of Corio- 
lanus. It is sufficient that it was s¢mulating humility not in his nature to bring 
to mind the fable of the wolf—ANoN. (Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p. 322): 
In this instance we side most cordially with the margins and Mr Collier against 
Mr Singer and the ordinary text. The haughty Coriolanus, who is a candidate 
for the consulship, says, ‘Why in this wolvish gown should I stand here?’ Now 
Shakespeare, in a previous part of the play, has described the candidate’s toga as 
‘the napless vesture of humility’; and it is well-known that this toga was of a 


ACT I, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 259 


co ae a ES a ae a 
[120. this Wooluish tongue] 


different texture from that usually worn. Is it not probable, therefore—nay 
certain—that Coriolanus should speak of it as woolless, the word ‘wolvish’ being 
altogether unintelligible? Mr Singer, defending the old reading, says it is suffi- 
cient that his investiture in this gown ‘was simulating humility not in his nature 
to bring to mind the fable of the wolf.’ Oh, Mr Singer! but must not the epithet 
in that case have been sheepish? Surely, if Coriolanus had felt himself to be a 
wolf in sheep’s clothing, he never would have said that he was a sheep in wolves’ 
clothing! [Foot-note to above passage: ‘The German translators, Tieck and 
Schlegel, adopt the reading of the First Folio and translate: “Warum soll hier mit 
Wolfsgehuel ich stehen.” Dr Delius concurs with his countrymen, and remarks 
that the boldness of Shakespeare’s constructions readily admits of our connecting 
the words “in this wolfish tongue” with the words “to beg.” Now, admirable as 
we believe Dr Delius’ English scholarship to be, he must permit us to say that 
this is a point which can be determined only by a native of this country, and that 
the construction which he proposes is not consistent with the idiom of our language. 
Even the German idiom requires with (mit), and not in, a wolf’s cry. We cannot 
recommend him to introduce tongue into his text of our poet. —The Anonymous 
Critic has, I think, somewhat misunderstood Delius, who does not justify the 
Schlegel-Tieck translation entirely, but says: ‘The endeavors to retain the read- 
ings of the Folio at all costs frequently cause our German critics to set at defiance 
all rules of English grammar, even in the case of this passage, and to attribute the 
anomaly thus produced to the peculiarity of the Shakespearian usage of language’ 
(Die Tieck’sche Shaksperekritik Beleuchtet, p. 50). Delius does not make reference 
to this in either of his editions—Ep.]—TycHo Mommsen (p. 175): ‘Wolvish 
tongue’ is unintelligible, and neither by auditor nor reader can be connected with 
‘to beg’; the dictator (or scribe) was here quite as unfortunate as in a preceding 
passage, where instead of the somewhat unusual word ‘hire’ he wrote the unin- 
telligible stupid word higher. Shakespeare could offer toge to his public, as 
‘flamen’ in II, i, and in Othello ‘toged consuls.’ The wolfish dress may be either 
the coarse skin of the wolf, or the dress of the wolf in sheep’s clothing; the former 
(though good and formative in itself) requires that we lay greatest stress upon 
coarse; the latter, as both Steevens and Malone rightly note, is the more natural. 
But with this last interpretation, which depends upon the general acquaintance 
with the language of the Bible and fable, it is necessary that not the classic word 
(toge), but the popular word gown be read. And this word, so thoroughly appro- 
priate, is not supplied by the original text. Thus we are constrained to decide in 
favor of the MS. Corrector, since woolless corresponds most closely with the poet’s 
idea of the classic dress of the candidate. The copyist and reader were most 
wofully at fault not only with the two words ‘hire’ and ‘toge,’ but also with a third, 
woolless, since they did not understand togue and took it for songwe, thus ‘woolvish 
tongue’ seemed to them a much better sense than ‘woolless tongue’; thus they 
tinkered with the (oldest) texts. Perhaps also the handwriting here was some- 
what illegible—R. G. Wu1TE (Sh. Scholar, p. 360): Where is the propriety, espe- 
cially the poetic propriety, of calling the sheep-skin ‘wolf’s clothing’ merely be- 
cause the wolf wore it? The moment it became wolf’s clothing, that moment it 
ceased to be a disguise, and lost all significance; and besides, ‘wolfish’ means not 
‘belonging to a wolf,’ but ‘like a wolf.’ Unquestionably, Shakespeare would 
never have called a woollen toga ‘woolless’; and the new reading [of Collier’s MS. 


260 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iii. 


[120. this Wooluish tongue] 

Corrector] cannot be accepted. But since neither ‘wolfish’ nor woolless give a 
consistent meaning, let us look at the original line, the context, and the other 
passages of the play, which have a bearing upon this one. The word in the 
corrupted text seems to have misled all the commentators upon the passage. 
They evidently regard Coriolanus when standing for the consulship as feeling 
what our border-men call ‘wolfish about the head and shoulders.’ But the text 
affords no support for this opinion. Coriolanus feels contempt for the people; 
he derides the custom, and thinks that it belittles him to conform to it. What 
Brutus says of him shows no ireful feeling on his part, but merely that he thought 
the ceremony very small business, [II, i, 250-255]. Coriolanus himself says on a 
previous occasion: 


‘I’d rather have one scratch my head in the sun, 
When the alarum were struck, than idly sit 
To hear my nothings monstered,’ II, ii, 82-84. 


It makes him shame-faced to go through this foolery. When told that he must, 
according to precedent, speak to the people, he replies: 


‘T do beseech you, 
Let me o’erleap that custom, for I cannot 
Put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them, 
For my wounds’ sake, to give their suffrage: please you 
That I may pass this doing’, II, ii, 148-152. 
Again: 

“Cor. It is a part 
That I shall blush in acting, and might well 
Be taken from the people. 

Bru. Mark you that? 

Cor. To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus; 
Show them the unaching scars which I should hide, 
As if I had received them for the hire 
Of their breath only!’ Ibid., 159-165. 


There is nothing of a wolf in sheep’s clothing or a sheep in wolf’s clothing in all 
this. He regards the custom as contemptible, foolish. The same feeling appears 
when he stands in the Forum; and there he says to a Citizen, with a sneer, ‘I 
have here the customary gown.’ So again, when he has received the ‘most sweet 
voices’ of the people and is told by the Tribunes and Menenius to go to the Senate- 
house to be invested, he asks: 


‘Cor. May I change these garments? 

Sic. You may, sir. 

Cor. That V’ll straight do; and, knowing myself again, 
Repair to the senate-house’ (supra 150-154). 


He looks upon the ceremony as a preposterous piece of folly, and thinks that the 
vesture of humility makes a patrician appear ridiculous. ‘Wolfish,’ we have seen, 
is inadmissible; woolless is equally so, because the toga which Coriolanus wore 
was made of wool. Is it not plain then that, merely continuing his ridicule, 
he said, “Why in this foolish togue should I stand here?’ Yes, unquestionably, 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 261 


[120. this Wooluish tongue] 
for in this very speech, after only five lines which impeach the binding force of 
custom, he says, ‘Rather than fool it so Let the high office and the honor go.’ 
The word in the original is ‘wooluish’; and that it is a typographical error for 
foolish is confirmed by the fact that in not one of the fifty instances in which 
Shakespeare uses ‘wolf,’ ‘wolvish,’ or ‘wolves,’ does he spell those words or are 
they spelled with two o’s—Dyce (ed. i.): It is remarkable that Mr Grant White, 
quite unconscious of having been anticipated by Mason (whose conjecture is not 
mentioned in the Variorum Shakespeare), has been at some pains to prove that 
foolish is the genuine reading.—Ism. (ed. ii.): In this much controverted passage 
I adopt the reading of Mr Collier’s MS. Corrector—woolless; compare ‘the napless 
vesture,’ etc. That ‘Tongue’ of the Folio is a mistake for foge we might have been 
sure, even if a similar error were not found in Othello, I, i, [‘Tongued Consuls’). 
{In his Notes on this play, which appeared about five years after the foregoing 
remarks, White completely changed his view; he there says: ‘‘“ Why in this wolvish 
gown”’—i. e., in this gown, in which, to attain my own ends, I assume a virtue— 
humility—which I have not, like the wolf in sheep’s clothing. The First Folio 
has “woolvish tongue,” which has been almost universally regarded by modern 
editors as a misprint for “this woolvish foge.’”’ But with this opinion I cannot 
agree. For nowhere else does Shakespeare use “toge” or even “toga,” or any 
word formed from it, often as there was opportunity, almost occasion, in his class- 
ical plays. And besides, in the passage of North’s Plutarch which he was here 
dramatising, we have “a poore gowne” and “‘a simple gowne,” but no mention of 
a toga; and Shakespeare, we know, stuck closely to his authority in such cases— 
even to its words when they were names of things. The misprint of “tongue” 
for “gowne” is not so extravagant but that it might occur even nowadays; and 
for these reasons, therefore, it seems most probable that the editor of the Second 
Folio was right in reading “this wolvish gowne.”’ We might read: ‘‘Why, in this 
wolvish tongue, should I stand here To beg,” &c., z. ¢., ““Why should I stand here 
to beg in this deceitful tongue”; but the speaker’s reply to his own question, 
“Custom wills me to’t,” forbids. Custom enjoined upon him only the napless 
vesture of humility and the solicitation. Of the various conjectural readings 
proposed for this passage, no others appear worthy of mention.’]—STauNTON: 
Possibly, after all that has been written about it, the term ‘woolvish’ may have 
been intended to apply to the mob, and not the vestment, and the genuine reading 
be ‘wolfish throng.’ [See Note by Delius, ante——Ep.]—KericutLey (Expositor, 
p. 363): As ‘woolvish’ offers very little sense, we should, with Collier’s MS. Cor- 
rector, read woolless—Hupson (ed. i.): We believe [‘woolvish’] to be nothing 
less nor more than a simple allusion to the scriptural figure of a wolf in sheep’s 
clothing. Not by any means that the poet meant to make Coriolanus call him- 
self a wolf; but he regards the figure in question merely as a general image of 
one trying to seem what he is not; and so makes the speaker apply it to himself 
simply as one who stands there clad in ‘the napless vesture of humility,’ while his 
heart is full of pride and disdain towards the part he is acting, and towards those 
whose suffrage he is asking. Brutus expresses the same thing afterwards: ‘With 
a proud heart he wore his humble weeds.’ [In his ed. ii. Hudson’s note is some- 
what differently worded, but is to the same effect. He there objects to the MS. 
correction, although accepted by Dyce, on the ground that, as the toga was of 
wool ‘the Poet would hardly speak of it as woolless.—Ep.]—HALLIWELL: I 


262 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iii. 


[120. this Wooluish tongue] 
believe ‘woolvish’ is correct, and that it refers to some well-known article of 
dress; for a wolf-gown is referred to in an inventory dated 1559.—C. & M. CowDEN 
CLARKE (Shakespeare): That ‘tongue’ is misprint for toge is evidenced by a some- 
what similar misprint in Othello, I, i, and that ‘woolvish’ is also a misprint for 
some other word, we think, is nearly as manifest. But inasmuch as we feel none 
of the proposed substitutions to be the probable emendation, we allow ‘woolvish’ 
to remain in the text. It is from this desire to leave the original unaltered, if 
possible, that we refrain from inserting the word here which we have long believed 
to be the one originally written by Shakeapeare—slavish. Not only does slavish 
contain nearly all the same letters which form ‘woolvish’; not only does slavish 
consist completely with either the Folio word ‘tongue’ or the accepted word of 
later editions, toge; not only does slavish exactly suit the context of this speech, 
but slavish perfectly accords with the epithets used both by Plutarch and by Shake- 
speare when mentioning the garment that Coriolanus wears on the present occa- 
sion. In Timon, IV, iii, 205, we find the expression ‘This slave-like habit,’ which 
testifies Shakespeare’s employment of a similar expression with regard to coarse 
and common raiment. While suffering ‘woolvish’ to occupy its place in the text, 
we must explain that it is usually supposed to mean wolf-like, but, judging from 
another passage in this play (III, ii, 12), we should rather take it to mean ‘wool- 
lenish,’ ‘wooll’nish’ or ‘wool’nish,’ which last elisionally abbreviated form of the 
word brings us almost precisely to the Folio spelling and printing. [See Note 
by the Clarkes on III, ii, 12.—Ep.]—WuitEtaw: If ‘woolvish’ can mean woollen 
it is either contemptuous, like ‘woollen vassals’ (III, ii, 12), or, since there was ‘no 
coat underneath the poor gown,’ it may perhaps be explained by comparison with 
Love’s Labour’s, V, ii, 716, ‘I have no shirt, I go woolward for penance.’ Perhaps 
Shakespeare wrote woollish (or woolish)—the strangeness of the word suggesting 
either repugnance or contempt.—KiNNEAR (p. 312), in support of the reading 
woollen toge, quotes the line ITI, ii, 12, to which reference has already been made, 
wherein the plebeians are spoken of as ‘woollen vassals.’ The toge or gown was 
thus one ‘made of coarse woolen stuff or frieze, too coarse to have any nap; for it 
is not to be supposed that Marcius would put on a garment worn threadbare by 
a plebeian, and none other could wear it.’ [Kinnear also quotes from a sumptuary 
law (Elizabeth 13) which enjoined the wearing of woolen caps for all but the 
nobility; this seems, however, but little to the purpose, as the law does not make 
any mention of other articles of dress——Ep.]—Scumipt (Coriolanus) retains the 
Folio reading in his text, and thereon remarks thus: ‘A very obscure expression, 
but one which the poet has chosen evidently in reference to the saying, Who 
keeps company with wolves will learn to howl. Why should I, asks Coriolanus, 
submit to this wretched situation and howl with wolves?’ After reviewing the 
various attempts at amending the passage, Schmidt concludes his note with a 
special objection to Steevens’s foge or togue, characterising it as the most inad- 
missible which the poet could have used.—W. A. Wricut: Coriolanus the soldier 
in his citizen’s gown of humility felt like a wolf in sheep’s clothing. Cotgrave has 
both ‘Toge’ and ‘Togue: f. A gowne; long robe or garment.’ For ‘wolvish’ 
see Huloet, Abcedarium, ‘Woluyshe, or of a wolfe. Lupinus.’ [Wright considers 
that the passage in Othello, so often cited in this connection, is sufficient evidence 
that ‘tongue’ is here a corruption of togwe or toge—Ep.]—Brrcuinc (Falcon Sh.): 
“Woolvish’ is generally explained as an inverted reference to the wolf in sheep’s 


ACT 11, SC. iii] CORIOLANUS 263 


[120. this Wooluish tongue] 
clothing, but though Menenius called Coriolanus a sheep (II, i, 10), he would 
hardly call himself one. A more likely explanation would be: Why like the wolf 
should I be thus masquerading? Or can it refer to the Roman wolf, i. ¢., the 
Roman people?—Miss Porter (First Folio Sh.): Malone might have added in 
support of his change, toge, that the were-superstition, or the changing of men into 
wolves, was a commonplace of the superstition of Shakespeare’s day, and that 
one of the characteristics of the were-wolf was that he could turn his skin inside 
out when he wanted to masquerade in a ‘napless gown,’ hence the pertinence of 
the phrase. Steevens is not altogether happy in the form of his explanation. 
That Coriolanus should desire to indulge in his ‘usual ferocity’ seems to convict 
him of the wolfishness he here abhors. The best comment on the text, as it 
stands, is the character of Coriolanus, as drawn by Shakespeare, and his peculiar 
dislike to howls in public over deeds he accounts incumbent upon nobility to ac- 
complish for the love of virtue, as a matter of course, and in silence. He refuses 
at first (ii, 163) ‘To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus’; later (iii, 49-53), ‘What 
must I say ...? Plague upon’t, I cannot bring my tongue to such a pace.’ 
When Menenius begs him ‘speak to ’em in wholesome manner,’ he even then 
tells the Citizens that he never yet desired ‘to trouble the poor with begging’ 
(ii, 75, 76); finally he bursts out against standing in this Woolvish tongue To begge. 
Altogether there seems to be no reason whatsoever for any other word here than 
tongue. He objects consistently to howling with the wolves, yelling with the 
pack, the common ‘cry of curs,’ as he says later—THIERGEN (p. 201): Whether 
we read with the First Folio ‘Woolvish tongue’ or with the Second, ‘toge,’ both ex- 
pressions remain obscure or incorrect; since if the wolf in sheep’s clothing is meant 
we must read sheepish toge, and in the other case if we interpret in this wolvish 
tongue as to howl with the wolves to stand in a tongue is nonsense.—CASE (Arden 
Sh.): Gowne, of the Folios, is the natural word, and a reasonable original of the 
misprint tongue. It has also the advantage of being North’s word in his account 
of the custom of Rome. For toge, may be urged that it is a genuine English form 
of the Roman word toga which might be expected in this place, and if it were quite 
certain that toged of the first quarto of Othello, I, i, 52, were the right reading, and 
tongued of the Folio and later quartos a misprint of it, that would be further strong 
evidence. As it is, it carries weight. The NV. E. D. gives examples of toge from 
the alliterative fourteenth century Morte Arthure, ed. Banks, 1900, p. 86, 1. 3189, 
‘In toges of tarsse full richelye attyrde,’ and Urquart’s Rabelais. The force of 
‘woolvish’ presents an equal difficulty. It is supposed that the material of the 
woollen gown is alluded to, in combination with the expression ‘a wolf in sheep’s 
clothing.’ Coriolanus with pride and hate in his heart wears the gown of humility, 
and puts the fact with fierce irony—TucKER Brooke (Yale Sh.): Wolf’s toga, 
or garment. Why should I stand here like a wolf in sheep’s clothing? One of 
the best of many emendations is woolless toge. [The majority of modern editors 
follow the reading of the Cambridge and Globe editors, which is substantially 
that of Steevens, ‘woolvish’ or ‘wolvish toge,’ and are thus constrained to adopt 
Steevens’s interpretation, that there is here an allusion to the fable of the wolf 
in sheep’s clothing. With this view I am disposed to agree, notwithstanding the 
cogent objection made to it by the Anonymous contributor to Blackwood’s Maga- 
zine, that if there be meant such a reference it should be ‘sheepish’ dress, not 
wolfish; but it is quite plain that had this latter word been the one employed 


264 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT I, SC. iii. 


To begge of Hob and Dicke, that does appeere 121 
Their needleffe Vouches: Cuftome calls me too’t. 

What Cuftome wills in all things, fhould we doo’t ? 

The Duft on antique Time would lye vn{wept, 


And mountainous Error be too highly heapt, 125 
121. does] F.F;, Schmidt. do F, 123. wills...things,] wills,...things 
et cet. Cap. et seq. 
122. Vouches:] voucher? Rowe, Pope, doo’t?] F,. do’t? F;F,, Rowe, 


Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. voices? Pope, Knti. do’t, Theob. et cet. 
Cap. Vouches? F, et cet. 


there would scarcely have been any reader or auditor who would apply it in the 
sense intended; Coriolanus would have been compared toa lamb led to the slaughter; 
and then no one, since the time of its first mention until 1853, had noticed the 
discrepancy. As a very slight contribution to this long note, and in equally 
small corroboration of the Folio reading, I offer the following: In Gascoigne’s 
translation of the Italian comedy Gli Suppositi, entitled Supposes, occurs the fol- 
lowing line, ‘Tégues? I pray you what did my togue ever hurt you?’ I, iii. (—p. 
196, ed. Cunliffe). Here, as is often the case, the letter is represented by a 
mark placed over the 6. Possibly the word togue in the present line was the one 
occurring in the MS., and the compositor, not understanding, thought that the 
mark over the o was simply omitted, as a man might omit to dot ani or cross a t; 
it may be noticed also that in the text the word directly above ‘Tongue’ is ‘which’; 
the long descending turn of the second letter, , might have seemed to supply the 
missing mark.—ED.] 

121, 122. To begge of Hob... Vouches] JoHNSON: Why do I stand here in 
this ragged apparel to beg of Hob and Dick, and such others as make their appear- 
ance here, their unnecessary votesP—BapHAM (Criticism, p. 13): The punctuation 
destroys the sense; for of what force is that clause ‘which do appear’? Shake- 
speare undoubtedly wrote: ‘Which do appear their needless vouches,’ 7. e., which 
present or offer their needless attestations of my merits. So the word ‘appear’ 
is used in IV, iii, 10, ‘You had more beard when I last saw you, but your favour 
is well appeared by your tongue.’ [See notes ad loc.—Ep.]—Hunson (ed. ii.): 
He calls the ‘vouches’ needless because, in his opinion, an election by the Senate 
is, or ought to be, enough. [Hudson explains ‘do appear’ in the same manner as 
Badham, also quoting the line IV, iii, 10 in illustration. Hudson’s remark that 
Shakespeare has it ‘repeatedly thus’ is not borne out by example. ScHmmrT 
(Lex.) does not record a single example of this transitive use of ‘appear’; the 
N. E. D. is equally silent. Such being the case, Johnson’s interpretation is the 
only one admissible.—ED.]. 

121. Hob] Murray (WN. E. D.,s. v. sb'. 1.): A familiar or rustic variation of the 
Christian name Robert or Robin. Hence formerly a generic name for a rustic, a 
clown. 1573. Tusser Husbandry, ix. (1878), 17: ‘To raise betimes the lubberlie, 
both snorting Hob and Margerie.’ [The present line also quoted.] 

123-126. What Custome . . . Truth to o’re-peere] JosepH HUNTER (ii, 118): 
We can never sufficiently appreciate the depth of the wisdom in this wonderful 
man. He seems to be acquainted with every political or moral maxim, and to 
know what is to be said in favor of it or against it. His views are also often pre- 


ACT II, SC. iii] _ CORIOLANUS 265 


For Truth to o’re-peere. Rather then foole it fo, 126 


126. to o’re-peere] to over-peer Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
Knt, Sta, Wh. i, Hal. Ktly. ? o’er-peer Walker, Dyce ii, Words. Huds. ii. 


sented, as in this instance, with inimitable felicity, so simply, so easily, so grace- 
fully, the metaphor so beautifully kept up to the end, and the meaning so clearly 
and vividly brought out. There is more of his political wisdom in this play, in 
Timon, and in Troilus and Cressida than in any other of the plays——KREyssIG 
(i, 491): The train of thought in this speech shows Coriolanus already to have 
abandoned the single indispensable rule of life of the conservative aristocracy. 
His own subjective consciousness he turns against sacred custom. He forgets 
that every prerogative becomes, and must become, a bond for him who enjoys it; 
that unconditional personal freedom leads to isolation, and is incompatible with 
the struggle for power. And thus he is driven to his fate before the wind of passion. 
In this scene the drama easily displays its highest skill—Sniper (ii, 229): Corio- 
lanus cannot submit to an institution—his individual will is supreme. This first 
discipline of offce—the suppression of his personal caprice and the submission to 
the established custom—cannot be endured by him. Hence on this side he is 
as revolutionary as the plebeians. The two parties thus reach the same point— 
the destruction of the institutions which restrain their tendencies. The patricians, 
however, as the true conservative element of society seek to conciliate both sides 
and to retain the ancient laws and customs of the nation. —J. C. CoLiins (Studies 
in Sh., p. 82): A sentiment peculiarly characteristic of the Greeks was their 
superstitious reverence for what was popularly accepted and become custom. 
This continually finds expression in the Greek dramas, and is, indeed, woven into 
the very fabric of their ethics. We need go no further than a line in Sophocles, 
as it is typical of innumerable other passages, ‘what custom establishes outmasters 
truth,’ Frag. 84, and Euripides, Bacche, 894, ‘What has long been custom, is 
divine.’ This is exactly Shakespeare’s philosophy, [the present line quoted], 
‘Our virtues Lie in the interpretation of the time’ (IV, vii, 51, 52), but illustration 
would be endless.—BRANDES (ii, 253): Coriolanus is utterly unaware that this 
speech of his strikes at the very root of that ultra-conservatism which he affects. 
The very thing he has refused to understand is, that if we invariably follow cus- 
tom the follies of the past would never be swept away, nor the rocks which hinder 
our progress be burst asunder. To Coriolanus, what is customary is right, and 
he never realises that his disdain for the Tribunes and people has led him into a 
politically untenable position. We are by no means sure that Shakespeare’s 
perceptions in this case were any keener than his hero’s, but, consciously or un- 
consciously, it is this very inconsistency in Coriolanus’s character which makes it 
so vividly lifelike-—MacCatium (p. 601): It is characteristic of this spirit [of 
self-centred confidence and egotism] which really makes a man a law unto himself 
and the measure of all things, that though by all his training and prejudices inclined 
to the traditional and conservative in politics, yet, if use-and-wont presses hard 
against his own pride, he shows himself an innovator of the most uncompromising 
kind. Coriolanus objects once and again to the prescriptive forms of election. 
[In this and the following lines] he blossoms out as the reddest of radicals, though 
a radical of the Napoleonic type. 

124. Dust on antique Time] DricHTon: ‘Time’ is spoken of as if it were a 
volume so covered with dust that no one would care to take it down from its shelf; 


266 THE TRAGEDY OF 


[ACT II, SC. iii. 


Let the high Office and the Honor go 127 


To one that would doe thus. 


I am halfe through, 


The one part fuffered, the other will I doe. 
Enter three Citizens more. 130 


Heere come moe Voyces. 


Your Voyces? for your Voyces I haue fought, 

Watcht for your Voyces: for your Voyces, beare 

Of Wounds, two dozen odde : Battailes thrice fix 

I haue feene, and heard of : for your Voyces, 135 


130. Enter three Citizens more.] 
Three Citizens more. Pope,+. Re- 
enter three other Citizens. Dyce (after 
]. 131), Words. Huds. ii, Craig. Re- 
enter three Citizens more. Cam.+, 
Coll. iii, Neils. Enter three other 
Citizens. Mal. et cet. 

131. moe] F,, Cam.+, Neils. 
F;F, et cet. 


more 


134. odde] and odd Rowe,+, Cap. 

135-137. Lines end: Haue...Voyces? 
..Confull. Pope,+, Cap. Varr. Ran. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Del. Dyce, 
Hal. Ktly, Cam.+, Words. Craig, Neils. 

135, 136. I haue...Haue] As one line 
Sta. 

135. I haue] I’ve Pope,+. 

Voyces,] voices, I Ktly. 


compare Jonson, The Poetaster, V, i, ‘his free hand That sweeps the cobwebs 
from unused virtue. —R. G. Waite: The Folio, with manifest error, has, ‘o’re- 
peere.’ This ill-printed play is remarkable for its excessive misuse of the apos- 
trophe. [White adopts, however, this ‘manifest error’ in his ed. ii, and without 
comment.—Eb.] 

131. moe] BAYFIELD (p. 195): While there is no reason to suppose that Shake- 
speare ever used this form, it is certainly impossible he should have used it here, 
since the word must be stressed according to the scansion given, as the context 
shows. More is indispensable. ‘Moe,’ which does not occur in the prose of this 
play, is found once again at IV, ii, 21, where also it must have a stress, though it 
forms the upbeat: ‘Moe noble blowes, then ever you wise words.’ 

135. I haue seene, and heard of] FARMER: Coriolanus seems now, in earnest, to 
petition for the consulate; perhaps we may better read, ‘—battles thrice six J’ve seen, 
and you have heard of.’—Co tier (ed. ii.): Dr Farmer would lose a fine characteristic 
turn by Coriolanus. By the text, as it stands, we perceive that the hero, instantly 
on his mention of the thrice six battles he has seen, becomes ashamed of his apparent 
boasting, and adds, therefore, the qualifying words, ‘—and heard of,’ meaning that 
some of the thrice six battles he had not so much seen, as heard of.—Dvce (ed. ii.): 
Here ‘heard of’ seems to mean famous, and to refer either to the battles or to the 
speaker. Mr Collier’s explanation is a strange one.—C. & M. CowpEN CLARKE: 
Taking into consideration Coriolanus’s scoffing manner of speaking here, we think 
this means, ‘eighteen battles I have seen something of, and heard something of.’ 
He has just before sneeringly said he would remind the voters of a time ‘when some 
certain of your brethren roar’d, and ran from the noise of our own drums,’ and 
he may well have here in his mind the sounds as well as the sights of a battle field. 
If the expression ‘I have seen and heard of’ include—as we think it does—the 
elliptically conveyed effect of ‘I have seen and made heard of,’ or caused to be 
heard of, it is thoroughly in Shakespeare’s comprehensive style—Hunpson (ed. 


ACT II, SC. iii.] 


CORIOLANUS 267 


Haue done many things, fome leffe,fome more : 136 
Your Voyces? Indeed I would be Confull. 


1.Ca. 
any honeft mans Voyce. 
2.Cit. 


Hee ha’s done Nobly, and cannot goe without 


Therefore let him be Confull : the Gods giue 140 


him ioy,and make him good friend to the People. 


All. 


Corio. Worthy Voyces. 


Amen, Amen. God faue thee, Noble Confull. 


Enter Menenius, with Brutus and Scicinius. 144 


137. Voyces?] voices: Rowe et seq. 
Indeed] For indeed Rowe, Coll. 
ii. (MS.), Wh. i. 
Fe One tsOlb.| 6) Citar O3etsa7 21. 
Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Hal. Ktly, Wh. i, 


Huds. i. Fifth Cit. Dyce, Words. 
Huds. ii, Craig. Sixth Citizen. 
Cam.-+, Neils. 


FAOwe 2a CAt.jo: Cit. Var. 03.13, (20, 
Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Hal. Ktly, Wh. i, 


Huds. ii, Craig. Seventh Citizen. 
Cam.+, Neils. 
141. good] a good Rowe,+, Cap. 
142. Confull.] conful. _[Exeunt. 
Rowe,+, Var. 778, 785. consul. 
[Exeunt Citizens. Cap. Knt, Coll. Del. 
Hal. Huds. Craig. 
144. Enter...] Re-enter... Mal. et seq. 
with] Om. Cap. 
Scicinius] Sicinius Ff (through- 


Huds. i. Sixth Cit. Dyce, Words. out). 


ii.): This, if the text be right, must mean, apparently, ‘I have taken part in eighteen 
battles, and those so considerable that I have since heard them talked about.’ 
The words ‘and heard of’ seem, to say the least, rather odd and out of place. 
Perhaps it should be ‘and shared of,’ which is a modest equivalent for been a 
part of, and is good English for had a share of; therewithal it accords with what 
Cominius says in the preceding scene, where, after describing the hero’s first 
exploit, he continues, ‘And in the brunt of seventeen battles since.—Ro Lre: 
This must be thrown in contemptuously, like the ‘some less, some more’ in the next 
line. The Plebeians do not see at the time that he is mocking them (1. 171) while 
begging their voices——Brrcuinc (Henry Irving Sh.): One would have thought 
that this passage required no annotation, but Dyce’s note shows how the simplest 
things may be hidden from the wise and prudent. . . . Of course Coriolanus is 
quizzing the people by affected magniloquence, from which he occasionally lapses 
into irony. The effect on the people would be to puzzle them, which would be 
partly Coriolanus’s intention. It is perhaps allowable to call attention to the 
excellent development of this scene. At first Coriolanus is simply cross and speaks 
shrewishly to the citizens; then he recovers his good temper and is chiefly bored 
by them; then when they refer to his wounds he becomes angry again and almost 
resolves to give up the consulship; finally he reflects that as the ceremony is half 
over he may as well finish it, and for the remainder of the time throws himself 
into the part with exaggerated urbanity——KiNNEAR (p. 313) proposes that ‘you 
heard of’ be read in the preceding line and ‘J have’ in this. In both of which 
readings he is, however, anticipated; the former by Farmer and the latter by 
Keightley.—Eb. 


268 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Il, SC. iii. 
Mene. You haue ftood your Limitation : 145 
And the Tribunes endue you with the Peoples Voyce, 
Remaines, that in th’Officiall Markes inuefted, 
You anon doe meet the Senate. 
Corio. Is this done ? 
Scicin. The Cuftome of Requeft you haue difcharg’d : 150 
The People doe admit you,and are fummon’d 
To meet anon, vpon your approbation. 
Corio. Where? at the Senate-houfe ? 
Scicin. There, Coriolanus. 
Corio. May I change thefe Garments ? 155 
Scicin. You may, Sir. 
Cori.That Ile ftraight do: and knowing my felfe again, 
Repayre toth’Senate-houfe. 


Mene. Ile keepe you company. Will you along ? 
Brut. We ftay here for the People. 160 
Scicin. Fare you well. Exeunt Cortol. and Mene. 


He ha’s it now : and by his Lookes, me thinkes, 
’Tis warme at’s heart. 163 


145-149. Lines end: Tribunes...Re- Han. 


maines,...You..done? Pope et seq. 
(exc. Sta.). 

145, 146. You...Tribunes] As one 
line Knt. 

145. You haue] You've Pope,+, 
Dyce ii, Words. Huds. ii. 

146. Voyce,] voice. Pope et seq. 

155. change] then change Han. Cap. 
Sticey. Vale O30 13) blalaDycon ails 
Words. Huds. ii. 

156. You may, Sir.] Sir, you may 


157. do] Om. Wh. i. 

158. toth’] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. to 
the Cap. et cet. 

161. Fare you well] Farewell Rowe i. 

162. SCENE vu. Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. 

163-165. Two lines, ending: wore... 
People? Pope et seq. (exc. Dyce i, Sta.). 

163. at’s] at fis Cap. Varr. Ran. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt, Del. 
Hal. Ktly. 


147, 148. Remaines ... Senate] Apsorr (§ 404): This construction is quite 
as correct as our modern form with ‘zt.’ The sentence ‘That in... Senate’ 
is the subject to ‘remains.’ So, ‘Happiest of all is (zt or this), that her gentle 
spirit Commits itself to you to be directed,’ Mer. of Ven., III, ii, 166. 

159. Will you along] For other examples of this omission of the verb of motion 
after the preposition ‘along,’ and also after will and is, see ABBOTT, §§ 30 and 4os. 

163. ’Tis warme at’s heart] Drtius: Impatience and rancor are hot within 
his heart—WuitELAw: There is rage in his heart.—|To both of these interpreta- 
tions Scumipt, rightly I think, dissents; he explains the phrase as meaning, It 
accords completely with his desire; and compares the speech of Nestor to Ulysses, 
‘He is not yet through warm: force him with praises,’ Tro. & Cress., II, iii, 232. 
Compare also, ‘It warms the very sickness in my heart,’ Hamlet, IV, vii, 56.— 
RotFe likewise, dissenting to Whitelaw’s interpretation, says: ‘It more likely 
refers to the gratification he evidently feels, though too proud to express it.’—Ep.] 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 269 


Brut. With a prowd heart he wore his humble Weeds : 

Will you difmiffe the People ? 165 
Enter the Plebeians. 

Scict.How now,my Mafters, haue you chofe this man? 

1.Cit. He ha’s our Voyces, Sir. 

Brut. We pray the Gods, he may deferue your loues. 

2.Cit. Amen,Sir:to my poore vnworthy notice, 170 
He mock’d vs, when he begg’d our Voyces. 

3.Cit.Certainely, he flowted vs downe-right. 

1.Cit.No,’tis his kind of fpeech,he did not mock vs. 

2.Cit. Not one amongft vs,faue your felfe, but fayes 
He vs’d vs fcornefully : he fhould haue fhew’d vs 175 
His Marks of Merit, Wounds receiu’d for’s Countrey. 

Scicin. Why fo he did,I am fure. 

All. No,no:no man faw ’em. 

3.Cit. Hee faid hee had Wounds, 


Which he could fhew in priuate : 180 
And with his Hat, thus wauing it in fcorne, 
I would be Confull,fayes he : aged Cuftome, 182 


166. Enter the Plebeians.] Ff, Rowe, Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. All Cit. 
Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. Sing. ii, Ktly. Citizens. Dyce i, Sta. 
Enter Citizens. Han. Wh. i. Re-enter Cam.+. All the Citizens. Dyce ii, 


Citizens. Cap. et cet. Words. Huds. ii. 
170. notice] notion Walker, Dyce i, 178. No, no:] No, Pope,+, Cap. 

Words. Huds. ii. Varr. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Hal. 
171, 172. Lines end: Certainely... em them Cap. 

downe-right. Cap. et seq. [Several speak. Mal. Steev. 
176. for’s] Fi, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce, Varr. Sing. Knt, Ktly. 

Sta. Wh. Cam.+, Huds. Words. for 179, 180. As one line Pope et seq. 

his Cap. et cet. 179. hee had) He'd Pope, Theob. 
177. Scicin.] First Cit. Anon. conj. Han. Warb. Johns. 

ap. Cam. 181. Hat] cap Pope, Theob. Han. 


T7oe All) 1. Cit; Bell. Cit-- Mal: Warb. Johns. 


167. haue you chose] For other examples of this form of the participle see, if 
needful, ABBort, § 343. 

173. No... he did not mock vs] See Appendix: Shakespeare and the Masses, 
R. W. CHAMBERS, p. 712. 

182. aged Custome] WARBURTON: This was a strange inattention. The Ro- 
mans at this time had but lately changed the regal for the consular government, 
for Coriolanus was banished the eighteenth year after the expulsion of the kings.— 
Matone: Perhaps our author meant by ‘aged custom’ that Coriolanus should 
say, the custom which requires the consul to be of a certain prescribed age will 
not permit that I shall be elected, unless by the voice of the people that rule should 
be broken through. This would meet with the objection made in note on ‘teach,’ 
II, i, 279; but I doubt much whether Shakespeare knew the precise consular age 


270 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT If, SC. 11. 


But by your Voyces, will not fo permit me. 183 
Your Voyces therefore : when we graunted that, 
Here was,I thanke you for your Voyces, thanke you 185 


Your moft {weet Voyces:now you haue left your Voyces, 

I haue no further with you. Was not this mockerie ? 
Scicin. Why eyther were you ignorant to fee’t ? 

Or feeing it, of fuch Childifh friendlineffe, 


To yeeld your Voyces ? 190 
Brut. Could you not haue told him, 
As you were leffon’d : When he had no Power, 192 
187. no] nothing Rowe,-+, Varr. Ran. Why, either, Theob. et cet. 
further] farther Coll. Sing. ii, 188. were you] you were Var. ’03, "13, 
Ktly, Wh. 220s 
Was not] Wa’ wt Pope, Theob. ignorant] impotent Han. 
Han. Warb. Johns. fee’t?| see’t, Coll. Del. Sta. 
188. Why] Why, F,. Cam.+, Huds. Words. Craig, Neils. 
Why eyther] F.F;, Craig, Neils. 191-215. Om. Bell. 
Why, either Fy, Rowe, Pope, Han. 192. leffon’d:] lesson’d? Han. 


even in Tully’s time, and therefore think it more probable that the words ‘aged 
custom’ were used by our author in their ordinary sense, however inconsistent 
with the recent establishment of consular government at Rome. Plutarch had 
led him into an error concerning this ‘aged custom.’ See note on II, ii, 96.— 
W. A. Wricut: The custom was not yet twenty years old, but Shakespeare was 
not thinking of dates when he wrote this. [An inattention on the part of Shake- 
speare more interesting, I think, than the question of date is to be found in the 
fact of his giving to the 3 Citizen a report of what Coriolanus said, containing 
words uttered by him in his soliloquy, which the Citizens could not have heard, 
as they were not present. The only reference to Custom made by Coriolanus is 
contained in his remark in regard to ‘the customary gown.’ Shakespeare’s audi- 
ence had heard Coriolanus inveigh against custom and that was all-sufficient —Eb.] 

188. Why ... ignorant to see’t] WARBURTON: ‘Ignorant’ at that time sig- 
nified impotent—HeatH (p. 417): ‘Ignorant’ doth not signify impotent. The 
sense is, Why had you not the apprehension to perceive it, or perceiving it, why 
did you vote for him?—Jounson: ‘Were you ignorant to see it?’ is, ‘did you want 
knowledge to discern it?’—Casr (Arden Sh.): A peculiar use of the word ‘igno- 
rant’ in relation to the context, to which there is no parallel in Shakespeare or in 
the V. LE. D.—[Scumipt (Lex.) classifies the present use of ‘ignorant’ under 4. 
dull, silly, simple; and in his own edition later says: ‘We should expect here ‘‘too 
ignorant to see it’’: evidently, dull in seeing it, blind to it; compare a somewhat 
similar expression in Two Gentlemen: “He, being in love, could not see to garter 
his hose,”’ [II, iii, 56], which would come nearer to our present passage if we inter- 
pret, “he was blind to garter his hose.”’—Wright compares Tempest, I, ii, 264, 
‘Sorceries terrible To enter human hearing,’ thus taking ‘ignorant’ to stand 
for ‘too ignorant.’—Eb.] 

190. To yeeld your Voyces] For other examples of this omission of as in rela- 
tival constructions see ABBorTT, § 281. 

192. lesson’d] CHotmetry (Arnold’s School Sh.): That is, taught by us. Com- 


ACT I, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 271 


But was a pettie feruant to the State, 193 
He was your Enemie, euer {fpake againft 
Your Liberties, and the Charters that you beare 195 


I’th’Body of the Weale : and now arriuing 

A place of Potencie, and {way o’th’State, 

If he fhould {till malignantly remaine 

Faft Foe toth’Plebeij, your Voyces might 

Be Curfes to your felues. You fhould haue faid, 200 

That as his worthy deeds did clayme no leffe 

Then what he ftood for : fo his gracious nature 

Would thinke vpon you, for your Voyces, 

And tranflate his Mallice towards you, into Loue, 

Standing your friendly Lord. 205 
Scicin. Thus to haue faid, 

As you were fore-aduis’d, had toucht his Spirit, 

And try’d his Inclination: from him pluckt 

Eyther his gracious Promife, which you might 


As caufe had call’d you vp, haue held him to ; 210 
Or elfe it would haue gall’d his furly nature, 
Which eafily endures not Article, 212 
194, 195. euer...the Charters] still... 199. Plebeij] Plebetans Rowe,+ 
charters Pope. (—Var. ’73). Plebeii. Cap. et cet. 
196. I’th’] Fi, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 7 the 203, 204. Would...And] As one line 
Cap. et cet. Ff et seq. (exc. Knt). 
197. A place] At place Fy, Rowe,+ 203. Would] Should Ktly. 
(—Var. ’73). 212, 213. Article,...ought,] article,... 
oth] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. ought; Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
o’the Cap. et cet. Cap. Var. ’78, ’85.  article...ought; 


Johns. et cet. 


pare 1. 230 below, and Richard IIT: I, iv, 246, ‘Ay, millstones, as he lesson’d us 
to weep.’ The rest of the sentence is all subordinate to ‘told him.’ You might 
have said that he was your enemy as a private citizen, and that it would be folly 
to make him consul if he meant to be so still. 

196, 197. arriuing A place of Potencie] ApBotr (§ 198) gives other examples 
of this omission of the preposition with a verb of motion: ‘Ere we could arrive 
the point proposed,’ Jul. Ces., I, ii, 110; ‘those powers . . . have arrived our 
coast,’ 3 Henry VI: V, iii, 8. 

197. A place... o’th’State] W. A. Wricut: That is, a position of power in 
the management of state affairs. Or ‘potency and sway’ may be equivalent to 
‘powerful influence.’ See I, viii, 6. 

199. Plebeij] WricuT notes that this is the only passage wherein Shakespeare 
uses this form of the word. Elsewhere it is Plebeians. 

203. Would thinke vpon you] MALone: Would retain a grateful remembrance 


of you. 


272 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ili. 


Tying him to ought, fo putting him to Rage, 254 
You fhould haue ta’ne th’aduantage of his Choller 
And pafs’d him vnelected. 215 


Brut. Did you perceiue, 
He did follicite you in free Contempt, 
When he did need your Loues : and doe you thinke, 
That his Contempt fhall not be brufing to you, 
When he hath power to crufh? Why,had your Bodyes 220 
No Heart among you?Or had you Tongues, to cry 
Againft the Re¢torfhip of Iudgement ? 
Scicin. WHaue you,ere now,deny’d the asker : 
And now againe,of him that did not aske, but mock, 224 


213. ought] aught Theob. ii. et seq. 222-225. Againft...Tongues] Lines 
214. th’] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Wh. i, end: you...againe...Beftow... Tongues? 
Dyce ii, Huds. Words. the Cap. et cet. Pope et seq. (See Commentary below.) 


217, 218. Contempt, When] Con- 224. And now againe,| Ff, Sta. Dyce 
tempt. When F,2. contempt When ii, Words. Huds. ii, Cam.+, Neils. 
Cam.+, Coll. iii, Craig, Neils. And, now again Rowe,+, Dyce. And, 

219. That] This Ran. now again, Cap. et cet. 

220. Why,] Why F,, Rowe, Pope, of] on Theob.+, Cap. Varr. 
Theob. Han. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt i, Del. i, 


221. you Tongues] your tongues Hal. Ktly, Huds. 


213. Tying] WALKER (Versification, p. 119): Words in which a short vowel is 
preceded by a long one or a diphthong, among the rest may be particularly 
noticed such present participles as doing, going, dying, playing, &c., are frequently 
contracted; the participles almost always. [Walker gives a large number of 
examples in illustration.] 

217. free Contempt] JoHNson: That is, with contempt open and unrestrained. 

221. Heart] Verity (Student’s Sh.): ‘Heart’ here used with the idea of ‘mind 
intelligence’ rather than ‘courage’; ‘had you tongues,’ were you given tongues 
that you might use them against the guidance of judgment?—CaskE, in reference 
to the foregoing, says, ‘It is more likely that, though the expression is condensed, 
spirit, action in speech, judgment are all involved: Were you quite spiritless? 
Had you judgment and yet voted against its dictates? The N. E. D. cites this 
passage under sense “‘The seat of courage: hence Courage, spirit,” and not under 
“Mind,” where III, i, 311 post is given. It cannot be repeated too often that 
precise correspondence in thought must not be demanded from Elizabethans 
when they do not appear to give it.’ 

222-225. Against . . . Tongues] STAUNTON alone of all the editors retains the 
arrangement of these lines as in the Folio. See Text. Notes. 

223-225. deny’d .. . Bestow] Apporr (§ 382): The Elizabethans seem to have 
especially disliked the repetition which is now considered necessary in the latter 
of two clauses connected by a relative or a conjunction. Here in strictness we 
ought to have ‘bestowed’ or ‘do you bestow.’ 

224. againe] Here used metaphorically for, on the other hand; compare, ‘The 
one is my sovereign, . . . the other again Is my kinsman,’ Rich. II: II, ii, 113. 
See ABBOTT, § 27. 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS "208 


Beftow your fu’d-for Tongues ? 225 
3.Cit.Hee’s not confirm’d, we may deny him yet. 
2.Cit. And will deny him : 
Ile haue fiue hundred Voyces of that found. 
1.Cit.I twice fiue hundred,& their friends,to piece ’em. 
Brut.Get you hence inftantly,and tell thofe friends, 230 
They haue chofe a Confull, that will from them take 
Their Liberties, make them of no more Voyce 
Then Dogges, that are as often beat for barking, 
As therefore kept to doe fo. 
Scict.Let them affemble:and on a fafer Iudgement, 235 
All reuoke your ignorant election : Enforce his Pride, 


225. Befiow] bestow’d Han. 231. They haue] They've Pope,+ 
Jwd-for Tongues] tongues unsu’d- (—Var. ’73). 
for Cap. 234. therefore] they are Huds. ii. 
226. Hee’s] He is Cap. (Bailey). 
227. And will] Ay, and we will Han. 234-236. Lines end: a/ffemble...re- 
229. 1. Cit.] Third Cit. Anon. ap. uoke...Pride. Theob. Warb. et seq. 
Cam. 235. on a] on Pope, Han. 
I] Ay, Rowe, Pope, Han. Coll. 236, 237. As three lines, ending: 
Wh. i, Huds. i, Craig. J, Theob. election...you...not Pope, Han. 
Warb. Johns. Var. 73. 236. All] Om. Pope, Han. 


224. of him] For other examples of ‘of’ thus used metaphorically for on see 
ABBOTT, § 175. 
225-228. Bestow ... that sound] WALKER (C7it., iii, 211): We should arrange 


and write, perhaps: 
‘, . . bestow 


Your sued-for tongues? 


3 Cit. He’s not confirmed; we may 
Deny him yet. 
2Cit. And will deny him: I 


Will have five hundred voices of that sound.’ 


225. your su’d-for Tongues] CAPELL (vol. I, pt i, p. 88): How the old reading, 
‘su’d-for,’ can be made to tally with the words that stand immediately over it, they 
should have told us who have thought fit to retain it; for the editor’s part, he sees 
no way of doing it, and therefore thinks his change necessary [see Text. Notes]; 
it is wanting too to perfect the verse; but that was no consideration with them 
who have contrived to make it out otherwise. And, indeed, their exploits of this 
sort throughout all Shakespeare, and this play in particular, must for ever entitle 
them to a large share of praise for their niceness of ear, great critical acumen, and 
greater fidelity—SrEEVvENS: Your voices that hitherto have been solicited— 
Matone: Your voices, not solicited by verbal application, but sued-for by this 
man’s merely standing forth as a candidate. ‘Your sued-for tongues,’ however, 
may mean your voices, to obtain which so many make swit to you; and perhaps 
the latter is the more just interpretation. 

236. Enforce his Pride] JoHNSoN: Object his pride, and enforce the objection.— 


18 


274 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT II, SC. iii. 


And his old Hate vnto you : befides, forget not 237 
With what Contempt he wore the humble Weed, 

How in his Suit he fcorn’d you: but your Loues, 

Thinking vpon his Seruices,tooke from you 240 
Th’apprehenfion of his prefent portance, 

Which moft gibingly, vngrauely, he did fafhion 

After the inueterate Hate he beares you. 


Brut. 


Lay a fault on vs, your Tribunes, 


That we labour’d (no impediment betweene) 245 
But that you muft caft your Election on him. 
Scici.Say you chofe him, more after ourcommandment, 247 


237. vnto] to Pope, Theob. Han. 


Warb. Johns. 

238-246. Om. Bell. 

241, 242. Th’apprehenfion...W hich] 
As one line Wh. i. 

241. Th’] The Pope et seq. 

242. moft gibingly, wngrauely] gib- 


243-249. Linesend: Lay...labour’d... 
mujft...chofe him...guided...Minds...muft 
do, Cap. et seq. (except Sta.). 

243. the] th’ Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Words. Huds. ii. 

you] to you Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. 


244, 245. Lay...That| As one line, 
and reading: Nay lay... Pope,+ (— 
Varsi73)s 


ingly, ungravely Pope,+, Cap. Steev. 
Var. ’03, 713, Words. gibing most un- 
gravely Lettsom (ap. Dyce ii.), Huds. ii. 
STEEVENS: So, afterwards, ‘Enforce him with his envy to the people,’ III, iii, 
4.—W. A. Wricut: That is, urge his pride as an argument, lay stress upon it. 
See Jul. Ce@s., III, ii, 43: ‘His glory not extenuated, wherein he was worthy, nor 
his offences enforced, for which he suffered death.’ 

240. Seruices] ABBotr (§ 471): The plural and possessive cases of nouns 
in which the singular ends in s, se, ss, ce, and ge are frequently written, and 
still more frequently pronounced, without the additional syllable. See III, iii, 
148 post. 

242. Which... fashion] Appotr (§ 456): Almost any syllables, however 
lengthy in pronunciation, can be used as the unaccented syllables in a trisyllabic 
foot, provided they are unemphatic. It is not usual, however, to find two such 
unaccented syllables as in [the first foot of this present line]. 

244-246. Lay a fault... on him] BEEcurING (Falcon Sh.): Here the Tribunes 
break with truth; their office is new, and they dislike taking its responsibility. 
They have every confidence that their end is wise, but in the choice of means 
display the moral cowardice of a despised race. No doubt personal pique mingles 
with their motives, but there is nothing to show it to be paramount, 

245, 246. That we...on him] Hupson (ed. ii.): The meaning seems to be: 
‘we labour’d, or took pains, that there might be no obstacle or hindrance to excuse 
you from voting for him.’ Endeavored to have, or to leave, ‘no impediment 
between.’ The language is'somewhat obscure. Here we have a right piece of 
demagogical craft; the sneaking ‘wealsmen’ trying to creep, underhand, into the 
good graces of the patricians while setting the dogs to worrying them. 

247. after our commandment] Aszorr (§ 141): That is, ‘according to,’ Latin 
secundum. Compare, ‘Neither reward us after our iniquities, in our Prayer 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 275 
Then as guided by your owne true affe¢tions,and that 248 
Your Minds pre-occupy’d with what you rather muft do, 

Then what you fhould,made you againft the graine 250 


To Voyce him Confull. Lay the fault on vs. 


Brut. 


I, {pare vs not : Say, we read Lectures to you, 


How youngly he began to ferue his Countrey, 

How long continued, and what ftock he {prings of, 

The Noble Houfe,o’th’<%artians : from whence came 255 
That Ancus Martius, Numaes Daughters Sonne: 

Who after great Hoftilius here was King, 

Of the fame Houfe Publius and Quintus were, 

That our beft Water, brought by Conduits hither, 

And Nobly nam’d, fo twice being Cenfor, 260 


Was his great Anceftor. 


248-251. Lines end: affections...with 
what...fhould...Confull... on vs, omitting 
true, |. 248, and reading should do, 1. 
250, Pope, + (—Var. ’73). 

250. what] with what Han. 

252-268. Om. Bell. 

255. oth’ Martians] Ff, Rowe, Wh. i. 
of Martius Pope,+. o’the Marci Cap. 
o’the Marcians Var. ’73 et cet. 

256. Numaes] Numa’s F, et seq. 

259, 260. hither,...Cenfor,] hither. 
And Censorinus, darling of the people... 
for twice...censor) Pope, + (—Var. ’73), 
Cap. Page. hither. And Censorinus 
darling of the people...censor, Varr. Ran. 
Mal. Knt, Coll. Dyce i, Sta. Wh. i. 
Huds. i. hither. And Censorinus darling 
of the people...being censor twice. Steev. 
Var. ’03, 13, Sing.i, Hal. hither. And 
Censorinus darling of the people...being 
twice censor Var. ’21. hither. And 


book. 


Censorinus that was so surnam’d... 
censor. Del. Craig, Chambers, T. 
Brooke, Gordon. hither; One of that 
family named Censorinus...twice being 
chosen censor. Sing. ii. hither; And 
Censorinus, he that was so nam’d... 
censor. Ktly. hither; And Censorinus, 
nobly nam’d so, Twice being by the 
people chosen Censor, Cam.+, White- 
law, Beeching, Verity, Cholmeley, Neils. 
Iuther; And Censorinus, who was nobly 
namn’d so, Twice being by the people 
chosen censor, Dyce li, Words. Huds. ii, 
Rife, Dtn. hither. And Censorinus, 
nam’d so by the people...Censor Leo. 
And Censorinus, who was nobly nam’d 
so, Twice being chosen Censor by the 
people, Huds. ii. 

260. nam’d, fo] nam’d Martius, 
Rowe i. nam’d; so, Rowe ii. 


[Also: ‘That it may please thee to giue vs an heart to loue & dread thee, 


and diligently to liue after thy commandements’ (The Letanie: Booke of Common 


Prayer, 1604, sig. n. verso). 
gested by this last.—Eb.] 


The present line seems almost to have been sug- 


250. Then what you should] Hearn (p. 417), with Pope’s rearrangement of 
these lines before him, suggests that the ‘lame verse’ may be restored by reading 
‘with what,’ wherein, as may be seen by the Text. Notes, he was anticipated by 


Hanmer.—Eb. 


251. To Voyce] For other examples of this construction see ABBorT, § 349. 
BEECHING notes: This is the only example in Shakespeare wherein ‘voice’ is thus 


used as a verb, in the sense #o vote for. 


259, 260. hither . . . twice being Censor] Pore: This verse I have supplied (see 


276 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act m, sc. iii, 


[259, 260. hither . . . twice being Censor] 
Text. Notes), a line having been certainly left out in this place, as will appear to any 
one who consults the beginning of Plutarch’s Life of Coriolanus, from whence this 
passage is directly translated.—THEOBALD: I have taken notice, in the course of 
these notes, of many anachronisms knowingly committed by our Author. I can- 
not help observing that he is guilty of more than one here through an inadvert- 
ence and desire of copying Plutarch at all hazards. This passage, as Mr Pope 
rightly informs us, is directly translated from that Greek biographer; but I'll 
tell Mr Pope a piece of history, which, I dare say, he was no more aware of than 
our Author was. Plutarch, in the entrance of Coriolanus’s life, tracing the origin 
of the Marcian family, blends his account not only with ancestors but the descend- 
ants of that great man; and Shakespeare in his haste (or perhaps his inacquaintance) 
with this particular point not attending to Plutarch’s drift; but, taking all the 
persons named to be Coriolanus’s ancestors, has strangely tripped in time, and 
made his Tribune talk of persons and things not then in being. For instance, he 
is made to talk of Censors. Now Coriolanus was killed in the year 266, A. U. C., 
but no Censors were ever created at Rome till 46 years after that period, in the 
year 312. Again, here is mention not only of a Censor, but of Censorinus. Now 
Caius Marcius Rutulus, when he came a second time to that office, on account 
of the known law propounded by him, was dignified with that additional name, 
in the year 487. But this was not until 220 years after the death of Coriolanus. 
And then again here is mention of the Marcian waters being brought into Rome. 
But we have the positive testimony of Julius Frontinus that they had no Aqueducts 
at Rome till the year 441, and that the Marcian water was not introduced till the 
year 613, so that the Tribunes are made to talk of a fact 347 years later in time 
than the period of Coriolanus. I would not be supposed to found any merit on 
this discovery, much less to be desirous of convicting my Author of such mis- 
takes, but I thought it proper to decline a charge of ignorance that might have 
been laid at my door had I passed this affair over in silence. Mr Pope, ’tis plain, 
tho’ he took the pains to add the conjectural line about Censorinus, was not aware 
of this confusion in point of chronology, or of our Author’s innocent trespass. 
Non omnia possumus omnes.—WaARBURTON, without referring to Theobald’s note, 
calls attention to the anachronism of a mention of a Censor here, and to the con- 
fusion between the ancestry and posterity of Coriolanus; he adds: ‘Another in- 
stance of Shakespeare’s inadvertency, from the same cause, we have in zr Henry 
IV, where an account is given of the prisoners took on the plains of Holmedon, 
“Mordake the Earl of Fife, and eldest son To beaten Douglas,” [I, i, 71]. But 
the Earl of Fife was not son to Douglas, but to Robert, Duke of Albany, governor 
of Scotland. He took his account from Holinshed, whose words are: “And of 
prisoners among others were these, Mordack, Earl of Fife, son to the governor 
Arkimbald Earl Douglas,” etc. And he imagined that the governor and Earl 
Douglas were one and the same person.’ [This note Warburton did not repeat, 
or make reference to this appearance of it, in his notes on z Henry IV.—Ep.|— 
CapELL (vol. I, pt i, p. 89): Here, indeed, are anachronisms with a witness; 
for Censorinus and Quintus and Publius were descendants, not ancestors, of 
Coriolanus, and that many generations beneath. The source of this mistake of 
the poet’s sprung from too hasty a transcript of a passage in his Plutarch. As a 
drama his play is not much the worse for it; and yet it strikes the editor’s fancy 
that he saw the fault while ’twas in making, and meant to have mended it; and 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 277 


[259, 260. hither . . . twice being Censor] 
that the gap was a gap in his own copy caus’d by this intention, and not a slip 
of the printer’s, as usual.—MAtone gives the passage from Plutarch which was the 
cause of this confusion; and, without reference to Theobald’s note, gives the dates 
of the first Censorship and the introduction of the Marcian waters. He thus 
concludes his note: ‘Can it be supposed that he who would disregard such an- 
achronisms, or rather he to whom they were not known, should have changed 
Cato, which he found in his Plutarch, to Calves, from a regard to chronology?’ 
See I, iv, 82.—VERPLANCK: Shakespeare misunderstood the biographer, and sup- 
posed that he meant to give the genealogy of his hero, when he intended merely 
to speak of the illustrious men who had at different times sprung from the Marcian 
family, some before Coriolanus, and the last named long after him. Yet it is a 
singular circumstance, which shows the little real value of such minute criticism, 
that Niebuhr and the modern school of critical Roman historians, while they 
allow the story of Coriolanus to be substantially true, yet maintain that he must 
have lived much later than the date assigned to him by the popular histories. 
If they are correct in this theory, the Poet is accidentally much nearer to the 
chronological truth than many of the learned critics who have been so precise in 
marking the number of years he has gone astray—DeEttus: The ‘darling of the 
people’ of Pope’s addition has but little of the true Shakespearian ring; it is, 
moreover, not to be found in Plutarch, whom Shakespeare is here somewhat closely 
following, without noticing that Plutarch is mentioning not alone ancestors but 
descendants of Coriolanus.—MacCatium (p. 487, foot-note): The addition by 
Delius seems preferable to the reading of the Cambridge Editors. In the first 
place, it is closer to North, and agrees with Shakespeare’s usual practice of keeping 
to North’s words so far as possible. In the second place, it is closer to the Folio 
text, involving only the displacement of acomma. In the third place, it is simpler 
to suppose that a whole single line has been missed out than that parts of two have 
been amputated, and the remainders run together.—CoLirer (Notes & Emenda- 
tions, etc., p. 354): Pope’s line respecting Censorinus was not wanted, inasmuch 
as this portion of the speech of Brutus was struck out by the old Corrector, 
possibly, because he saw the defect, and was not in a condition to remedy it. 
Nevertheless, something was at one time written in the margin, but it is so 
erased as not now to be legible-—Lretrsom (Walker’s Shakespeare’s Versification; 
Preface, p. xxi.): It is worth observing that though Collier’s old Corrector has 
inserted nearly a dozen lines in the text, while Walker has pointed out several 
places where lines appear to be missing, and in some instances has attempted to 
supply the deficiencies, their opinions in this respect never coincide. On the pas- 
sage in Coriolanus, where Pope has inserted the line, ‘And Censorinus darling of 
the people,’ they are both silent. This is the more to be regretted, as scarcely 
any supplementary verse could be less satisfactory than Pope’s. However the 
lost verse may have begun, it must have ended with the words ‘nam’d Censor- 
inus,’ as is clear from what immediately follows.—Srncrr (Sh. Vindicated, 
etc., p. 216), in reference to the foregoing comment on the omission by the MS. 
Corrector, exclaims: ‘A pretty argument truly! What then becomes of his 
“authorities,” which we are led to believe he consulted on other occasions? I 
undertake to say that Pope’s line is a much more judicious addition to the text, 
as evidently necessary and warranted by the passage in Plutarch, than any of the 
uncalled for interpolations of the correctors so triumphantly dwelt upon by Mr 


278 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iii. 


[259, 260. hither . . . twice being Censor] 

Collier!’—Tycuo Momsen (Der Perkins Folio, p. 437), on this same head, asks: 
If the MS. Corrector, being aware of this anachronism, struck out this passage, 
why did he make the correction ‘Cato’s’ for Calves, which quite as evidently was 
an anachronism, or why did he let stand the lines in regard to the introduction of 
the Marcian waterp—R. G. Waite: I am responsible for the addition of chosen 
to line 260; and in justification of my text cite the lack of the two syllables in the 
Folio, and the presence of the word in the above passage from Plutarch. [Singer, 
ed. ii., has herein anticipated White—Ep.]—Camproocre Epp. (Note V.): The 
reading we have given in the text leaves the words of the Folios still in their order, 
and introduces what must have been the significant fact that Censorinus was 
chosen ‘by the people.’ A stain or rent in the copy might have rendered parts 
of two lines illegible, the remainder being unskilfully pieced together by tran- 
scriber or printer—C. & M. CowpEN CLARKE (Shakespeare): Our unwillingness 
to disturb a generally received reading makes us adopt Pope’s line as it is, else 
we should have preferred to give the line thus, ‘The darling of the people, Cen- 
sorinus,’ as then not only the rhythm would be better, but the surname would be 
brought more immediately in connection with the words, ‘and nobly nam’d so.’— 
Scumipt (Coriolanus) marks here a line omitted, offering as one to supply its 
place, ‘And he that was surnamed Censorinus.’ [This version, according to 
Wright (Clarendon Sh.), was also proposed by Dr Brinsley Nicholson——Ep.]— 
R. M. Spence (Notes & Queries, 9 June, 1894, p. 443): Perhaps with no other 
passage in Shakespeare has conjectural emendation taken greater liberties; while, 
as I shall demonstrate, the wholesale emendation is altogether unnecessary, 
emendation is needed, but it consists only of the correction of a common misprint 
and the addition of a single word, the omission of which can be easily accounted 
for. The misprint is ‘so’ for as. This ‘so,’ if I mistake not, was what put Pope 
and others on the wrong scent, backwards instead of forwards. Had they ob- 
served the punctuation in the Folio (the comma between ‘nam’d’ and ‘so’), 
the misprint would have become self-evident. The word Censor has been omitted 
from a cause which is often a source of mistake—inattention on the part of the 
printer to the consecutive repetition of the same word. Again the punctuation 
of the Folio (the comma at the end of the line) might have guided the critics 
aright. As indubitably the true reading I give with confidence: And nobly 
nam’d, as twice being censor, Censor Was his great ancestor. First we have 
censor, the official title, and then Censor, the abbreviated English form of Cen- 
sorinus, the honorable name conferred on C. Marcius Rutilus, in recognition of 
the fact that he had held the censorship twice. As to the scanning of the line now 
restored, it is a regular line of five accents with an additional syllable. [The 
title at the head of this paragraph runs, ‘The Solution of the Long-standing 
Crux in “Coriolanus.”’ Whether this be the author’s own, or one supplied by 
the Editor of V. & Q., it is, I think, in either case injudicious. Modest or defer- 
ential introduction of a purely conjectural emendation inspires acquiescence, 
whereas assertion is apt to beget hostility. In proof of this it may be said that 
but two of the subsequent editors or commentators (Cholmeley and E. K. 
Chambers) have shared Spence’s ‘confidence’ in this ‘indubitable’ addition, or 
have even taken any notice of it—Ep.]—HeErrorp (Eversley Sh.), discarding all 
emendations, leaves these lines as in the Folio. He adds: ‘Professor Littledale 
proposes a comma at “‘being,” which gives a harsh but possible sense.’ 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CORIOLA NUS 279 


Scicin. One thus defcended, 262 
That hath befide well in his perfon wrought, 
To be fet high in place, we did commend 
To your remembrances : but you haue found, 265 
Skaling his prefent bearing with his paft, 
That hee’s your fixed enemie ; and reuoke 
Your fuddaine approbation. 

Brut. Say you ne’re had don’t, 
(Harpe on that ftill) but by our putting on : 270 
And prefently, when you haue drawne your number, 
Repaire toth’ Capitoll. 

All. We will fo : almoft all repent in their election. 


Exeunt Plebeians. 274 

263. hath] had Han. 273. All.] Cit. Mal. Steev. Varr. 

266. prefent] prefent, F2. Sing. Knt, Hal. Ktly. Citizens. Dyce 

268. fuddaine] fudden F,. i, Sta. Cam.-++. 

269. don’t] done’t Han. Mal. et seq. will fo] will Han. 

272-275. Lines end: almofi all...goe all} all {several speak. Mal. 
on: Han. Cap. et seq. (exc. Knt, Sta.). Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. 

272. toth’| Fi, Rowe,+, Wh. i, 274. Plebeians.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Huds. to the Cap. et cet. Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Var. ’73. 


Om. Dyce. Citizens Han. et cet. 


260. twice being Censor] STEEVENS: For the sake of harmony I have arranged 
these words as they stand in our author’s original—North’s translation of Plutarch 
—‘the people had chosen him censor twice.’-—-CoLtiER: Shakespeare seems to have 
entertained a different notion; and what Steevens calls ‘harmony’ Shakespeare 
probably considered monotony. His great object, as regards versification, seems 
from the first to have been to free it from the weighty words constantly recurring 
at the ends of lines, which gave such a burdensome dulness to the delivery of 
the verse of his immediate predecessors. Steevens, by his alteration, introduced 
the very fault which Shakespeare seems anxious to avoid. [Collier is, I think, 
unjust. By ‘harmony’ Steevens apparently refers, not to the versification, but 
to the agreement with Plutarch. Steevens was an offender on many occasions 
in the manner Collier mentions, but this is not one of them.—Ep.] 

266. Skaling] JoHnson: That is, weighing his past and present behaviour.— 
Scumipt: This is the usual explanation, but, according to the view of Sicinius, 
there is no difference between the past and present behaviour of Coriolanus, but 
rather both the former and the latter show him to be the constant enemy to the 
people. With reference to I, i, 40, we should have to take it in another sense: 
reviewing his present by his past behavior—W. A. Wricut: That is, weighing, 
and so comparing, not contrasting. Coriolanus had been uniform in his behaviour 
to the people, their ‘fixed enemy.’ The word is used probably in the same sense 
in Meas. for Meas., III, i, 266, ‘The poor Mariana advantaged and the corrupt 
deputy scaled’; that is, weighed in the balance and found wanting. 

273. repent in their election] For other examples of ‘in’ used metaphorically 
for in the case of, about, see ABBOTT, § 162. 


280 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, sc. i. 
Brut. Let them goe on: 275 

This Mutinie were better put in hazard, 

Then ftay paft doubt, for greater : 

If, as his nature is, he fall in rage 

With their refufall, both obferue and anfwer 

The vantage of his anger. 280 
Scicin. Toth’Capitoll, come : 

We will be there before the ftreame o’th’People : 

And this fhall feeme, as partly ’tis, their owne, 

Which we haue goaded on-ward. Exeunt. 284 


Atlus Tertius. be 


[Scene I.] 
Cornets. Enter Coriolanus, Menenius, all the Gentry, 
Cominius, Titus Latius, and other Senators. bee 


275. them] ’em Han. Rome. Rowe, Pope, Han. A publick 


281. Toth’| Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. Huds. 

To the Cap. et cet. 
Toth’ ...come] 
Pope, Han. 

281, 282. come...People] As one line, 
and reading We’ll, 1. 282, Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Sta. Hal. Ktly, 
Wh. i, Huds. i. 

282. o’th’] o’the Cap. et seq. 

1. Actus Tertius] Act III, Scene 1. 
Rowe et seq. 


Come;...Capitol 


Street in Rome. Theob. Warb. Johns. 
The Forum. Bell. A Street. Varr. 
Ran. The Same. A Street. Cap. et 
CEL; 

2. all the Gentry] Ff, Cam.+, Neils. 
Om. Rowe et cet. 

3. Latius] Lartius F,F;. 
(throughout). 

and...Senators.] Ff, 

Cam.+, Neils. 
cians. Cap. et cet. 


Lucius F, 


Rowe,+, 
Senators and Patri- 


276, 277. This Mutinie .. . for greater] W. A. WricuTt: The construction is 
again confused. The sense is, It were better to run the risk of this mutiny than 


stay, &c. 


278. he fall in rage] W. A. Wricut: We usually say ‘in a rage,’ but we find in 


King Lear, I, iv, 299, ‘The king is in high rage.’ 


[See ABBOTT, § 150.] 


279, 280. both obserue... anger] Jounson: Mark, catch, and improve the 
opportunity which his hasty anger will afford us—-W. A. WricHt: Both watch 
for the opportunity which his anger will give, and be ready to avail ourselves of 
it. To ‘answer’ occurs in this play (I, ii, 22) in the sense of ‘to meet in combat,’ 


and hence to answer an occasion is to meet and take advantage of it. 


Compare 


All’s Well, I, i, 168, ‘Answer the time of request.’ 

282. streame o’th’People] MALoNE: So, in Henry VIII, ‘The rich stream 
Of Lords and ladies having brought the queen,’ etc., [IV, i, 62]. 

1. Actus Tertius] E. K. CoamBers (Warwick Sh.): Act I. showed us Coriolanus 


in his nobility, Act II. in his inherent and fatal weakness. 


The present Act 


leads him on inevitably to his ruin. At the beginning of it he is the champion of 
Rome, and, as he and the Patricians think, her chosen Consul; at the end he is a 


disgraced exile. 
this result. 


His better and his worse qualities have combined to bring about 
If he had had that sympathy with the people which alone can make 


ACT III, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 281 


Corio. Tullus Auffidius then had made new head. 
Latius. He had, my Lord, and that it was which caus’d 5 
Our fwifter Compofition. 


4. head.| head? Rowe et seq. 6. Compofition] composition with the 
foe Words. 


a true leader, or if he had been willing, like the rest of the Senators, to affect a 
sympathy which he did not feel, the crisis of his fate would have been averted. 
As it is, he falls, and we can scarcely pity him. The action of the Act is spread 
over three scenes, dealing respectively with Coriolanus’s first defeat by the Trib- 
unes, his partial recovery of his position, and his final banishment. This arrange- 
ment is dramatically effective: it holds the issue in suspense, and thus retains our 
interest.—VERITY (Student’s Sh.): The Tullus Aufidius element of the tragedy 
has to be kept ‘in being,’ so that the instrument of the catastrophe may be forth- 
coming, and forthcoming naturally, when the time comes. It is a sort of thread 
that runs through the play as a parallel but subsidiary interest to the Coriolanus 
element, and the tense irony here (Il. 17-28) is meant to keep the connection vividly 
before us.—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Theobald first inserted the stage- 
direction, placing the opening of Act III. in a street. From ‘Passe no further’ 
(I. 34) it comes out that the Patricians, with Coriolanus, are in the act of proceed- 
ing toward the Market place (1. 42). This was perhaps the forward part of the 
fore-stage, and they were at one side of the fore-stage, fronting thither, when 
Brutus and Sicinius from the opposite side enter to stop them. As the mutiny 
grows against Coriolanus he is urged ‘home to thy House’ (1. 287), and thither he 
goes (at |. 310), passing into the rear-stage, now imagined to be his house. Scene ii. 
follows in the rear-stage, where Coriolanus takes his mother’s advice and says he 
is ‘going to the Market place’ (1. 159), and there in the fore-stage scene iii. is placed. 
With the call ‘Go see him out at Gates’ (iii, 171) the Act ends, all making their 
Exeunt together in a tumult through the central exit. [This reconstruction of the 
stage-business is certainly plausible, yet it is, I think, open to several objections. 
In the first place, account is not taken of the disposition of the stage at the close 
of Act II. The scene of Coriolanus’s ordeal, since it requires but little space for 
the few actors taking part, was doubtless played on the fore-stage, the curtains 
being drawn between the columns, thus cutting off the middle and inner stage. 
Another reason for the use of this fore-stage may be found in the fact that both 
scenes i. and ii. of Act II. are scenes requiring the use of the full stage (the triumphal 
return of Coriolanus and the Senate House). At the opening of this Act the cur- 
tains between the columns are drawn aside and the full stage is made available 
for the crowded scene of the tumult and mutiny; when Coriolanus returns to his 
house it is more natural for him to make his exit by the same door through which 
he entered instead of through the doorway to the small inner stage. At the end 
of this scene the curtains between the columns are closed after the departure of all 
the participants, and the scene at Coriolanus’s house is then played on the fore- 
stage. The use of the small inner stage for this important scene is hardly practical 
on account of the number of actors taking part. For scene iii, the market place 
again, the curtains are drawn aside and the full stage is used for the final scene of 
the banishment.—ED.] 

6. our swifter Composition] W. A. Wricut: That is, our making terms more 
speedily. See Meas. for Meas., I, ii, 2: ‘If the duke with the other dukes come not 


282 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Corto. 


[ACT III, SC. i. 


So then the Volces ftand but as at firft, th 


Readie when time fhall prompt them,to make roade 


Vpon’s againe. 


Com. They are worne (Lord Confull) fo, Io 
That we fhall hardly in our ages fee 


Their Banners waue againe. 
Corio. Saw you Auffidius ? 
Latius. 


On fafegard he came to me,and did curfe 


Againft the Volces, for they had fo vildly 15 
Yeelded the Towne : he is retyred to Antium. 


Corio. Spoke he of me ? 
Latius. He did,my Lord. 
Corio. How ? what ? 
Latius. 


7,15. Volces] F2, Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt. Volcies 


F;.  Volfcies F,, Rowe.  Volscians 
Pope,t. Volcians Cap.  Volsces 
Coll. et cet. 


8. roade] inroad Pope, Han. 
9. Vpon’s] Upon us Cap. Varr. Ran. 


How often he had met you Sword to Sword : 20 


Mal. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Hal. 
Ktly. 

10. They are] They’re Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. Dyce ii, Words. 
Huds. ii. 

15. vildly] FF, Del. Case. 
et.cet. 


vilely Fy 


to composition with the King of Hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the 
king.’ 

8. to make roade] W. A. Wricut: That is, to make an inroad or incursion, to 
invade. Compare Henry V: I, ii, 138, ‘Against the Scot, who will make road 
upon With all advantages.’ And zr Samuel, xxvii. 10, ‘And Achish said, Whither 
have ye made a road today?’ 

to. Lord Consull] Matone: Shakespeare has here, as in other places, attributed 
the usage of England to Rome. In his time the title Jord was given to many officers 
of state who were not peers; thus lords of the council, lord ambassador, lord 
general, &c.—C. & M. CowbEN CLarxKE (Shakespeare): In reference to Malone’s 
rather superficial note: ‘Precisely so; the dramatist employed an expression which 
he knew would be instantly comprehended by the public for whom he wrote, and 
he wished to give the immediate impression of Coriolanus’s having attained his 
new dignity: that dignity striven for in the last Act, assumed and recognised at 
the commencement of the present Act, and forfeited before the conclusion of its 
first scene. This is just one of the poet’s touches of dramatic art; with apparent 
carelessness, but really nicest forethought, marking a point which, as the action 
progresses, is essential to be well borne in mind.’ 

14. On safegard] StEEVvENS: That is, with a convoy, a guard appointed to 
protect him. 

15. for they had] That is, because; for other examples of this meaning see, if 
needful, ABBort, § 151, or Shakespeare passim. 

16. is retyred] For examples of this use of ‘is’ with certain intransitive verbs 
see ABBOTT, § 2905. 


ACT III, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 283 


That of all things vpon the Earth, he hated 21 
Your perfon moft : That he would pawne his fortunes 
To hopeleffe reftitution, fo he might 
Be call’d your Vanquifher. 
Corio. At Antium liues he? 25 
Latius. At Antium. 
Corio. I with I had a caufe to feeke him there, 
To oppofe his hatred fully. Welcome home. 
Enter Scicinius and Brutus. 
Behold,thefe are the Tribunes of the People, 30 
The Tongues o’th’Common Mouth. I do defpife them : 
For they doe pranke them in Authoritie, 
Againft all Noble fufferance. 
Scicin. Paffe no further. 
Cor. Hah ? what is that ? 35 
Brut. It will be dangerous to goe on--No further. 
Corio. What makes this change ? 


Mene. The matter ? 38 

28. To oppofe] T’ oppose Dyce ii, 31. oth] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. o’the 
Words. Huds. ii. Cap. et cet. 

home.| Fi, Rowe, Pope, Dyce, 34, 36. further] farther Coll. Wh. i. 

Cam.-+, Words. Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. 35, 30. Hah?...to] As one line Steev. 
home. [To Lartius] Theob. et cet. Varr. Sing. Hal. Hah?...dangerous As 

29. Scicinius] Sicinius Ff (through- one line, Ktly. 
out). 


27. I wish... him there] E. K. CHAmBers (Warwick Sh.): This is ironical. 
Coriolanus does not know how soon he will go to Antium, nor what his cause to 
seek Aufidius will be. 

32. pranke them in Authoritie] SterveNns: So in Meas. for Meas., ‘Drest in 
a little brief authority,’ [II, ii, 118]. 

32. pranke] JoHNSON: That is, Plume, deck, dignify themselves.—W. A. WRIGHT: 
Used contemptuously. Compare Twelfth Night, Il, iv, 89, ‘But ’tis that miracle 
and queen of gems That nature pranks her in attracts my soul.’ ‘Ajolier, To 
pranke, tricke vp, set out, make fine’ (Cotgrave). The word is connected with 
German praugen and prunken and the Dutch pronken, appronken.—VERITY 
(Student’s Sh.): Scott makes Leicester rebuke the Usher, Master Bowyer, thus 
in one of the most striking chapters (xvi.) of Kenilworth: ‘Thou art a knave— 
an ungrateful knave; but he that hath done, can undo—thou shalt not prank thee 
in thy authority long.’ Kenilworth is permeated with Shakespearian words and 
allusions, which add greatly to its Elizabethan colouring. The Shakespearian 
touches are introduced so naturally as to form part of the very texture of the 
diction of the novel. They witness to a remarkable degree of familiarity with 
Shakespeare’s plays. One of the most interesting of Scott’s Miscellancous Essays 
is on the drama. [In Quarterly Review, April, 1826.—Ep.] 


284 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 111, Sc. i. 


Com.Hath he not pafs’d the Noble,and the Common? 
Brut. Cominius,no. 40 
Corio. Haue I had Childrens Voyces? 
Senat.Tribunes giue way,he fhall toth’ Market place. 
Brut. The People are incens’d again{t him. 
Scicin. Stop,or all will fall in broyle. 
Corio. Are thefe your Heard ? 45 
Muft thefe haue Voyces, that can yeeld them now, 
And ftraight difclaim their toungs? what are your Offices? 
You being their Mouthes,why rule you not their Teeth ? 
Haue you not fet them on ? 
Mene. Be calme,be calme. 50 
Corio. It is a purpos’d thing,and growes by Plot, 
To curbe the will of the Nobilitie : 
Suffer’t,and liue with fuch as cannot rule, 
Nor euer will be ruled. 


Brut. Call’t not a Plot : 55 
The People cry you mockt them : and of late, 

When Corne was giuen them gratis, you repin’d, 57 
39. Noble] nobles Rowe,+, Var. ’78, Words. Craig. 1. Sen. Mal. et cet. 
85, Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Words. 42. toth’| Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i, Huds. 

Coll. MS. to the Cap. et cet. 
Common] Mal. Knt, Coll. Del. 43, 44. The People...Stop] As one 
Sing. ii, Sta. Ktly, Cam.+, Huds. i, line Pope et seq. 
Craig, Neils. Commons Ff et cet. 45. Heard] herd ¥3F,. 
42. Senat.] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Wh. i. 47. toungs] tongs F.F;. tongues F,. 
1. S. Cap. First Sen. Dyce, Cam.+, Offices?| Offices F2. 


39. Noble, and the Common] SteEvENs: The First Folio reads ‘noble’ and 
‘common.’ The Second has, commons. I have not hesitated to reform this 
passage on the authority of others in the play before us. Thus, ‘the nobles bended 
As to Jove’s statue, and the commons made A shower and thunder,’ [II, i, 292.— 
Collier (ed. ii.) notes that his corrected Folio reads Nobles . . . Commons, but, 
as Steeyens shows, commons is the reading of F., and is not, therefore, a correction. 
—Ep.] 

44. in broyle] That is, into noisy contention; for other examples of ‘in’ for 
into see ABBOTT, § 159. 

47. Offices] For other examples wherein, metri gratia, the final syllable of the 
plural and possessive cases of nouns ending in ce, and the like, are frequently 
pronounced without the additional syllable, see ABsorr, § 471. 

48. why ... their Teeth] WarsuRTON: The metaphor is from men’s setting a 
bulldog or mastiff upon anyone. 

56, 57. of late... gratis] Case (Arden Sh.): In I, i. Coriolanus scorns the idea 
of giving the people corn at their own rates, but there has been nothing about 
giving corn gratis so far. The occasion referred to occurred after the people had 
refused Marcius for Consul, and is antedated by Shakespeare. 


ACTHIEGSCH ts] CORIOLANUS 285 


Scandal’d the Suppliants : for the People, call’d them 58 
Time-pleafers, flatterers, foes to Nobleneffe. 
Corio. Why this was knowne before. 60 


Brut. Not to them all. 
Corio. Haue you inform’d them fithence ? 
Brut. How? I informe them ? 
Com. You are like to doe fuch bufineffe. 
Brut. Not vnlike each way to better yours. 65 
Corto. Why then fhould I be Confull? by yond Clouds 
Let me deferue fo ill as you,and make me 
Your fellow Tribune. 


Scicin. You fhew too much of that, 69 
58. Suppliants:] Suppliants F,. Ktly, Wh. Words. Huds. ii, Craig. 
62. fithence] since Pope,+, Cap. Chamb. 
Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 64. You are like] Yes, you are like 
re enough Han. 
64, 65. You are...yours] As two lines, 65. each...yours] etther...you Han. 
ending: wlike...yours. Johns. et seq. 66. yond] yon’ Cap. Var. 73. yon 


64. Com.] Cor. Theob. Han, Warb. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Johns. Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Sing. i, Knt, Hal. 
Varr. Sing. Dyce, Coll. ii, iii, Sta. Hal. 69-75. Om. Bell. 


64. Com. You are... businesse] Knicut: This interposition of Cominius 
is according to the old copy. The modern editors give the words to Coriolanus 
as a continuation of his dialogue with Brutus. The words are not characteristic 
of Coriolanus; whilst the interruption of Cominius gives spirit and variety to 
the scene.—SINGER (ed. ii.): The old copy gives this line to Cominius, but the 
sequel of the dialogue clearly shows that it was uttered by Coriolanus.—CoLLier: 
The prefixes could not have been very easily mistaken by the printer, as that of 
Coriolanus in this part of the scene is Corio., and that of Cominius, Com. We 
adhere to the ancient authorities, for the later folios make no change. [In his 
edd. ii. and iii. Collier adopts the change in prefix, erroneously crediting 
Malone with the change—Ep.]—Rotre: At first sight the reply seems to favour 
Theobald’s change of prefix; but, as Knight remarks, the interruption by Cominius 
gives spirit and variety to the scene. The ‘yours’ in the reply might be addressed 
to Cominius as identified with the interests of Coriolanus: the business of your 
party. 

65. Not vnlike ...to better yours] WARBURTON: That is, likely to provide 
better for the commonwealth than you (whose business it is) will do. To which the 
reply is pertinent: ‘Why then should I be consul?’—Mason (Comments, etc., 
p. 252): The reply of Coriolanus, ‘Let me deserve as ill as you,’ proves, in my 
opinion, the propriety of the amendment proposed by Hanmer, the reading, to 
better you, instead of ‘yours.—WuirELAw: That is, in every way to better 
your way. [To this Schmidt (Coriol.) dissents, remarking that ‘yours’ refers here 
to ‘business,’ not ‘way.’ That is: I am the man to better your business in every 
way. He compares, ‘What you do Still betters what is done.’—Wint. Tale, IV, 


iv, 135-] 


286 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. i. 


For which the People ftirre: if you will paffe 70 
To where you are bound, you muft enquire your way, 
Which you are out of, with a gentler {pirit, 
Or neuer be fo Noble as a Confull, 
Nor yoake with him for Tribune. 
Mene. Let’s be calme. 75 
Com. The People are abus’d : fet on,this paltring 
Becomes not Rome : nor ha’s Coriolanus 
Deferu’d this fo difhonor’d Rub, layd falfely 
I’th’ plaine Way of his Merit. 
Corio. Tell me of Corne : this was my fpeech, 80 
And I will fpeak’t againe. 
71. you are) you’re Pope, Theob. Johns. et cet. (subs.). 


Han. Warb. Johns. 77. Rome] Romans Steev. conj. 
73. neuer] ne’er Pope. 79-81. As two lines, ending: Corne... 
be] to be Rowe ii, Pope. againe Pope et seq. 
76. abus’d: fet on,] abus’d, set on; 79. I’th’] Fi, Rowe,+, Wh.i. the 
Rowe, Pope, Han. abus’d.—Set on;— Cap. et cet. 
Theob. Warb. abus’d. Set on. Coll. 80. Corne:] Cornel Ff. 


Del. Sta. Ktly, Wh. i. abus’d, set on. 


74. for Tribune] That is, as a Tribune, compare |. 234 below, ‘Whom you 
have named for consul.’ See also Scumupt (Lex.), s. v. For (3). 

76. The People are abus’d: set on] THEOBALD: This is pointed as if the sense 
were, The people are set on by the Tribunes, but I don’t take that to be the poet’s 
meaning. Cominius makes a single reflection, and then bids the train set for- 
ward, as again afterwards, ‘Well, On to th’ market place.’ And so in Jul. C@s., 
‘Set on, and leave no ceremony out,’ [I, i, 11] —Rotre: It is a question whether 
“set on’ is here instigated to this, or whether it should be separated from what 
precedes, and made imperative, go on. The former is favoured by |. 49 above, 
and the latter by 1. 137 below. 

76, 77. this paltring ... Rome] JoHNson: That is, this trick of disstmula- 
tion; this shuffling: ‘And be these juggling fiends no more believed That palter 
with us in a double sense..— Macbeth, [V, viii, 19]. 

77. Becomes not Rome... Coriolanus] STEEVENS: I would read, ‘Becomes 
not Romans’; Coriolanus being accented on the first and not the second syllable 
in former instances. 

78. Rub, layd falsely] Jounson: ‘Falsely’ for ‘treacherously.—_MALonE: The 
metaphor is from the bowling green—Casr (Arden Sh.): Brutus, in ll. 56-so, 
passes lightly over the mockery of the people and revives an old grievance. Corio- 
lanus responds to this only and admits it. Cominius, then, in saying that he had 
not deserved the rub, could not consistently mean to deny the charge which con- 
stituted it and to urge that it was therefore wntruly made; but he could say that 
this base and undeserved opposition was a mere pretext and false or untrue in 
that sense. This may be called hair-splitting, but it illustrates the difficulties 
that confront the commentator, and, after all, even the presence or absence of 
consistency is not a conclusive test. 

81. I will speak’t againe] MacCattum (p. 508): In Plutarch, Coriolanus’s 


ACTA SC si: CORIOLANUS 287 


Mene. Not now, not now. 82 
Senat. Not in this heat, Sir,now. 
Corto. Now as I liue, I will. 


My Nobler friends, I craue their pardons : 85 
For the mutable ranke-fented Meynie, 
84-88. Lines end: friends...pardons 85, 86. My...For] As for my...But for 
iM eynie...And...againe Var.’73. Lines Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. 
end: friends...mutable...as...themfelues 86. the mutable] their mutable Daniel. 
Ktly. Lines end: friends...pardons... Meynie| Meyny F.F3. meiny 
them...And...againe Cap. et cet. Schmidt. meynie Case. Many F, 
et cet. 


unsuccessful candidature has, except as it adds to his private irritation, no im- 
mediate result; and only some time later does his banishment follow on quite 
another occasion. Corn had come from Sicily, and in the dearth it was proposed 
to distribute it gratis; but Marcius inveighed against such a course and urged 
that the time was opportune for the abolition of the Tribunate in a speech which, 
in the play, he ‘speaks again’ when his election is challenged. But the Life 
reports it only as delivered in the Senate; and the Tribunes, who are present, at 
once leave and raise a tumult, attempt to arrest him, and are resisted. The Sen- 
ators, to allay the commotion, resolve to sell the corn cheap, and thus end the dis- 
content against themselves, but the Tribunes persist in their attack on the ring- 
leader, hoping, as we have seen, that he will prove refractory and give a handle 
against himself. When he does this and the death-sentence is pronounced, there 
is still so much feeling of fairness that a legal trial is demanded, which the Trib- 
unes consent to grant him, and to which he consents to submit on the stipulation 
that he shall be charged only on the one count of aspiring to make himself king. 
But when the assembly is held the Tribunes break their promise and accuse him 
of seeking to withhold the corn and abolish the Tribunate, and of distributing the 
spoils of the Antiates only among his own followers. . . . So the unexpectedness 
of this last indictment throws him out. Now there are several things to notice in 
Shakespeare’s very different version. ‘The first is the tact with which he compresses 
a great many remotely connected incidents into one. He antedates the affair 
about the corn with Marcius’s speech against the distribution and the Tribunate, 
and only brings it in as a supplementary circumstance in the prosecution. The 
real centre of the situation is Coriolanus’s behaviour when a candidate, and round 
this all else is grouped; and this behaviour, it will be remembered, is altogether a 
fabrication on Shakespeare’s part. 

86. Meynie] Scummpr (Coriolanus) retains the reading of the Folio in the form 
meiny, taking it in the sense of the paid retainers of a household in distinction from 
the ‘Nobler friends’ of the preceding line —W. A. Wricut: Shakespeare does 
use ‘meiny’ in King Lear, II, iv, 35, ‘They summoned up their meiny, straight 
took horse,’ but here it does not seem to be appropriate, and is another instance 
of the printer’s error mentioned in the note on II, iii, 115. ‘Many’ for multitude 
occurs in 2 Henry IV: I, iii, 91, ‘O thou fond many,’ etc.—VeErity (Student’s 
Sh.): It has been assumed that ‘many’ in The Faerie Queene, I, xii, 9, ‘And after 
all the raskall many ran,’ is a misspelling of meimy and means ‘crowd, troop’; 
but the word may quite well be the ordinary adjective many used substantively. 
In fact, Spenser’s phrase, ‘the raskall many,’ seems exactly parallel to ‘the mutable, 


288 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. i. 


Let them regard me, as I doe not flatter, 87 
And therein behold themfelues : I fay againe, 
In foothing them, we nourifh ’gainft our Senate 
The Cockle of Rebellion, Infolence, Sedition, go 
Which we our felues haue plowed for, fow’d,& fcatter’d, 
By mingling them with vs,the honor’d Number, 
Who lack not Vertue, no, nor Power, but that 
Which they haue giuen to Beggers. 
Mene. Well, no more. 95 
Senat. No more words, we befeech you. 
Corio. How ? no more? 


As for my Country, I haue fhed my blood, 98 
88. therein] there Pope, Theob. Han. plough’d Var. ’78 et seq. 

Warb. Johns. 92. Number,| number. Pope. 
ot. plowed] plow’d Rowe,+, Cap. 94. they] we Pope,+. 


rank-scented many,’ and expresses the same antidemocratic sentiment. Compare 
2 Henry IV: I, iii, 91. Possibly ‘meynie’ was substituted in the Folio for many 
in the same way as ‘higher’ for hire, II, ili, 114. From similarity of sound and 
sense many and ‘meiny’ were confused a good deal by old writers.—CasrE (Arden 
Sh.), in support of the Folio reading in the sense of multitude, furnishes several 
examples, notably one from Day’s Festivals (1615), Epistle Dedicatory (N. E. D.): 
‘If we account them not more religious, then the Meyny, or Multitude are.’ 

87, 88. Let them ... behold themselues] Jonnson: Let them look in the mirror 
which I hold up to them, a mirror which does not flatter, and see themselves.— 
WuitELaw: ‘As’ = that; ‘regard this in me, that I am no flatterer, and in this, 
in my plain speaking, behold themselves.’ 

90. The Cockle . . . Sedition] StEEvENsS: The thought is from North’s Plutarch, 
where it is given as follows: ‘Moreover, he said that they nourished against them- 
selves the naughty seed and cockle of insolency and sedition, which had been 
sowed and scattered abroad among the people.’—Ritson: Here are three syllables 
too many. We might read, as in North’s Plutarch, ‘The cockle of insolency and 
sedition.’ 

go. Cockle] BrIsLEY (p. 129): The cockle of modern botanists (Lychnis 
Githago) is a tall handsome plant with purplish flowers, growing mostly in corn- 
fields, the seeds of which are black; . . . but the plant meant by Shakespeare is 
the Lolium temulentum, in his time called darnel, as well as cockle and cockle 
weed.—W. A. Wricut: The two plants [‘cockle’ and darnal] are clearly distin- 
guished by Lyte and Gerarde. The latter says (p. 926, ed. 1597): ‘Cockle is a 
common or hurtfull weede in our Corne, and very well known by the name of 
Cockle.’ And in the next page: ‘Some ignorant people haue vsed the seede 
heereof for the seede of Darnell, to the great danger of those who have receiued 
the same.’ If any further proof were needed that the two plants are quite dis- 
tinct, and were known to be so in the 16" century, it would be supplied by the 
following passage from Latimer’s Sermons (p. 72, Parker Society ed.): ‘Who is 
able to tell his diligent preaching, which every day, and every hour, laboureth to 
sow cockle and darnel?’ 


ACT III, SC. i.] 


CORIOLANUS 


289 


Not fearing outward force : So fhall my Lungs 
Coine words till their decay, againft thofe Meazels 100 
Which we difdaine fhould Tetter vs, yet fought 


The very way to catch them. 
Bru. 


You {peake a’th’people, as if you were a God, 


To punifh; Not a man, of their Infirmity. 


Sicin. 
Mene. 


*Twere well we let the people know’t. 105 
What,what? His Choller ? 


Cor.Choller? Were I as patient as the midnight fleep, 


By Ioue, ’twould be my minde. 


100. Meazels] measles Rowe,+, 
Dyce, Wh. Cam.+, Words. Huds. ii, 
Craig, Neils. 

to1. difdaine] disdain’d Ktly. 

fought] seek Rowe,+. 

102-105. The very...knowi] Fi, 
Rowe,+, Knt, Sta. Ending lines: 
people...Not...Infirmity Var.’73. End- 
ing lines: people...Not...well Cap. et 
cet. 

103-107. Lines end: were...man...let 
...Cor. Choller? Han. 


108 


103. a’th’] o’th’ F,, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 
o’the Cap. et cet. 
as if] as Pope, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Sir, as if. Han. 
104. Not] not as being Han. 
of] of of. Fo. 
106, 107. What...Cor. Choller?] As 
one line Johns. Var. ’73. 
107. Cor. Choller?] As separate line 
Cap. Var. 78 et seq. 
108-111. Lines end: minde...is... 
remaine? Pope et seq. 


100. Meazels] W. A. Wricut: In Early English misel is a leper, from the Old 
French mesel (Lat. misellus). The term is thence contemptuously applied to a 
scurvy wretch. See Wiclif, Mats. x, 8, ‘Clense the mesels,’ for ‘cleanse the 
lepers.’ And Promptorium Parvulorum, ‘Mysel, or mesel, or lepre, Leprosus.’ 
In Chaucer, Parson’s Tale, ‘meselrie’ is leprosy. But by the middle of the 16t® 
century the word ‘measles’ had acquired its modern sense. Huloet, Abcedarium, 
has ‘Mesiles disease, Variol@,’ and Cotgrave gives ‘Rougeolle: {. The Mazles.? 
Shakespeare uses it here with a reference also to the contemptuous sense which it 
had acquired when applied to persons.—MoyeEs (p. 26): The exact meaning of 
‘meazels,’ its spelling, and its relationship to leprosy, elephantiasis, smallpox, 
and our present-day measles, constitute a very confused subject. The infectious 
nature of the disease, however, is clearly implied. According to Creighton, a 
word ‘meseles’ is used in the poem Piers Plowman, meaning lepers, but John of 
Gaddesden uses the word ‘mesles’ in his description of ‘morbilli’ (or our present- 
day measles). Again, ‘Ye Maysilles’ is given in Levins’ Manipulus Vocabulorum 
as meaning ‘Variole’ (our present-day smallpox), and in Baret’s dictionary the 
word measles is defined as ‘a disease with manie reddish spottes or speckles in the 
face and bodie, much like freckles in colour.’ It must be remembered that the 
confusion was one not merely of words and names, but that smallpox (variola) 
and measles (morbilli) were constantly confused, and their distinction was due to 
the Arabian physician and made known in England by John of Gaddesden. We 
may fairly suppose that ‘meazels’ in the text refers to our present-day measles. 

104. Not... of their Infirmity] E. K. CoampBers (Warwick Sh.): A reminis- 
cence of Hebrews, iv, 15: ‘We have not an high-priest which cannot be touched 
with the feeling of our infirmities.’ 


I9 


290 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. i. 


Sicin. It is a minde that fhall remain a poifon 

Where it is : not poyfon any further. IIO 
Corio. Shall remaine? 

Heare you this Triton of the Minnoues ? Marke you 


His abfolute Shall ? Ts 
112. Heare] Here F.F;. 113-115. His...Cor. Shall?] As one 
this Triton] this, Triton F,. line Pope et seq. 


Minnoues] minnows Pope. 


112. Triton of the Minnoues] WARBURTON and JoHNson both explain, some- 
what unnecessarily, that a minnow is a very small fish; and Steevens quotes in 
illustration the only other passage wherein the word is used by Shakespeare— 
Love’s Labour’s, I, i, 250: ‘there did I see that low-spirited swain, that base minnow 
of thy mirth.’—Dettus: The high and mighty Tribune with his absolute shall con- 
trols the swarming mass of the people, just as a Triton controls the swarming fish 
of the smallest kind. Likewise there is an alliteration between Triton and Tribune. 
[Possibly also between ‘Triton of the minnows’ and Tribune of the many.—Ep.]— 
Rusuton (Sh. Illustrated by Old Authors, p. 29): The contrast between Triton, 
the son of Amphitrite, and Neptune, and the minnows, which are very small fish, 
is apparent; and although it may be truly said that Triton, as a deity of the sea, 
would rule over the minnows with his ‘absolute’ or peremptory ‘shall,’ which 
Coriolanus calls ‘the horn and noise of the monster,’ yet, when it is remembered 
that Triton used to announce the approach of Neptune by blowing his horn, 
which was a large conch or sea-shell, it may be considered probable that Shake- 
speare plays upon the word ‘shall’ in this passage, using it in a double sense; 
for the words ‘shall’ and shell do not differ more from each other in sound than 
the words ‘sheep’ and ‘ship,’ which Speed plays upon in Two Gentlemen, I, i, 
72, 73; and it may also be considered probable that Shakespeare, further on in 
this passage [ll. 130, 131], plays upon the word ‘shall,’ using it again in a double 
sense. For the reader will perceive that Coriolanus speaks of ‘such a one as he, 
who puts his shall against a graver bench than ever frown’d in Greece’; and Shake- 
speare, using the word in a double sense, may refer to the practice in ancient Greece 
of banishing persons considered dangerous to the state by ostracism, where the 
votes were given by shells, each man marking upon his shell the name of the person 
he would have banished. [This last suggestion is, I think, of very doubtful likeli- 
hood. See ll. 130, 131 and note by Case, supra.—Eb.] 

113. His absolute Shall] R. G. Wurre: The recognition of the compulsory sense 
of ‘shall,’ and the difference of signification between that auxiliary and ‘will’ 
could not be more strongly marked than it is in the outbreak of the newly chosen 
Consul against the Tribune’s use of the former instead of the latter. But upon 
this point there can hardly be any misunderstanding, and need be no remark. 
No one who is acquainted with our early literature will dispute for a moment 
that very long before the Elizabethan period ‘shall’ emphatically applied by a 
speaker to a second or third person expressed obligation, or that ‘will’ was used in 
the same manner, or, again, that ‘shall,’ used with regard to a coming event, hada 
prophetic force, and implied either the ability to bring it about, or the well assured 
belief that it would happen. It is the restriction of ‘shall,’ in the first person, to 
the expression of simple futurity, and of ‘will’ to that of ‘volition,’ which is a mark 


ACT Ill, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 291 


Com. ’Twas from the Cannon. 
Cor. Shall? O God ! but moft vnwife Patricians:why 115 


114-136. Om. Bell. good, Theob. et cet. (O, good, Coll. 
115. O God!] Ff, Rowe, Pope i. MS.). 
O Gods! Heath (conj.), Varr. Ran. O 


of a more modern stage of the language. True, many passages may be produced 
from Shakespeare’s own works in which these two auxiliaries are used in exact 
conformity to the modern idiom; but many others occur in which the distinction, 
now so well established, is disregarded. [See also ABBort, § 316.] 

114. "T'was from the Cannon] JoHNson: Was contrary to the established rule; 
it was a form of speech to which he has no right—M. Mason (Comments, etc., 
p. 252): These words appear to me to imply the very reverse. Cominius means 
to say ‘that what Sicinius had said was according to the rule,’ alluding to the 
absolute veto of the Tribunes, the power of putting a stop to every proceeding; 
and, accordingly, Coriolanus, instead of disputing this power of the Tribunes, 
proceeds to argue against the power itself and to inveigh against the Patrician 
for having granted it.—Pye (p. 249): I am rather inclined to the last opinion if 
‘canon’ is meant for rule; but it is very probable that Shakespeare (considering 
his little attention to this sort of propriety) might mean that the absolute shall 
of the Tribune came as loudly as if from the mouth of a cannon.—[Miss C. PorTER 
(First Folio Sh.), without reference to the foregoing remark, characterises ‘Cannon’ 
here as ‘an anachronism which has lacked notice because commonly explained in 
the sense of canon as rule or law.’ An interpretation which, to me at least, is 
inconsistent with the dignified language of this scene—Ep.J—C. &. M. CowpEN 
CLARKE (Shakespeare): We hold with Mason’s explanation, because it consists 
with Sicinius’s speech at the commencement of the last scene of this Act, ‘When 
they hear me say, ‘‘It shall be so, i’the right and strength o’the Commons,” . . . 
insisting on the old prerogative and power,’ &c.; but the present passage affords a 
remarkable instance of the directly opposite sense which the word ‘from’ may 
give to a sentence, according to the sense in which the word is used and taken.— 
Rev. Joun Hunter: Imitated from the decalogue, in which the word ‘shall’ 
occurs so frequently, ‘Or that the Everlasting had not fixed His canon ’gainst 
self-slaughter,’ Hamlet, I, ii, 131.—Scumupt (Cortolanus), in support of the inter- 
pretation given by Johnson that ‘from the canon’ here means contrary to law, 
quotes Hamlet, III, iii, 22, ‘For anything so overdone is from the purpose of 
playing’; and Twelfth Night, I, v, 201, ‘But this is from my commission.’— WRIGHT 
likewise follows Johnson, and to the two examples given by Schmidt adds: ‘Why 
birds and beasts from quality and kind,’ Jw. Cas., I, iii, 65 ——ORGER (p. 62): 
If Cominius interrupts the speech with the words ‘’T'was from the Canon,’ they 
can only mean, as Mason paraphrases, ‘it was according to law.’ But such a 
declaration is little calculated to assuage Coriolanus’s violence, and the meaning 
of ‘canon’ in all other places is ‘Divine Law,’ the language of the Ten Command- 
ments. The imperious ‘shall’ Coriolanus might naturally declare belonged to 
a law with heavenly sanction, not to mortal voice; and the force of the term will 
be preserved if we continue the speech to him without interruption, ‘His absolute 
“shall,”—’Twas from the canon, ‘“Shall’’!’—[Johnson’s, rather than Mason’s, 
interpretation is adopted by the majority of modern editors.—Ep.] 

115. O God! but most, etc.] THrosatp (Sh. Restored, p. 180): After this ex- 


292 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. i. 


You graue, but wreakleffe Senators, haue you thus 116 
Giuen Hidra heere to choofe an Officer, 


116. wreakleffe] reckless Han. et seq. 117. heere] leave Coll. ii, iii. (MS.). 


clamation, methinks, ’tis very odd to continue the sentence with such a disjunctive 
‘But.’ Besides, as the text now stands, there seems that contrast of terms wanting, 
and broken off, which appears intended in this passage by the next immediate 
line. As the addition of a single letter restores us this beauty, I make no doubt 
but the passage ought to be restor’d, ‘O good, but most unwise,’ etc—HEATH 
(p. 418): I am inclined to believe the ancient reading, ‘O God! but most unwise 
Patricians,’ etc., is genuine; only I would rather read O Gods! The particle ‘but’ 
is not employed here merely as a disjunctive, but as introductive of the objection 
or reproof which was to follow; and that double antithesis in this and the next 
line, which Mr Theobald thinks was intended, and admires as a beauty, appears, 
on the contrary, to me to be too studied to be the language of passion, which is 
expressed with much greater spirit by the exclamation and break in the ancient 
reading. That of Mr Theobald is tame and flat in comparison of it, like the formal 
exordium of an oration——STEEVENS (Variorum, 1773): ‘O Gods!’ Thus the 
old copy. Succeeding editors had altered it, ‘O good.’ When the only authentic 
copy affords sense, why should we depart from it?p—Matone, in answer to the 
foregoing question by Steevens anent the Folio reading, says: ‘No one can be 
more thoroughly convinced of the general propriety of adhering to the old copy 
than I am; and I trust I have given abundant proofs of my attention to it by 
restoring and establishing many ancient readings in every one of these plays, 
which had been displaced for modern innovations; and if in the passage before 
us the ancient copy had afforded sense I should have been very unwilling to dis- 
turb it. But it does not; for it reads, not ““O Gods!” as Mr Steevens supposed, 
but ‘‘O God!” an adjuration surely not proper in the mouth of a heathen. Add 
to this that the word “but” is printed with a small initial letter in the only 
authentic copy; and the words “‘good but unwise” here appear to be the counter- 
part of ‘‘grave and reckless” in the subsequent line. On a reconsideration of this 
passage, therefore, I am confident that even my learned predecessor will approve 
of the emendation now adopted.’—StErvens: I have not displaced Mr Malone’s 
reading, though it may be observed that an improper mention of the Supreme 
Being of the Christians will not appear decisive on this occasion to the reader who 
recollects that in Troilus & Cressida the Trojan Pandarus swears ‘by God’s lid,’ 
the Greek Thersites exclaims ‘God-a-mercy’; and that in Mid. N. Dream our author 
has put ‘God shield us!’ into the mouth of Bottom an Athenian weaver. I lately 
met with a still more glaring instance of the same impropriety in another play of 
Shakespeare, but cannot, at this moment, ascertain it. 

117. Giuen Hidra heere] SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, p. 218): Leave [the reading 
of Collier’s MS. Corrector) is not wanted in this line. To ‘give’ is to concede, 
to permit, and ‘given’ stands for permitted—Dvyce (ed. i.): Mr Collier’s MS. 
Corrector reads Jeave, and rightly perhaps; for in this passage there is a harshness 
in understanding ‘Given’ as equivalent to permitted —LEO (Coriolanus): In 2 
Henry VI: IV, iv, 34, we find, ‘Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother’s death 
Hath given them heart and courage to proceed.’ I propose, therefore, the reading 
‘Given Hydra heart,’ etc. [Dyce (ed. ii.), discarding even his half-hearted com- 


ACT III, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 293 


That with his peremptory Shall, being but 118 
The horne, and noife o’th’Monfters, wants not {pirit 

To fay, hee’l turne your Current in a ditch, 120 

119. noife] voice Kellner. 119. Monjfters] monster Cap. Var. 73, 

oth] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. Dyce, Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), Sta. Wh. 

o’the Cap. et cet. Words. Huds. ii. monster’s Del. 


Cam.-+, Craig, Neils. 


mendation of the MS. correction, accepts the foregoing suggestion as the true 
reading. Wright’s objection to Leo’s change is, I think, well taken, that ‘what 
the people wanted was not courage but power to choose’; thus taking ‘Given’ in 
the sense of ‘allowed the choice,’ as suggested by Singer.—Ep.]—Hunson (ed. ii.): 
Dyce substitutes heart for ‘here’; very infelicitously as I cannot but think. For 
the patricians have not given the people the heart, that is, the disposition or spirit, 
to choose Tribunes; the people had that before; but they have granted to them 
the legal power or right; have given their consent to such a law. Coriolanus re- 
gards the common people everywhere as a many-headed monster, like the Hydra; 
and what he is now complaining of is that here, in Rome, this monster is allowed 
to choose a special officer who can do such and such things. 

119. The horne, and noise] WARBURTON: Alluding to his having called him 
Triton before. 

11g. th’Monsters] SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, etc., p. 218), apparently unmindful 
of the fact that the change ‘Monsters’ to monster is not original with the MS. 
Corrector (see Text. Notes), says: ‘To change “monsters” to monster destroys 
the meaning; the plural refers to the many heads of the hydra; the reference is to 
Sicinius as the mouthpiece of the Plebs. This is evident from what Coriolanus 
has said just before: ‘‘ You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth? ””’— 
‘But,’ remarks Dyce (ed. i.), ‘would any writer, after applying to the people col- 
lectively the term ‘“‘Hydra,” proceed in the very same sentence, to speak of the so 
symbolised plebs as ‘‘monsters”? Certainly not. Sicinius is ‘““The horn and noise 
of the [many-headed] monster.’ Earlier in the present scene we have had “‘for 
the multitude to be ingrateful were to make a monster of the multitude,” and ‘‘he 
himself (Coriolanus) stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude”; after- 
wards in IV, i. Coriolanus says, ‘“‘the beast With many heads butts me away.”’— 
Verity (Student’s Sh.): This whole passage illustrates the blending of imagery 
which characterises Shakespeare’s later style, especially in scenes of great emo- 
tional exaltation. Here Coriolanus flouts the Tribunes as no more than the 
blatant mouthpieces of mob-clamour; earlier he charged them with being wire- 
pullers, in whose hands the people are mere puppets. Truly, ‘temper makes of 
us all an unjust judge.’—WuiteLaw: The double genitive, ‘o’ the monster’s,’ 
after the definite article used absolutely (‘the horn and noise’) can hardly be right.— 
W. A. Wricut: The construction is the same as in Cymbeline, I, iii, 149, ‘Shrew 
me, If I would lose it for a revenue Of any king’s in Europe.’ And Rich. II: 
III, iv, 70, ‘Letters came last night To a dear friend of the good duke of 
York’s.’ 

120. in a ditch] That is, zwfo a ditch. For other examples of this use of ‘in’ 
for into see ABBOTT, § 159, or Shakespeare passim. 


294 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. i. 


And make your Channell his? If he haue power, 121 
Then vale your Ignorance : If none,awake 
Your dangerous Lenity : If you are Learn’d, 


Be not as common Fooles ; if you are not, 124 

r21. he] they Han. Cap. Huds. ii. 122. your] to Orson. 

122. Then...Ignorance| Let them have Ignorance] signorie or signories 
cushions by you Han. Cap. Huds. ii. Sta. conj. 

awake] abate S. Jervis. awake 123. Learn’d] Learned Rowe,+, Cap. 

from Bailey. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 

122, 123. Ignorance...awake...Lenity] Kant, Coll. Del. 
impotence...revoke...bounty Coll. ii, iil. 124. common] commons’ Sta. conj. 


(MS.), Wh. i, Words. 


121-123. If he... Lenity] Hanmer transposes 1. 125 (‘Let them have 
cushions by you’) to follow ‘If he have power,’ reading the latter line ‘If they,’ 
etc. On this change Capell (vol. I, pt i, p. 89) remarks: ‘It requires no ex- 
traordinary reasoning to see that the speaker’s conclusions follow right, in the 
present arrangement, and in their due order, which cannot be said of the old one; 
nor can any good reason be given why one Tribune only should be mentioned in 
the first member of this rhetorical period, and both in the last; a further argument 
in favour of both changes. Transpositions are frequent in printing; and the reader 
will see very signal ones pointed out to him in the course of these notes, some of 
which have the authority of other old copies for their rectification.—JOHNSON: 
If this man have power, let the ignorance that gave it him vail or bow down before 
him.—Cottrer’s MS. Corrector for ‘Ignorance’; ‘awake’; ‘Lenity’ reads im- 
potence; revoke; bounty. Of these changes Collier says: ‘The meaning is, that if 
the Tribune have power, let the impotence (not “ignorance,” which is not the 
proper antithesis to power) of the Senate submit to it; but if he have none, let the 
Senate revoke the bounty by which such a dangerous privilege had been conceded 
to the populace. The “lenity” of the patricians was not to be “awakened.” 
Coriolanus calls upon them to revoke the bounty which had caused them to re- 
linquish a power properly belonging only to themselves. What the hero says 
afterwards is in entire consistency with this view of the passage: ‘At once pluck 
out the multitudinous tongue; let them not lick The sweet which is their poison,”’’ 
(ll. 184-186].—SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, etc., p. 218): This is a sweeping liberty to 
be taken with the old text. ‘Jgnorance’ could hardly be a misprint for impotence, 
nor is the change requisite, for the next sentence proves that ignorance is the 
right word, ‘If you are learned be not as common fools’; revoke for ‘awake’ 
may have been, and seems a likely, substitution; but bounty for ‘lenity’ is not 
required; the concession of power to the plebs and the indulgence given to the 
Tribune was ill-judged lenity, not bounty. [See Collier: Trilogy, in Appendix, 
p- 589.]}—Sraunton: To ‘vail’ means to ower, and Coriolanus would hardly call 
upon his brother patricians to lower their impotence. The genuine word was far 
more probably signorie or signortes, i. e., senatorial dignity, magistracy, sway. 
The emendation ‘revoke your . . . bounty’ is an emendation, however clever, of 
very questionable propriety; for ‘lenity’ in this place does not, perhaps, mean 
mildness, but lenitude, supineness. So in Plutarch’s Life of Coriolanus: ‘For he 
(Marcius) alledged that the creditors losing their money they had lost, was not 
the worst thing; but that the lenity (z. ¢., the inaction of the people when sum- 


ACT Itt, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 295 


[r21-123. If he . . . Lenity] 

moned to resist the enemy) was favoured, was a beginning of disobedience.’— 
Hopson, reading with Collier’s MS. Corrector revoke, says: ‘It seems clear enough 
that awake reverses the drift of the argument. But the following clause, “if you 
are learn’d,” makes against impotence, as it is evidently meant to be antithetic 
to “your ignorance.” As to the substitution of bounty for “lenity,” it is to be 
observed that Coriolanus is here speaking not against the Senate’s bounty in 
letting the people have corn gratis, but against the Senate’s indulgent temper, or 
lenity, in letting them have Tribunes as their own special magistrates.’—[In his 
ed. ii. Hudson remarks: ‘I adopt Hanmer’s reading as the simplest and most 
satisfactory way of setting both the logic and the language in order. Collier’s 
Folio substitutes impotence for “ignorance,” and thus gets a fitting antithesis to 
power; but does nothing towards redressing the other difficulties of the passage. 
“Awake your dangerous lenity,” it seems to me, cannot be made to yield any con- 
sistent sense.’ This last statement, in view of Hudson’s usual perspicacity, is 
somewhat surprising. ‘The figure is a little involved, but depends upon the mean- 
ing of ‘lenity,’ which here is stretched to mean torpor, slothfulness. It is, in fact, 
practically the same figure as used by Buckingham in his simulated address to 
Richard urging him to take upon himself the royal seat; he says: ‘—the mild- 
ness of your sleepy thoughts Which here we waken to our country’s good’ (III, 
vii, 123). In effect Coriolanus says: ‘If this officer have no power then arouse 
your dangerous torpor, and let what was inactive become active.’—Ep.]—Lro 
(Coriolanus): In All’s Well, V, iii, the words, ‘Oft our displeasures, to ourselves 
unjust, Destroy our friends, and after weep their dust,’ are to be understood as 
follows: ‘Jn our displeasures we often destroy our friends, and after we weep their 
dust.’ In the same manner the words ‘awake your dangerous lenity’ are to be 
understood, ‘you must awake out of your dangerous lenity.’ Perhaps the best 
reading would be away instead of ‘awake,’ though with after away is wanting.— 
Dyce (ed. ii.): ‘Awake out of’ is not English.-—CartwricHt (p. 30): Read, 
‘vail your arrogance; if none away,’ etc. Compare, ‘Would the nobility lay aside 
their ruth And let me use my sword,’ I, i, 210. And, ‘This too much lenity And 
harmful pity must be laid aside,’ 3 Henry VI: II, ii,9. ‘Away’ seems preferable 
to ‘away with,’ as a more probable misprint, and the following passage appears to 
confirm the ‘Well, I must do’t Away, my disposition,’ III, ii, 136. And ‘Away 
thy hand,’ says Hamlet; or ‘with’ may be understood as in Othello: ‘What con- 
juration and what mighty magic I won his daughter,’ I, ili, [90-94. This last is 
not wholly apposite, as Cartwright has omitted a line following ‘magic’: ‘For 
such proceeding I am charged witha]’; the final word here is thus made to do 
double duty.—Ep.J—R. G. Wutre: The Folio text is utterly without sense to me, 
and of which I am utterly unable to find even a plausible attempt at explanation. 
The text from Mr Collier’s folio of 1632 requires no comment either as to its sense, 
its fitness to the context, or the probability of the typographical errors which it 
presupposes.—CaseE (Arden Sh.): Johnson’s paraphrase gives a sufficient, if not an 
exact, sense for this expression, ‘vail your ignorance.’ Ignorance of consequences 
has betrayed the ‘good but most unwise patricians,’ and it is, therefore, more 
cutting to say they must stoop their ignorance than their pride, whether we take 
the act to signify submission or shame. The Prayer Book (Litany) uses zgnorance 
for a fault ignorantly committed, ‘to forgive us all our sins, negligences, and 
ignorances.’ 


296 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. i, 


Let them haue Cufhions by you. You are Plebeians, 125 
If they be Senators : and they are no leffe, 

When both your voices blended, the great’{t tafte 

Mott pallates theirs. They choofe their Magiftrate, 


And fuch a one as he, who puts his Shall, 129 
125. Let...by you] Then vail your Han. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 
ignorance Han. Cap. Huds. ii. Sing. Knt, Del. Ktly. gross Anon. ap. 
You are] You're Pope, Theob. Cam. 
Warb. Johns. 127. tajte] state Singer conj. Huds. i. 
127. great’/t] greatest Rowe, Pope i, 129. puts] puts in Rowe. 


125. Plebeians] Assotr (§ 492) marks but two exceptions (Henry V: Chorus, 
1. 27; Tit. And., I, i, 231) wherein this word is made other than a dissyllable. See 
Dixie Veiivs.30- 

126-128. they are no lesse . . . Most pallates theirs] JouNson: These lines, 
I think, may be made more intelligible by a very slight correction: 


‘—they no less [than Senators] 
When both your voices blended, the greatest taste 
Must palate theirs.’ 


When the faste of the great, the patricians, must palate, must please, [or must try] 
that of the plebeians——SrervENS: The plain meaning is, ‘that senators and 
plebeians are equal, when the highest taste is best pleased with that which pleases 
the lowest,’ &c.—[W. A. Wricut: I do not think this can be the meaning.]— 
Mason (Comments, etc., p. 253): Neither Johnson nor Steevens appear to me to 
have rightly conceived the meaning of this passage; nor would Johnson’s amend- 
ment render it intelligible. That which I should propose, is to read the general 
taste, instead ‘of the greatest taste,’ and then the meaning will be thus: ‘You are 
Plebeians,’ says Coriolanus, ‘and they are no less, if, when both of your opinions 
are blended together; that is, are put upon an equal footing, the opinions of the 
Tribunes shall be most relished by the multitude.’ He calls the taste of the 
multitude the general taste, as in 1. 175 he calls the ignorance of the multitude ‘the 
general ignorance.’ Volumnia, in scene ii, calls the people ‘our general louts.’ 
And Hamlet says a certain speech was ‘caviare to the general. —Matone: I 
think the meaning is, the plebeians are no less than senators, when the voices 
of the senate and the people being blended together, the predominant taste of the 
compound smacks more of the populace than the senate—WuuiITreLAw: ‘The 
prevailing flavour of the whole smacks rather of their voice (their authority) than 
of yours.’ Judged by results (the taste it leaves in the mouth) this dualized 
government of compromise gives expression to the popular, rather than to the 
patrician, will; the tribunicial nay is stronger than the consular yea. To palate 
elsewhere of the person who tastes; here, of the thing, or flavour, which affects 
the palate. [Thus also, substantially, W. A. Wright.|]—Hrrrorp (Eversley Sh.): 
That is, when the predominant taste is adapted to their palate-——WorpsworTH 
(Historical Plays, i, 123): It is with reluctance that I have allowed this passage 
to stand in the text. There can, I suppose, be no doubt as to what the writer 
meant [Wordsworth accepts Wright’s explanation]; but surely Horace’s Quintilius 
would have said to such a clause, ‘Corrige, sodes,’ and would have ordered it to be 


ACT III, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 297 


His popular Shall, againft a grauer Bench 130 
Then euer frown’d in Greece. By Ioue himfelfe, 

It makes the Confuls bafe; and my Soule akes 

To know, when two Authorities are vp, 

Neither Supreame ; How foone Confufion 


May enter ’twixt the gap of Both, and take 135 
The one by th’other. 

132-136. and my...th’ other] Mne- 136. th’other] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i, 
monic Warb. Dyce, Hal. Words. ?’other Steev. Sta. 


the other Cap. et cet. 


returned to the anvil.—Casr (Arden Sh.): In Malone’s explanation ‘palates’? = 
savours of (of which meaning no other instance has been brought forward), and 
‘theirs’ refers to ‘taste’ and not to ‘voices.’ If ‘palates’ means relishes, and 
‘theirs’ refers to ‘voices,’ the sense may be, and they are no less than senators if, 
when they and you mix voices in coming to a decision, the taste of the majority 
prefers your view. In the fact that the metaphor involving taste seems to begin 
in ‘blended,’ there is an inducement to accept Malone’s view, although in the only 
other instances of ‘palate,’ the verb, in Shakespeare (Ant. & Cleo., V, ii, 7; Tro. & 
Cress., IV, i, 59) the meanings come under those given in the WV. E. D. (‘To per- 
ceive or try with the palate, to taste; to gratify the palate with, to enjoy the taste 
of, relish’), which does not give the sense ‘savour of’ or quote the present passage. 
[This, it will be noted, is substantially the interpretation of Mason; while it is 
doubtless grammatically correct, that of Malone is more in accord with the 
general drift of Coriolanus’s fierce invective-—Ep.] 

130, 131. a grauer Bench ...in Greece] In Plutarch, Coriolanus, speaking 
against giving corn gratis, refers to ‘the cities of Greece, where the people had 
more absolute power.’ Hence probably the comparison.—Ep. 

132. my Soule akes, etc.] Brzecuinc (Falcon Sh.): Coriolanus is an aristocrat 
in principle. In these speeches, from |. 85, however mistimed they may be, he 
is expressing his serious political convictions. It may be worth noting what was 
actually the issue of the strife between these two ‘authorities,’ the whole Roman 
people with their Consuls on the one hand, and the plebeians with their tribunes 
on the other. The Senate, originally merely a consulting body, gradually super- 
seded both. It is not hard to see how, when magistracies were annual, knowledge 
of affairs, and so responsibility, and so power, came to lie with a permanent body. 
And to this both patricians and plebeians were eligible by serving certain magis- 
tracies. 

132. akes] W. S. WALKER (Vers., p. 118): Ache, aches (the noun substantive) 
are pronounced aitch, aitches. Examples are familiar. See particularly Much 
Ado, III, iv, 56. I believe that the verb was uniformly ake. It is at least fre- 
quently, if not always, so printed; and in some places the pronunciation is estab- 
lished by the metre or otherwise. [Besides the present passage Walker gives four 
others wherein the verb is so spelt in the Folio. See Boaden’s Life of John Philip 
Kemble, ii, 517, for an account of the controversy caused by the actor’s pronun- 
ciation of the word aches as a dissyllable, and his own justification of this.—Eb.] 

133-136. when two Authorities are vp... th’other] Warsurton: The 
mischief and absurdity of what is called Imperium in imperio is here finely ex- 


298 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Com. 
Corio. 


[ACTMEE, SCaa1: 


Well, on to’th’Market place. 137 
Who euer gaue that Counfell, to giue forth 


The Corne a’th’Store-houfe gratis,as’twas vs’d 


Sometime in Greece. 140 
Mene. Well,well,no more of that. 
Cor.Thogh there the people had more abfolute powre 

I fay they norifht difobedience: fed, the ruin of the State. 
Bru. Why fhall the people giue 

One that {peakes thus,their voyce ? 145 
Corio. Ile giue my Reafons, 

More worthier then their Voyces. They know the Corne 

Was not our recompence, refting well affur’d 

They ne’re did feruice for’t ; being preft to’th’Warre, 149 | 


138. Corio.] Com. F,. 


139. ath] F.F;. o’th’ Fy, Rowe,+. 


o’the Cap. et cet. 


140. Greece.) Greece— FF, et seq. 


144. Why]Om.Han. What! Words. 

147. worthier] worthie F,. worthy 
F,F,, Rowe,+. 

Voyces] voice Pope ii, Theob. 


(subs.). Han. Warb. Johns. 
142-144. As verse, ending lines: 148. our] their Han. Coll. ii. (MS.), 
powre...fed...giue Pope et seq. Ktly, Words. Southern MS. a 


143. they] the F>. 
norifht] nourifh’d F 4. 
144-191. Om. Bell. 


Lettsom ap. Dyce ii. as Kinnear. 
well] Om. Theob. Warb. Johns. 
149. They| That Glo. 


pressed.—HERFoRD (Lversley Sh.): It has been remarked that there was never a con- 
stitution which looks more unworkable on paper than the Roman. But the Romans 
had a genius for government which prevented deadlocks.—VeERrirtvy (Student’s Sh.): 
In no nation was the ‘sense of the State’ more developed. And this sense told them 
what the State needed, and regulated the working of its political machinery to that 
end. Much the same might be said of the English and the English constitution. 

135, 136. take... by th’other] Case: That is, seize the one by means of the 
other. The commentators [Beeching and Chambers] say destroy, but their author- 
ity to go so far is questionable. Seizure is an idea which naturally follows that 
of entry through a gap. Compare IV, iv, 26, post. 

138. Who euer gaue that Counsell, etc.]| E. K. CaampBers (Warwick Sh.): 
Coriolanus in his excitement goes back to an old grievance. So far from wishing 
to conciliate, he picks up the challenge thrown down by Brutus in ll. 56, 57 above. 
According to Plutarch this episode of the distribution of the corn took place after 
Coriolanus’s rejection as Consul. Shakespeare leaves us to infer that it took 
place at some undefined time before the action of his play begins. But he works 
into the present scene part of the speech against the distribution put by Plutarch 
in Coriolanus’s mouth. 

148. our recompence] SINGER (ed. ii.): We should probably read ‘their recom- 
pense.’ Southern had thus corrécted it in a copy belonging to him. At any rate 
we must understand ‘our recompense to them.’ [Dyce likewise thus interprets 
the Folio reading.] 

149. They] The Globe Shakespeare here reads ‘ That ne’er did service,’ etc. That 


ACT III, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 299 


Euen when the Nauell of the State was touch’d, 150 
They would not thred the Gates: This kinde of Seruice 

Did not deferue Corne gratis. Being i’th’Warre, 

There Mutinies and Reuolts, wherein they fhew’d 

Moft Valour, fpoke not for them. Th’Accufation 


Which they haue often made againft the Senate, 155 
All caufe vnborne, could neuer be the Natiue 
151. They] That Sing. i. Mason conj. Sing. ii, Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), 
153. There] Thare F.. Their F3F, Sta. Hal. Ktly, Wh. Huds. Glo. 
et seq. Hunter, Craig, Neils. Cholmeley, 
156. Native] motive Johns. conj. Chambers. 


this is an error of the press is, I think, shown by the fact that it is not recorded 
as a new reading in the second Cambridge edition. This would hardly be worth 
more than recording in the Teat. Notes were it not that Apporr (§ 262) quotes 
this line as an uncommon instance of the separation of ‘that’ and its antecedent 
‘They’ in |. 147.—Eb. 

151. They would not thred the Gates] JoHNSON: That is, pass them. We 
yet say to thread an alley—Mason (Comments, etc., p. 253): A similar expression 
is used by Captain Carteret, in his Voyage round the World: ‘I am also of opinion 
that it is better to go to the North-east than to thread the Moluccas, or coast New 
Guinea.’ To thread, therefore, is to go through a narrow passage.—STEEVENS: 
So in King Lear, ‘—threading dark-ey’d night,’ [II, i, 121—Scumipt (Levx.), 
besides the present passage and that given by Steevens, gives: ‘It is as hard to 
come as for a camel To thread the postern of a small needle’s eye,’ Rich. IT: 
V, v, 17; he compares also ‘unthread the rude eye of rebellion,’ King John, V, iv, 
I1.| 

156. could neuer be the Natiue] WarsBurton: ‘Native’ for natural birth— 
HEATH (p. 418): It is evident from the scope and drift of the whole context that 
the word ‘native’ cannot signify here ‘the natural birth.’ Coriolanus had enumer- 
ated several reasons why the donation of corn could not be interpreted as a recom- 
pense, given in recognition of any meritorious service done by them: ‘They ne’er 
did service for it, and when pressed to the war refused to stir out of the gates; when 
in the war their mutinies and revolts could be no arguments in their favour; their 
frequent and causeless accusations of the senate could not be the inducement 
which prevailed with that body.’ This being the sense of the context, it neces- 
sarily follows either that we must understand the word ‘native’ to denote the 
native cause or inducement that gave birth to the donation, which is a sense I 
am afraid the word will scarcely bear; or we must read motive instead of it.— 
Jounson: ‘Native’ is here not natural birth, but natural parent or cause of 
birth.—CaPpELt (vol. I, pt i, p. 90) refers the reader to his Glossary for his inter- 
pretation of this word, wherein he gives, with reference to this passage—native 
cause, remarking that he was led to this meaning by the word ‘unborn’ just pre- 
ceding it—MAatone: So, in a kindred sense, in Henry V: ‘A many of our bodies 
shall no doubt Find native graves,’ [IV, iii, 96]—Mason: I cannot agree with 
Johnson that ‘native’ can possibly mean natural parent or cause of birth; for if 
the word could bear that meaning it would not be sense here, as Coriolanus is 
speaking not of the consequence, but the cause, of their donation. Malone’s 


300 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. i. 


Of our fo franke Donation. Well, what then? 157 
How fhall this, Bofome-multiplied, digeft 


Craig, Neils. Chambers, Cholmeley, Sherman, Tucker Brooke. bissom multitude 
Sing. ii. 


quotation from Henry V. is nothing to the purpose, as in that passage ‘native graves’ 
means evidently graves in their native soil—Srncrer: ‘Native,’ if it be not a cor- 
ruption of the text, must be put for native cause, the producer or bringer forth. 
Mason’s proposed emendation of motive would be very plausible were it not 
that the poet seems to have intended a kind of antithesis between ‘cause unborn’ 
and native cause. [See Text. Notes—Ep.]—K®rIcHTLEY (Expositor, p. 364): 
As I have never met with ‘native’ in the sense of origin, source, I think, and so did 
Mason, that the right word is motive-—Scumupt (Coriolanus): ‘Native’ with Shake- 
speare signifies kin or relation; thus the passage may be paraphrased: our donation 
bears no relation to those complaints of the people. [Schmidt does not, however, 
here or in his Lexicon furnish any instances of such use of the word.—Ep.]— 
W. A. Wricut: Though no instance is given of ‘native’ in the sense of origin or 
source, a Scotch or Suffolk peasant will speak of such and such a place as his 
‘native.—BEECHING: Motive gives the meaning. But ‘unborn’ preceding makes 
it probable that ‘native’ is correct. 

158. this Bosome-multiplied] MALONE: This multitudinous bosom; the bosom 
of that many-headed monster, the people-—CoLiiEeR (Notes & Emendations, etc., 
p- 356): ‘Bosom multiplied,’ a misprint most evident now it is pointed out [see 
Text. Notes], has always been retained in the text. It can never be reprinted; 
and is it too much to infer that the old corrector had somewhere seen or heard the 
above passage, and others, represented with undoubted improvement? In II, i, 
59 we have had bisson printed ‘beesome,’ and here it is printed ‘bosome’; it is 
very clear that the compositor did not understand the meaning of the word, which 
then, perhaps, was becoming somewhat obsolete; this consideration can, however, 
afford him no excuse for converting multitude into ‘multiplied.—S1ncER, in Notes 
& Queries, 8 May, 1852, p. 436, commenting upon the MS. emendations in Collier’s 
Folio, says of the change in this passage: ‘Who can doubt that ‘‘Bosome mul- 
tiplied” should be bisson multitude? A glance at the passages as they stand in the 
old print of the First Folio would convince the most sceptical.’—J. O. HALLIWELL 
(later Halliwell-Phillipps), in the same journal for 22 May, same year, deprecates 
the adoption into the text of MS. corrections when the source of these is unknown; 
among the many communicated in Collier’s first announcement of his discovery 
‘there was,’ says Halliwell, ‘scarcely a single example which indicated it was 
derived from an authentic source, but many, on the other hand, which could be 
well believed to be mere guess-work; and it was rather alarming to see the readiness 
with which they were received, threatening the loss of Shakespeare’s genuine text. 
A ray of light, however, at length appears in the new reading in Coriolanus [the 
present passage]. This, more than any other, gives hopes of important results; 
and it does more than this, it opens a reasonable expectation that the MS. Cor- 
rector had, in some cases, recollection of the passages as they were delivered in 
representation. Once establish a probability of this, and although many of the 


ACT III, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 301 


[t58. How shall this Bosome-multiplied, digest] 
corrections must still be looked upon as conjectural, the volume will be of high 
value. The correction “‘bisson multitude” seems to me to be clearly one of those 
alterations that no conjectural ingenuity could have suggested. The volume has 
evidently been used for stage purposes; and it may be taken as almost beyond a 
doubt that that particular correction was made on authority.—A. E. Brag 
(Notes & Queries, 10 July, 1852, p. 26): I cannot perceive anything in the proposed 
alteration [bisson multitude] to exalt it above the common herd of conjectural 
guesses; on the contrary, with the example of ‘bisson conspectuities’ in the same 
play, nothing appears more obvious than the extension of the same correction to 
any other suspected place to which it might seem applicable. Dealing with it, 
therefore, merely as conjectural, I reject it: (1) Because the apologue of ‘the 
belly and the members,’ in the first scene, gives its tone to the prevailing metaphor 
throughout the whole play. Hence the frequent recurrence of such images as 
‘the many-headed multitude,’ ‘the beast with many heads,’ ‘the horn and noise 
of the monster,’ ‘the tongues of the common mouth,’ &c.; and hence the strong 
probability that in any given place the same metaphor will prevail. (2) Because 
in Cortolanus there are three several expressions having a remarkable resemblance 
in common, viz., ‘multiplying spawn,’ ‘multitudinous tongue,’ ‘bosom multi- 
plied,’ and the concurrence of these three is strongly presumptive of the authen- 
ticity of any one of them. (3) Because in the speech wherein ‘bosom multiplied’ 
occurs—the matter in discussion being the policy of having given corn to the people 
gratis—when Coriolanus exclaims, ‘Whoever gave that counsel, nourished dis- 
obedience, fed the ruin of the state’; these two words, of themselves, seem intended 
to be metaphorical to the subject; but when he goes on to enquire, ‘how shall 
this bosom multiplied digest the senate’s courtesy,’ it becomes manifest that 
‘digest’ continues the metaphor which ‘nourished’ and ‘fed’ had begun, and if, in 
addition, it can be shown that ‘bosom’ was commonly used as the seat of digestion, 
then the inference appears to be irresistible that ‘bosom multiplied’ is a phrase 
expressly introduced to complete the metaphor. Now, that bosom was so used, and 
by Shakespeare, is easily proved. Here is one example from 2 Henry IV: ‘Thou 
beastly feeder . . . disgorge thy glutton bosom,’ I, iii, 98. But I shall go still 
further: I assert that Shakespeare has nowhere used digest in the purely mental 
sense; that is, without some reference real or figurative, to the animal function 
of the stomach. . . . (4) Because, since digest is thus invariably used by Shake- 
speare, ‘bosom multiplied,’ having close relation with that function, is in strict 
analogy with the prevailing metaphor of the play; while, on the other hand, bisson 
multitude has no relation with it at all; and therefore, had the latter been the 
genuine expression, it would have been associated not with ‘digest,’ but with 
some verb bearing more reference to the function of sight than to that of degluti- 
tion or concoction. (5) Because I cannot perceive why there should be any greater 
difficulty in the metaphorical allusion to the bosom multiplied digesting the senate’s 
courtesy than to the multitudinous tongue licking the sweet which is their poison. 
There is, in fact, such a close metaphorical allusion between the two expressions that 
one can scarcely be doubted as long as the other is received as genuine.—SINGER 
(Notes & Queries, July 24, 1852, p. 85) regrets that this ‘very elaborate and in- 
genious argument’ has failed to convince him. ‘I still think,’ he continues, ‘that had 
Mr Collier’s second folio only afforded this one very happy correction, it would 
have done good service to the text of a play in which the printer’s errors are numer- 


302 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. i. 


[158. How shall this Bosome-multiplied, digest] 
ous. To the argument of your excellent correspondent, it seems to me, one fatal 
objection offers itself: the context requires a plural noun to be in accord with 
“they” and “their,” and therefore “this bosome multiplied” cannot be right; 
for dare we say the poet was wrong? Think of the greatest master of language 
the world ever saw writing “this bosome multiplied. . . . What’s like to be 
their words: ‘We did request it,’”” &c. I submit that we may confidently read the 
passage thus: ‘How shall this bisson-multitude digest The Senate’s courtesy? Let 
deeds express What’s like to be their words,” &c.’—A. E. Brae (Notes & Queries, 
August 14, 1852, p. 154): I can scarcely believe it possible that Mr Singer could 
have overlooked the parallel metaphor to which I directed attention in the fifth 
clause of my original argument; and yet in that metaphor the very same peculiarity 
of expression (which Mr Singer is pleased to call error) is much more prominent, 
viz.: ‘At once pluck out The multitudinous tongue, let them not lick The sweet 
which is their poison.’ This passage is, I presume, of undoubted genuineness; 
and yet in it them and their are in much closer apparent connection with the sin- 
gular noun than in the clause objected to; consequently, with such a palpable ex- 
ample within a few lines of a repetition of the very difficulty he was animadverting 
upon, I cannot conceive how Mr Singer could indulge in the vein he has respecting 
it. But the truth is that no real difficulty exists at all; because it is quite plain 
that the dominant antecedent throughout the whole speech to such words as they, 
them, their, &c., is ‘the people’ in this question of Brutus which occurs a few lines 
previously: ‘Why shall the people give One that speaks thus their voice?’— 
(To this Singer made no reply; what was there to be said? Collier’s volume with 
a large number of the MS. corrections appeared in the following year; and Singer 
in the same year produced his ‘Shakespeare Vindicated,’ wherein, p. 218, he again 
returns to this particular passage, remarking: ‘Of the substitution bisson multi- 
tude for ‘‘bosome multiplied” I have elsewhere (Votes & Queries) spoken with 
unqualified approbation, and still think it an undoubted and acute rectification of 
an evident misprint. Little did I then anticipate the extensive mischief with 
which we are now threatened. Yet this evident emendation has met with one 
strenuous dissentient voice which we may still hope to see raised in opposition 
to the flagrant misapprehensions of the language of the poet with which Mr 
Collier’s volume abounds.’—Ep.]—Anon. (Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p. 
322): There is, it seems, an old word bisson signifying blind; and therefore we see 
no good reason (although such may exist) against accepting, as entitled to textual 
advancement, the old corrector’s substitution of bisson multitude for ‘bosome 
multiplied.’ The latter, however, is defended, as we learn from Mr Singer, ‘by 
one strenuous dissentient voice.’ Why did he not tell us by whom and where? 
[Singer’s reference is, of course, to A. E. Brae in Notes & Queries, see ante —Ep.]— 
StaunToN: Notwithstanding what has been said, and much more might be said, 
in support of the old reading as meaning many-stomached, we accept this emenda- 
tion of Mr Collier’s annotator as an almost certain restoration of the poet’s text — 
R. G. Wuire: The Folio has the extravagant misprint ‘Bosome-multiplied’ 
which yet remained uncorrected till the discovery of Mr Collier’s folio, and which— 
so stolidly tenacious is hide-bound conservatism of its mumpsimus—has since 
then found defenders. ‘Bisson’ means blinded—C. & M. CownrEN CLARKE 
(Shakespeare): From the mode in which Shakespeare elsewhere uses the word 
‘bosom’ for stomach, and from the context of the word ‘digest’ in the present pas- 


ACT II, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 303 


[158. How shall this Bosome-multiplied, digest] 
sage-—also from the mode in which he uses ‘multiplying’ for multifarious (Macbeth, 
I, ii, 11)—-we believe here ‘bosom multiplied’ is meant to express ‘general stomach.’ 
[In corroboration reference is also made to the passage in 2 Henry IV: I, ii, where 
occur the words ‘disgorge,’ ‘glutton bosom,’ etc., reference to which has already 
been made by Brae.—Ep.]—Ketcutey (Expositor, p. 364): I do not think that 
the text is, in any place in these plays, more certainly correct than it is here; yet 
some late editors adopt without hesitation bisson multitude, the reading of Collier’s 
Folio. By ‘bosom-multiplied’ the poet means the union or complex of the bosoms, 
z. e., the hearts, affections, of the people. In his next speech Coriolanus uses 
in a similar manner ‘multitudinous tongue’; and in II, ii, we meet ‘multiplying 
spawn.’ In Lear (V, iii, 48) we have ‘the common bosom’; and in our poet’s 
Lover’s Complaint, ‘That he did in the general bosom reign.’—W. A. WricHT: 
Although bisson multitude was adopted in the Globe and Cambridge editions, I think 
it better not to disturb the old text, which has some justification. With [‘bosom 
multiplied,’ meaning bosom of the people,] may be compared Lear, V, iii, 49. And 
still better, as preserving the figure made use of here, to which the word ‘digest’ 
points, 2 Henry IV: I, iii, gt-100. See also Macbeth, V, iii, 44: ‘Cleanse the 
stufi’d bosom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart.’—BrEcHING 
(Falcon Sh.), in defence of the Folio reading, and in reference to the passage from 
2 Henry IV: I, iti, remarks that ‘if a bosom could disgorge, it could digest.’— 
PERRING (p. 298): The critics convert ‘this bosom multiplied’—by what process 
I know not—to ‘this bissom multitude!’ The latter being the harsher expression, 
is thought perhaps to accord better with Coriolanus’s temper. As a matter of 
fact, however, for this particular passage the other phrase bears off the palm. It is 
not the blindness of the multitude which is here glanced at, but the dangerous 
knowledge bosomed up by them and sure in time to be thoroughly digested, that 
they had wrung gratuities and concessions from a reluctant oligarchy. Multiply 
the bosom, and you augment the danger. Bissom multitude is just the phrase 
that an unwary critic would catch at; and how triumphantly might he point to 
‘bissom conspectuities’ in another part of the play! But ‘bosom multiplied’ is the 
phrase for the place, original, unique, and strikingly apposite, bearing the stamp 
of discerning judgment and originating genius. It may be matched with the 
‘multitudinous tongue’ which occurs a little further down; only there speech, 
here thought, is the dominant idea. By all means read, therefore, ‘How shall this 
bosom multiplied digest The Senate’s courtesy.—G. S. Gorpon: There is no 
reason to change ‘bosom multiplied’ to bisson multitude. It is a poor argument 
for bisson (purblind) that it has already occurred in II, i, 59. And we do not digest 
with our eyes. But can a bosom digest? No; but it is the bosom which first 
feels the load of repletion and indigestion. Had Shakespeare’s idea been simply 
digestion he would have used belly. It is because the courtesy-crammed multitude 
cannot digest, can indeed do nothing more than gorge what the senate gives it, 
that he uses ‘bosom.’ This is confirmed by the only other passages in Shakespeare 
where ‘bosom’ occurs in this connexion. They are 2 Henry IV: I, ii, 95-08, 
and Macbeth, V, iii, 44. In both of these passages, as in ours, the bosom suffers 
from repletion, and is the seat not of digestion, but of indigestion. The first is 
a striking parallel in more than language; that ‘beastly feeder,’ the insatiate 
multitude, is precisely the subject of Coriolanus’s thoughts. The second is a 
description of ordinary dyspepsia. Editors have been accustomed to defend 


304 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act mr, sc. i. 


The Senates Courtefie ? Let deeds expreffe 
What’s like to be their words, We did requett it, 160 
We are the greater pole, and in true feare 
They gaue vs our demands. Thus we debafe 
The Nature of our Seats, and make the Rabble 
Call our Cares, Feares ; which will in time 
Breake ope the Lockes a’th’Senate, and bring in 165 
The Crowes to pecke the Eagles. 
Mene. Come enough. 


Bru. Enough,with ouer meafure. 168 

159, 160. deeds...words] words... 164. Cares...time] caresses...time to 
thoughts Krueger (Jahrbuch, xxxviii, come or after time Anon. ap. Cam. 
237). 165. ope] open F,, Rowe i. 

161. pole] poll Rowe et seq. ath’ oth F,, Rowe,+. Wh. i. 

162. They] Thy ¥3. o’the Cap. et cet. 

164-167. Lines end: ope...Crowes... 167. enough] enough, enough Han. 


enough Pope,+, Varr. Ran. Steev. Words. 
Varr. Sing. Neils. 


‘bosom’ in our passage by saying that a bosom which disgorges (as in 2 Henry IV.) 
must be able to digest. This is smart and lawyer-like, nothing more.—CasE 
(Arden Sh.) retains the reading of the Folio, accepting Malone’s interpretation 
and quoting in support of the text Lear, V, iii, 49, and 1. 185 below, and in con- 
clusion says: ‘But though some editors read “‘bisson multitude,” sucha violent change 
is out of the question in view of the sense yielded by the old reading and the sup- 
port it receives from the above references, and the many uses of “bosom” by Shake- 
speare.’ On the meaning of ‘digest,’ as here used, Case remarks: ‘That is, inter- 
pret, understand. Beeching’s argument is fallacious, for, in reality, there is no if 
about it; rejected food must pass through the breast, which can, therefore, dis- 
gorge, but not digest. Figuratively, however, the bosom, i. e., the heart or mind, 
can digest in the sense of thinking out, reaching understanding by a slow process 
resembling digestion, and ‘“‘understand” is the ultimate sense required here. 
The same would follow from G. S. Gordon’s different reasoning. . . . But it 
may be doubted whether Shakespeare distinguished as carefully as the com- 
mentator.’ 

164. Call... in time] See Text. Notes for expedients to render this line metric- 
ally correct; ABBorT (§ 508) quotes this as an example where a slight pause (here 
between ‘Feares’ and ‘which’) may take the place of the missing syllable-—Eb. 

166, 167. The Crowes... enough] Popr’s rearrangement of the preceding 
lines to render them metrically correct leaves these two half lines still deficient 
by two syllables. Steevens, to supply these, suggests the repetition of the word 
‘enough,’ unaware apparently that he is anticipated by Hanmer, whose text 
thus reads.—Dyce (ed. ii.) in reference to these changes says: ‘The passage, 
as in the Folio, most probably was the author’s arrangement of these lines, 
though the Folio, by mistake, has omitted something in ]. 164. It is better, 
however, if the metre must halt, that it should halt at the conclusion of the 
passage.’—Ep. 


ACT Ir, 4SCy 1.) CORIOLANUS 305 


Corio. No, take more. 
What may be fworne by, both Diuine and Humane, 170 
Seale what I end withall. This double worthip, 
Whereon part do’s difdaine with caufe, the other 
Infult without all reafon : where Gentry, Title, wifedom 173 


170. by, both...) by. Both... Warb. seq. 
Johns. 172. do’s] does Rowe et seq. 
172. Whereon] Where one Rowe et 173. reafon] seafon Ff, Rowe. 


169-190. No, take more, etc.] Gotpwin Smit (p. 43): This whole passage 
against democracy is, in the mouth of Coriolanus, dramatic, but it is also emphatic. 
It should be remembered that revolution in its most terrible form, that of the 
risings of the Anabaptists on the continent, had not been very long laid in its 
grave. [The last insurrection of the Anabaptists was put down in 1535; nearly 
thirty years before the birth of Shakespeare, and at least seventy-five before the 
date of the present play.—Ep.] 

169-171. No... sworne by, both . . . withall] WARBURTON: The false point- 
ing hath made this unintelligible. It should be read and pointed thus: 


‘No take more; 
What may be sworn by. Both divine and human 
Seal what I end withal!’ 


z. e., No, I will still proceed, and the truth of what I shall say may be sworn to. 
And may both divine and human powers (i. e., the Gods of Rome and Senate) 
confirm and support my conclusion.—HEAtH (p. 419): I would gladly be informed 
how sworn by came to signify sworn to. Mr Warburton complains that the 
common reading as pointed in the former editions ‘is unintelligible.’ If it is so, 
it can be only so to those who are ignorant that the Romans commonly swore by 
what was Human as well as by what was Divine: by their own head; by the head 
of others, of their parents, of their children; by their eyes; by the dead bones and 
ashes of their parents; by the conscious knowledge of their own minds, &c. See 
Brisson. de Formulis, pp. 808-817. The sense is, No, let me add this further; and 
may everything Divine and Human which can give force to an oath bear witness 
to the truth of what I shall conclude with—Mason (Comments, &c., p. 254): 
Warburton’s explanation is not admissible; the What may be sworn by cannot possibly 
mean What may be sworn to; and, according to his manner of pointing, the words 
divine and human have no substantive to which they can refer; but according to 
the present pointing Coriolanus invokes everything in heaven and on earth, of 
reverence sufficient to be sworn by, to confirm what he says. So in Fletcher’s 
Coxcomb, Antonio says to Mercury: ‘By this light I cannot; By all that may be 
sworn by,’ [I, i; ed. Dyce, iii, p. 125.—Ep.]. 

173. without all reason] That is, without any reason. Apxott (§ 12) gives 
other examples of this use of ‘all’ for any: ‘‘‘ Without all reason,” Ascham 48. 
(Comp. in Latin ‘sine omni,” &c.), Heb., vii, 7: Wickliffe, “withouten ony agen- 
seiynge”; Rheims, Geneva, and A. V., “without all contradiction.” This con- 
struction, which is common in Ascham and Andrewes, is probably a Latinism in 
those authors.’—Case: That is, beyond all reason. Compare Macbeth, III, ii, 
11, ‘Things without all remedy should be without regard.’ 

20 


306 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT UI, SC. i. 


Cannot conclude, but by the yea and no 

Of generall Ignorance, it muft omit 175 
Reall Neceffities, and giue way the while 

To vnftable Slightneffe. Purpofe fo barr’d, it followes, 

Nothing is idone to purpofe. Therefore befeech you, 

You that will be leffe fearefull, then difcreet, 


That loue the Fundamentall part of State 180 

More then you doubt the change on’t : That preferre 

A Noble life, before a Long, and With, 182 
175. Ignorance, it...omit] Ignorance, et cet. 

it...omit: F2. ignorance,—it...omit Cap. 181. doubt] do Han. 

et seq. on’t} oft F2. oft F;F,, Rowe,+, 


177. Slightneffe.] Fi, Rowe i, Coll. Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Del. Wh. i, Huds.  slightness; Rowe ii. Sing. i, Del. Hal. 


174. yea and no] W. A. Wricut: According to Sir Thomas More’s rule, yea 
and nay go together, and yes and no; the former being answers to questions framed 
in the affirmative, and the latter to those framed in the negative. But this was a 
tule not strictly observed, and Shakespeare neglected it both here and elsewhere. 
Compare Lucrece, 1340, ‘Receives the scroll without or yea or no.’ And Merry 
Wives, I, i, 88, ‘By yea and no I do.’ 

177. vnstable Slightnesse] WHITELAW: That is, feeble vacillation—ScHmmrtT 
(Coriolanus) dissents to this, saying that ‘slightness’ here rather means, ‘A bearing 
which earns for one the adjective slight. Nothingness, an attitude of mind that 
means nothing, and for which nothing has meaning, so that it is unstable, without 
hold on anything.’ [See BapHam, Note on 177, 178.—Eb.] 

177, 178. Purpose... to purpose] WARBURTON: This is so like Polonius’s 
eloquence, and so much unlike the rest of Coriolanus’s language, that I am apt 
to think it spurious.—HEartu (p. 420): ‘Purpose so barr’d’ is only the same thing, 
recapitulated in three words, which had been before expressed more at large in 
ll. 173-175. Wherever this is done, Coriolanus concludes, nothing is done to 
purpose. If Mr Warburton had given himself the leisure to understand this, I 
suppose he would scarce have disgraced this passage, notwithstanding a play on 
the words not unusual to Shakespeare, by comparing it to Polonius his eloquence, 
or rejected it as spurious.—BapHaAm (p. 7): The sense and metre in this passage 
alike indicate that it is corrupt; for to what does senatorial wisdom have recourse 
when its wiser purposes are barred their execution by popular ignorance? not 
slightness—though slightness will certainly be the quality of whatever fabric 
they rear, but sleights, i. e., shifts, tricks, expedients. [Read therefore] ‘To unstable 
sleights; purpose so barred, it follows,’ etc.—VeERiry (Student's Sh.): That is, 
where a deliberate and continuous course is precluded there can be no successful 
policy; all is from hand to mouth and unsatisfactory. There is, I think, a per- 
sonal note in this passage which suggests that it expresses Shakespeare’s own 
indictment of democracy. Want of continuity of policy has ever been the char- 
acteristic weakness of popular government. 

180, 181. That loue ... change on’t] WARBURTON: That is, Who are so 
wedded to accustomed forms in the administration that, in your care for the 


ACT III, SC. i.] CORIOLA NUS 307 


[180, 181. That loue . . . change on’t] 

preservation of those, you overlook the danger the constitution incurs by strictly 
adhering to them. This the speaker, in vindication of his conduct, artfully rep- 
resents to be his case; yet this pertinent observation the Oxford Editor [Hanmer], 
with one happy dash of his pen, in amending ‘doubt’ to do, entirely abolishes — 
Heata (p. 420): That is, You whose love for the fundamental part of the state 
(or, which in the language and sentiments of Coriolanus amounts to the same 
thing, the supreme authority of the Senate) is not overpowered by your appre- 
hensions, that the steps necessary to support it may possibly hazard the change of 
it. That this is the sense of the passage is evident from what immediately 
precedes and follows it (1. 179 and Il. 181-184). All which lines express the very 
same sentiment under various illustrations. Instead of this, Mr Warburton hath 
given us a sense which the words do by no means express, and which counteracts 
the very scope and intention of the speaker; a sense which insinuates that it is 
more prudent to yield in points of form than hazard the safety of the constitution. 
Whereas the advice of Coriolanus is, That it is better to put the whole to the 
hazard at once than to temporize, while the authority of the Senate is thus gradu- 
ally subverted.—JoHNnson: To ‘doubt’ is to fear. The meaning is: ‘You whose 
zeal predominates over your terrors; you who do not fear so much the danger of 
violent measures, as wish the good to which they are necessary, the preserva- 
tion of the original constitution of our government.’—CaPELt (vol. I, pt i, p. 90): 
That is, stand in fear of the consequences attending a change of it, have doubts 
about them. ‘The fundamental part of state’ is, in the speaker’s estimation, 
that government which subsisted before the people had any great share in it, 
and especially before the institution of tribunes; whom he would have them set 
aside and fear no consequences, reverting to a rule by themselves; assigning for 
cause of his advice their present dishonourable dependence, which hinder’d them 
from doing anything rightly, or the state any service, while the tribunes had a 
veto in everything. This short gloss conveys a true idea of the tendency of all 
this long speech, some part of which is wrapped up in a purposed obscurity, the 
speaker being more set on fire; in his next he is more open.—CasgE takes objection 
to the first part of Johnson’s paraphrase on the ground that ‘zeal is not discretion.’ 
He thus interprets: ‘You that will show less fear than prudence (or foresight), 
or that will rather be prudent (or foreseeing) than afraid.’ And continues: ‘“ Vio- 
lent measures,” as advocated in lines 183 ef seg., may affect “the state,” as Corio- 
lanus wishes, by their success, or “the fundamental part of state,”’ as he does 
not wish, by their failure. In the one case, change is the action of the senators 
(and = changing) and “‘on’t” refers to “state” only; in the other, change is the 
result of the failure of that action and “on’t” refers to “the fundamental part 
of state.” The two senses (which, after all, are involved in Johnson’s expression, 
“the danger of violent measures”) could be put in this way: (a) You that fear 
not to change the constitution in order to preserve its foundations; (b) You that 
so love the fundamental part of state that you will risk it to make it sure. The 
fundamental part of the state is affected in Coriolanus’s eyes already, but there is 
room for greater loss, so that this cannot be urged against (b), which has also a cor- 
respondence with the alternatives that follow in ll. 181-183.’—Brrcuine (Falcon 
Sh.): ‘Whose love for what is really and originally the State outweighs any fear 
of the revolution that might follow making the change’; 7. ¢., abolishing the 
tribunate. 


308 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. i. 


To iumpe a Body with a dangerous Phyficke, 183 


183. iumpe] vamp Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Cap. Dyce. imp Sing. i, 
Dyce ii. 


183. To iumpe a Body] STEEVENS: To ‘jump’ anciently signified to jolt, to 
give a rude concussion to anything. ‘To jump a body’ may, therefore, mean 
‘to put it into a violent agitation or commotion.’ Thus Lucretius, HI, 452— 
quassatum est corpus. [This assertion by Steevens, without any example to sup- 
port it, is not borne out by fact. The NV. E. D. does not give any such transitive 
meaning to the verb jump; his quotation from Lucretius is nothing to the purpose; 
quassatum is used tropically for enfeebled, weakened——Ep.] So in Phil. Holland’s 
translation of Pliny’s Natural History, bk xxv, ch. v, p. 219, ‘If we looke for good 
successe in our cure by ministring ellebore, &c., for certainly it putteth the patient 
to a jumpe or great hazard.—Matone: From this passage in Pliny it should 
seem that ‘to jump a body’ meant to risk a body; and such an explication seems 
to me to be supported by the context in the passage before us. So in Macbeth, 
We’d jump the life to come,’ [I, vii, 7]. Again in Ant. & Cleo., ‘—our fortune 
Lies upon this jump,’ III, viii, 6. [Also Cymbeline, ‘or jump the after enquiry 
on your own peril,’ V, iv, 188.]—SmNcER (Notes & Queries, 24 July, 1852, p. 85): 
I read (meo periculo), ‘To impe a body,’ 7. e., restore or increase its power. This 
term from falconry was familiar to the poet.—[In his Shakespeare Vindicated 
(published a year later) Singer repeats this emendation, remarking of the word 
‘jump’ that ‘all attempts to give it a reasonable meaning have failed’ and ‘nothing 
can be made of it.’ In illustration of Shakespeare’s use of the word imp as a 
term of falconry, used metaphorically, Singer quotes, ‘Impe out our country’s 
broken wing,’ Richard II: Il, i, 292, and thus concludes: ‘The word originally 
signified to insert, and, in falconry, to insert a feather into an injured or deficient 
wing of a hawk; but its general meaning is to mend by artificial means; this is the 
sense required here—to patch up.’ Thus, in The Pilgrim, Beaumont and Fletcher, 
I, i, ‘None of your pieced companions, pined gallants That fly to flitters, with 
every flaw of weather; None of your imped bravadoes.’—Singer’s statement, that 
the general meaning of imp ‘is to mend by artificial means’ and hence ‘to patch 
up,’ is only partly correct. The original meaning is to engraft, from the Greek em- 
phenein, to implant; Shakespeare was undoubtedly familiar with the term in fal- 
conry, and certainly understood it sufficiently to preclude his using it in connection 
with a dose of physic. Medicine is not used to patch up a sickened body; but 
may often be used, as Malone says, even at the risk, or hazard, of a cure. The 
Anonymous writer in Blackwood’s Magazine (Sep., 1853, p. 322), who reviews 
Collier’s MS. Corrections, turns aside for a moment to speak with special com- 
mendation of this emendation by Singer; but, misled by him, also asserts that 
‘there is an old word imp, which signifies to patch,’ and, since no sense can be made 
of the words ‘to jump a body,’ imp ‘is the word which ought to stand in the 
text.—Ep.]—Dvyce (ed. i.): Malone’s explanation of this rank corruption has, 
I am sorry to see, misled Dr Richardson to cite the passage in his Dictionary under 
‘Jump.’ Mr Singer would read ‘To imp.’ But I have no doubt that vamp (Pope’s 
emendation) was Shakespeare’s word; ‘vamp,’ in fact, comes nearer to the ductus 
literarum of the old lection than does imp; ‘va’ was more likely to have been mis- 
taken for ‘in’ than ‘i’ for ‘in.’ The proneness of printers to blunder in words 
beginning with v is very remarkable-—Ism. (ed. ii.): In my former edition I read 


ACTMITSCH As] CORIOLANUS 309 


Lite Sa at (RIG NI RS I NEL SEL RP Ve y 6 
[183. To iumpe a Body with a dangerous Physicke] 
with Pope ‘To vamp,’ but I now prefer the conjectural emendation of Mr Singer. 
So Fuller speaks of persons who ‘impe their credit with stollen feathers,’ Worthies, 
vol. ii, p. 567, ed. 1811.—Sraunton: We have not presumed to change the ancient 
text, but have little doubt that ‘To jump’ is a misprint, and the true lection, 
‘To purge a body,’ etc. Thus in Macbeth, V, ii, 27, ‘Meet we the medicine of the 
sickly weal And with him pour we in our country’s purge.’ Again, in the same 
play, V, ili, 51, “—my land, find her disease and purge it to a sound and pristine 
health.’—R. G. Waite: ‘Jump’ was quite surely used of old substantively in the 
sense of risk, venture; but this use of it as a verb, transitively, is so singular in 
itself, and so infelicitous in the present passage, that I more than suspect corrup- 
tion. Yet I cannot accept either Mr Singer’s ‘To imp a body,’ or Mr Dyce’s 
‘To vamp a body,’ or suggest a better myself. [Had White but consulted the 
Variorwm of 1821 he would there have seen that ‘jump’ used as a verb transitively 
was not as singular as he thought; also that vamp is not Dyce’s emendation, but 
due to an earlier editor—Ep.]—Hunpson (ed. i.) quotes the passages given by 
Steevens and Malone in support of the Folio text meaning fo risk or hazard. He 
admits that he was at first inclined to adopt Singer’s emendation, and of that 
editor’s remark that nothing can be made of the original reading Hudson says: 
‘Mr Singer is entitled to more respect than he sometimes shows towards others 
who are not less worthy of it than himself. As explained and confirmed by our 
quotations, to jump a body is just the very thing that would needs be done by 
using dangerous physic; nor is anything more natural or more common than to 
use such physic in cases where the patient is “‘sure of death without it.” In other 
words, the sense of risk agrees much better with the context here than that 
of mend.’—C. & M. CowbdEN Ciarke (Shakespeare): The original word ‘jump’ 
is used elsewhere by Shakespeare to express the precise meaning demanded here— 
‘risk,’ ‘hazard,’ ‘jeopardise.’ [The passages from Macbeth, Ant. & Cleo., Cymbeline, 
and Holland’s Pliny are given.] The argument throughout the passage, as well 
as the sentence in immediate juxtaposition, require that the original word, sig- 
nifying ‘risk,’ should be retained, and not altered to one that means ‘patch up by 
attempted cure. —BAtLey (i, 164): If we discard ‘jump’ we want a word in its 
place which will help to express this, and not differ from it too much in point of 
sound. Of all the terms I can think of, tempt is the one that accomplishes the 
desired end the best: ‘To tempt a body,’ i. ¢., to try a body, to make an experi- 
ment uponit. So Henry VIII: I, ii, we have ‘I am much too venturous In tempt 
of your patience,’ [l. 55].—Lro (Coriolanus): Neither ‘vamp’ nor ‘imp’ express 
what Coriolanus means; he will treat the body with a dangerous physic, and hopes 
to ‘cure,’ not to ‘vamp’ it, and since the treatment is dangerous, he jumps, i. e., 
he risks the body.—W. A. Wricut: That is, to run the risk of applying a danger- 
ous remedy to a body. There is no actually parallel instance in Shakespeare of 
‘jump’ in this sense, but the following may be compared: Macbeth, I, vii, 7, and 
Cymbeline, V, iv, 188. The difference is, of course, that in these cases the object 
of the verb is not that which is put in peril. [Wright quotes the passage from 
Holland’s Pliny as ‘very much to the purpose, but credits it to Malone; as regards 
Pope’s and Singer’s changes Wright says: ‘The figure requires some word which 
expresses the application to a sick body of some desperate remedy, which will 
either kill or cure, and not one which denotes the vamping or patching it like an 
old boot, or the imping or repairing it like the broken wing of a hawk.’]—KINNEAR 


310 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. i: 


That’s fure of death without it : at once plucke out 
The Multitudinous Tongue, let them not licke 185 
184. it] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. 


(p. 315) accepts Staunton’s emendation, purge, characterising the word ‘iumpe’ as 
‘an evident misprint.’ ‘Shakespeare,’ he adds, ‘never employs ‘“‘jump” in a sense 
applicable here; nor has any appropriate use of the word been cited from other 
writers. Malone gave it the meaning here éo risk, but that is not the sense the 
passage requires. In Hamlet, IV, iii, 10, ‘Diseases desperate grown By desperate 
appliances are relieved, Or not at all.” The risk is expressed in “a dangerous 
physic”—the action of the desperate appliance is ‘“‘to purge (not to risk) a body 
that’s sure of death without it.”’—E. K. CoamBers (Warwick Sh.): That is, 
‘apply a violent stimulus that may galvanize it back into life.’ [See note by 
STEEVENS ante, and comment thereon.—Ep.]—VeErity (Student's Sh.) quotes 
in illustration the passage from Hamlet, IV, iii, 9-11, given by Kinnear, and, from 
the notes on the same, a passage from Lyly’s Euphues: ‘But I feare me wher so 
straunge a sicknesse is to be recured of so vnskilfull a Phisition, that either thou 
wilt be too bold to practise, or my body too weake to purge. But seeing a desper- 
ate disease is to be committed to a desperate Doctor, I will follow thy counsel, 
and become thy cure,’—ed. Arber, p. 67. ‘The expression,’ says Verity, ‘was 
probably proverbial. Cunliffe quotes a similar sentiment in Seneca’s Agamemnon, 
153-155. [The phrase ‘Desperate ills require desperate remedies’ is given in 
Bohn’s Polyglot of Foreign Proverbs, p. 7, as from the French: Aux grands maux 
les grands remédes. The passage in Seneca’s Agamemnon is thus translated by 
Studley, 1581: ‘There is no man who at the first, extremity will trye’ (Seneca: 
His Tenne Tragedies, p. 144). This does not, however, seem at all a parallelism.] 
Verity thus concludes: ‘The changes made by the old editors—vamp and imp— 
may seem strange in the light of what we know as to this Elizabethan use of 
jump; but we must remember that their sources of information on such points of 
language were infinitesimal compared with those at our disposal. And ignorance 
is the parent of most emendations; more especially ignorance of an author’s own 
language and of contemporary usage and idiom.’—DEIGHTON: That is, ready to 
run a risk by administering a dangerous medicine, etc. This seems to be the only 
meaning if ‘jump’ is genuine, and that word is in a measure supported by a pas- 
sage which Steevens quotes from Holland’s Pliny. [The quotation here given.] 
Though the word imp [Singer’s conjecture] is used figuratively in Richard IT: 
II, i, 292, its connection with a desperate remedy would be a very strange one. 
Staunton’s conjecture had occurred to myself, but it is difficult to believe that 
any transcriber or compositor could be wrong-headed enough to substitute so 
uncommon and difficult a word as ‘jump’ for one so plain and common as purge.— 
Bucknitt (Medical Knowledge, etc., p. 208): The violent Tribune’s retort to 
Menenius’ exhortation to temperance, when he wishes to execute mob-law upon 
the hero, conveys the same medical maxim as that referred to in Much Ado, ‘For 
to strange sores strangely they strain the cure,’ [IV, i, 254]. Brutus puts the same 
maxim in an inverted form, both the one and the other, however, being evidently 
founded upon the maxim of Hippocrates, that extreme diseases need extreme reme- 
dies, [Sixth Aphorism, sec. 2. See Much Adoe About Nothing, this ed., p. 219, for 
discussion of this doctrine. —Ep.] 

185. The Multitudinous Tongue] Gorpon: Coriolanus’s mind is obsessed by 


ACTAIT NSCs] CORIOLANUS 21t 


The {weet which is their poyfon. Your difhonor 186 
Mangles true iudgement, and bereaues the State 
Of that Integrity which fhould becom’t : 
Not hauing the power to do the good it would 
For th’ill which doth controul’t. . 190 
Bru. Has faid enough. 
Sicin. Ha’s {poken like a Traitor,and fhall anfwer 
As Traitors do. 
Corto. Thou wretch, defpight ore-whelme thee : 


What fhould the people do with thefe bald Tribunes ? 195 
188. becom’t] become it Rowe,+, Rowe et cet. 

Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 191, 192. Has...Ha’s)] H’as...H’as 

Kot, Coll. Del. Hal. Ktly, Craig. Rowe,+, Sta. Del. ii. Has...Has 


190. controul’t} Ff, Dyce, Wh. Dyce, Wh. Cam.+, Huds. ii, Words. 
Cam.+, Words. Neils. control it Neils. He has...He has Cap. et cet. 


this image. He sees the people always as a monster of multitude, with its many 
heads, its ‘bosom multiplied,’ and its ‘multitudinous tongue.’ 

186. The sweet which is their poyson] STEEVENS: So in Meas. for Meas., 
‘Like rats that ravin up their proper bane,’ [I, ii, 133]. 

187. Mangles true iudgement] JoHNson: ‘Judgment’ is the faculty by which 
right is distinguished from wrong. 

188. Integrity ... becom’t] JoHNson: ‘Integrity’ is in this place soundness, 
uniformity, consistency, in the same sense as Dr Warburton often uses it when 
he mentions the integrity of a metaphor. To ‘become’ is to suit, to befit. 

190. For th’ill] That is, because of, on account of. For other examples see 
ABBOTT, § 150. 

191, 192. Has... Ha’s] Scumimt: This otherwise common omission of the 
pronoun has here something peculiarly characteristic of the speakers. For other 
examples of this omission of the nominative with ‘has,’ ‘is,’ etc., see ABBOTT, § 400. 

194. despight] WALKER (C7rit., i, 194) suggests that this ancient spelling should 
be here retained, as the words despite and despight ‘assumed different meanings, 
despight being used for contempt, despectus.’ [Murray (NV. E. D.) does not, how- 
ever, make this distinction, remarking that the 16% century spelling despight 
was due to confusion with the words sight, right, etc., and recording despite or 
despight, in the sense of contempt, scorn, as obsolete or archaic, except in the phrases 
in despite of, in despite-—ED.] 

195. these bald Tribunes] W. A. Wricut: ‘Bald’ is evidently used in the same 
contemptuous sense as in Cotgrave: ‘Chauve d’esprit. Bauld-spirited: that hath 
as little wit in, as he hath haire on his head.—KunnEar (p. 317): Read bold 
for ‘bald,’ an easy misprint. The sense not only of this passage, but of a great 
portion of the play, requires the correction; for the boldness of the Tribunes causes 
the banishment of Marcius and the subsequent events. But for the boldness of 
the Tribunes this play would not have been written. Compare lines 31, 112, 
172, 173 ante. [In the Text. Notes of the Cambridge ed. ii. the reading bold for 
‘bald’ is assigned to ‘Chalmers.’ I regret that a search through the voluminous 
works of George Chalmers, 1797 to 1815, and the reissue of Steevens’s ed. 1793 


312 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT III, SC. i. 


On whom depending, their obedience failes 196 
To’th’greater Bench, in a Rebellion : 

When what’s not meet, but what muft be, was Law, 

Then were they chofen : in a better houre, 

Let what is meet, be faide it muft be meet, 200 


And throw their power i’th’dutft. 


Manifeft Treafon. 
This a Confull? No. 


Bru. 
Sicin. 


Enter an Atdile. 204 


197. Bench, in...] bench. In... Pope,+, 
Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Dyce, Hal. Ktly, 
Wh. Huds. 

200. be faide] be said, Rowe,+, Cap. 
Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Var. ’21, Craig. 


law Warb. 

201. their] the Han. 

204. Enter an Aédile] After foe, 1. 
205 Dyce ii, Words. Huds. ii, Neils. 
Atdiles enter Theob. Warb. Johns. Om. 
Pope, Han. Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. 


it...mect] that..law Han. ib... Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt. 

under the editorship of Alexander Chalmers, has failed to verify this. All other 
readings proposed by Kinnear are recorded in this second Cambride ed.; it would 
seem, therefore, that, in this case, the Editors regarded the reading by Chalmers 
as anticipating that by Kinnear.—Ep.]—Verity (Student’s Sh.): That is, witless. 
The literal meaning bare leads easily to the figurative idea destitute of force, meagre, 
paliry, and so destitute of sense. Similarly, Shakespeare often has barren =barren 
of wits, empty-headed, stupid; cf. Richard IT: I, iii, 168, ‘dull, unfeeling, barren 
ignorance.’ Or does ‘bald’ imply ‘in their dotage’?—Gorpon: The jest of youth 
at middle age. It is difficult to be at once bald and majestic, as Julius Cesar found. 
Ordinarily Shakespeare takes the other side, and suggests, according to the prov- 
erb, that bushy headed people have more hair than wits. This is a touch of 
nature. He was prematurely bald himself.—Casr (Arden Sh.): With more respect 
Cominius calls Sicinius ‘Ag’d sir’ in 1. 212 below, but possibly ‘bald’ is more than 
a mere taunt of youth against age on the part of Coriolanus, and figuratively im- 
plies contemptible or bald-witted. The figurative use of ‘bald’ was as common then 
as now: Comedy of Errors, II, ii, 110, ‘I knew ’twould be a bald conclusion’; z 
Henry IV: JI, iii, 65, ‘This bald unjointed chat of his.’ References to the use of 
barren by Shakespeare and others (as in Mid. N. Dream, III, ii, 13, ‘The shallowest 
thick-skin of that barren sort’) do not seem much to the point, as there is no diffi- 
culty in the application of an adjective meaning unproductive or sterile, and very 
little metaphor. 

198. what’s not meet] W. A. WricuT: We should have expected ‘not what’s 
meet,’ but the sense is clear without change: ‘when that which is not suitable, but 
which is unavoidable, was law.’ 

200. Let what ... be meet] MAtone: Let it be said by you that what is meet 
to be done, must be meet, i. e., shall be done, and put an end at once to the tribuni- 
tion power, which was established, when irresistible violence, not a regard to 
propriety, directed the legislature. [For other examples of this confusion of two 
constructions see ABBOTT, § 411.] 

204. an Atdile] ‘The two Plebeian Addiles were appointed B. C. 494 at the same 


ACT Ill, SC. i.] 


CORIOLANUS 313 


Bru. The Ediles hoe : Let him be apprehended : 205 


Sicin. 


Go call the people, in whofe name my Selfe 


Attach thee as a Traitorous Innouator : 


A Foe to’th’publike Weale. 

And follow to thine anfwer. 
Corio. Hence old Goat. 
All. Wee’l Surety him. 
Com. Ag’d fir, hands off. 


205. [Exit Brutus. Var. ’73. 

206. people,] people: [Exit Brutus] 
Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Knt, Dyce i, Sta. Hal. Wh. 
people; [Exit AEdile. Coll. et cet. 

my Selfe] I myself Ktly. 


Obey I charge thee, 


210 


212 


211. All.] Sen. & Pat. Mal. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Knt, Dyce, Sta. Hal. Wh. 
Huds. ii. Senators &c. Cam.+, Huds. 
i, Craig, Neils. 

212. Ag’d] Aged Rowe, Varr. Ran. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. 


209. [Laying hold on Coriolanus. Del. Dyce, Ktly, Hal. Hold, aged 
Rowe,+. Han. My aged Cap. 


time with the Tribuneship of the Plebs, as servants of the Tribunes, and at first 
probably nominated by them till 471, when, like them and under their presidency, 
they began to be elected by the whole body of the Plebs. They took their name 
from the temple (@des) of the plebeian goddess Ceres, in which their official archives 
were kept. Besides the custody of the plebi-scita, and afterwards of the senatus- 
consulta, it was their duty to make arrests at the bidding of the Tribunes; to carry 
out the death-sentences which they passed, by hurling the criminal down from the 
Tarpeian rock; to look after the importation of corn; to watch the traffic in the 
markets; and to organise and superintend the Plebeian and Roman Games. Like 
the Tribunes, they could only be chosen from the body of the Plebs, and wore no 
badge of office, not so much as the toga pretexta, even after they became an au- 
thority independent of the Tribunes.’—Dictionary of Classical Antiquities, SEYFFERT 
(ed. Nettleship and Sandys). 

207. Attach... Innouator] W. A. Wricut: That is, arrest. Compare 2 
Henry IV: IV, ii, 109, ‘Of capital treason I attach you both.’ In Shakespeare 
‘innovation’ is not only change, but change for the worse. 

210. old Goat] Casr (Arden Sh.): Coriolanus, resenting the touch of Sicinius, 
probably means to imply that he smells offensively. So just below he calls him 
‘rotten thing.’ [Is it not more likely that the long gray beard of Sicinius suggests 
a characteristic feature of the goat? Menenius, II, i, 80, refers derisively to the 
wagging of the beards of the two Tribunes.—Eb.] 

211, 212. Wee’l Surety him. Ag’d sir, hands off] Agsort (§ 484): Monosyllables 
containing diphthongs and long vowels, since they naturally allow the voice to 
rest upon them, are often so emphasized as to dispense with an unaccented syl- 
lable. [In the present instance Abbott suggests that the emphasis falls on ‘We,’ 
and ‘Ag’d’ is to be pronounced asa dissyllable, A ged, thus the metre is made regular; 
but are not these two short lines by their very irregularity highly expressive of the 
vehemence and haste of the dialogue? See Text. Notes, 1. 212, for Hanmer’s and 
Capell’s attempts to regulate the metre here. Dyce (ed. ii.) queries as to whether 
‘surety’ is a trisyllable for the same purpose.—Eb.] 


314 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. i. 
Corio. Hence rotten thing, or I fhall fhake thy bones 213 
Out of thy Garments. 
Sicin, Helpe ye Citizens. 215 


Enter a rabble of Plebeians with the #idiles. 


Mene. On both fides more refpect. 

Sicin. Heere’s hee, that would take from you all your 
power. 

Bru. Seize him #diles.| 220 


All. Downe with him, downe with him. 
2Sen. Weapons, weapons, weapons : 
They all bufile about Coriolanus. 
Tribunes, Patricians, Citizens : what ho : 
Sicinius, Brutus, Coriolanus, Citizens. 225 
215. Helpe ye Citizens.] F.. Helpe Citizens. Sing. ii, Ktly. Enter Brutus, 


me Citizens. F;. Help me, Citizens. Fy, the Aidiles, and a rabble of Citizens. 
Rowe,+, Cap. Varr. Ran. Help ye, Wh. Enter...Citizens...@diles. Cam. 


Citizens. Schmidt. Help, ye Citizens. 
Mal. et cet. 

216. SCENE 1. Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. 

Enter...A¢diles.] Re-enter Bru- 
tus, with AXdiles, and a whole rabble 
of Citizens. Cap. Re-enter Brutus 
with...4tdiles Varr. Ran. Re-enter 
Brutus, with the Atdile, and a rabble 
of Citizens. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
Knt, Dyce, Sta. Hal. Re-enter the 
fEdile, with others, and a Rabble of 
Citizens. Coll. Del. Huds. i, Craig. 
Re-enter the Atdiles, and a rabble of 


+, Dyce ii, Words. Huds. ii, Neils. 

217-220. Lines end: would...Acdiles. 
Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Coll. Ktly, Wh. Huds. i. 

221. All.] Cit. Malone et seq. 

{Several speak. Mal. Steev. 

Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Ktly, Wh. 

222. 2 Sen.] Sen. Pat., &c. Dyce ni, 
Words. Huds. ii. Senators &c. 
Cam.+, Craig. 

223. They...Coriolanus.] 
Coriolanus, crying. Cam.+. 

224. Tribunes...| 1. S. Tribunes... 
Cap. 


Aheyen 


213, 214. Hence rotten thing, etc.] SterveNs: So in King John, ‘Here’s a stay 
That shakes the rotten carcase of old death Out of his rags!’ [II, i, 55-57]. 

222-226. 2 Sen. Weapons... All. Peace... peace] CAMBRIDGE Epp. (Note 
VII.): All editors follow the Folios in assigning the words ‘Weapons, weapons, 
weapons!’ to the Second Senator, and all, except Capell, continue the words ‘Trib- 
unes . . . citizens!’ to the same speaker. Capell assigned them to the First 
Senator. But surely the words are intended to express the tumultuous cries of the 
partisans on both sides, who are bustling about Coriolanus. The following words, 
‘Peace, peace, peace,’ . . . attributed to Al) in the Folios, are spoken by some of 
the elder Senators endeavoring to calm the tumult. Compare also Act V, sc. vi, 
144-145. [In order to indicate the tumultuous cries of the crowd each of the words 
between commas and colons in lines 224, 225 are printed by the Cam. Edd. within 
quotation marks.—Ep.] 

224. Tribunes, Patricians, etc.] Cape. (vol. I, pt i, p. 90): The parties upon 
this scene, besides those who have particular names, are a large body of the 
Senate, consisting of old and young members, some Patricians, and a rabble of 
Citizens; of these, the Patricians and the younger senators side with Coriolanus, 


ACT 111, sc. i.] CORIOLANUS 215 


All. Peace, peace, peace, ftay, hold, peace. 226 
Mene. What is about to be? I am out of Breath, 

Confufions neere,I cannot {peake. You, Tribunes 

To’th’people : Coriolanus, patience : Speak good Sicinius. 229 


226. All.] Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. Varr. 220, 230. Lines end: patience...peace 
Ran. Om. Cam.+, Dyce ii, Words. Cap. et seq. 

Huds. ii, Craig. Cit. Mal. et cet. 229. To’th’people...Sicinius]  Corio- 

228. Confufions neere] Confufions lanus; patience; speak, Sicinius Pope,+- 
neve F,. Confujfion’s near F3F, et seq. (—Var. ’73). 

cannot speake. You...| cannot. To’th’| To’th Ff, Rowe,+, 

Speak, you... Mason. cannot—speak Wh.i. Speak to the Tyrwhitt, Dyce ii, 

you,... Ran. Words. Huds. ii, Beeching. To the 
Cap. et cet. 


while the old ones endeavor to moderate; the sentiments of the latter are given to 
1.S., 7. é., first Senators; of the former, to 2.5. Agreeable to this idea, upon the 
Citizens bawling out ‘Down with him,’ the Poet makes his young Senators call for 
‘weapons,’ but could not possibly make the same persons, and in the same breath, 
utter things so discordant as this cal] and the exclamations that follow. Here 
was, therefore, an error; and those exclamations are now restored to their proper 
owners [see Text. Notes], the old and grave Senators; whose assistants in pacifying 
are Menenius and Cominius. 

228, 229. Confusions neere...Coriolanus, patience] Tyrwuitt: I would 
read, ‘Speak to the people.—Coriolanus, patience:—’—Mason (Comments, etc., 
p- 254): Tyrwhitt proposes an amendment to this passage, but nothing is neces- 
sary except to point it properly: 

‘Confusion’s near,—I cannot. Speak you, tribunes, 
To the people.’ 
He desires the tribunes to speak to the people because he was not able; and at the 
end of the speech repeats the same request to Sicinius in particular—MAtLone: 
I see no need of any alteration. [RANN is Mason’s sole follower in this arrange- 
ment.—Ep.]—Dettus: Editors connect ‘tribunes to the people,’ although ‘to 
the people’ would be better connected with ‘Speak’ (1. 229), separated therefrom 
by the parenthesis ‘Coriolanus, patience.’ The Tribunes should ask silence of the 
people, since Menenius knows not how to obtain a hearing for himself, as in an 
earlier case (cf. I, i.)—VeERity (Student’s Sh.): ‘You,’ i. e., do you speak (Menenius 
himself being unable). Some would read ‘You, tribunes, Speak to the people!’ 
But abruptness seems more suitable to the context.—PERRING (p. 299): Menenius, 
who all along endeavors to maintain amicable relations with the commons, and 
to act as a sort of peacemaker between the two rival factions, would surely not, 
when the populace were all afire, deliberately blow the flames and insence the 
Tribunes by crying out insultingly ‘You, tribunes to the people!’ Rather does 
he do his utmost to check the conflagration and prevent the flames from spreading, 
appealing to each one of the opposing parties in turn; admonishing first the Trib- 
unes, then Coriolanus; exhorting them to speak to, to restrain, pacify the people; 
exhorting him to have patience. Such being the case, the passage should be 
stopped thus: ‘Confusion’s near; I cannot speak. You, tribunes, 
To the people. Coriolanus, patience! 
Speak, good Sicinius.’ 


316 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 111, SC. i. 


Scicit. Heare me, People peace. 230 
All. Let’s here our Tribune : peace, fpeake, fpeake, 
fpeake. 


Scici. You are at point to lofe your Liberties : 
Martius would haue all from you; Martius, 


Whom late you haue nam’d for Confull. 235 
Mene. Fie, fie, fie, this is the way to kindle, not to 
quench. 


Sena. To vnbuild the Citie,and to lay all flat. 

Scicit. What is the Citie,but the People? 

All. True,the People are the Citie. 240 

Brut. By the confent of all, we were eftablifh’d the 
Peoples Magif{trates. 

All. You fo remaine. 


Mene. And fo are like to doe. 244 

231. All.] Cit. Cap. et seq. Pope,+, Var. ’78, 785. Ran. you chose 
here] heare Ff. Cap. you've named Words. 

231, 232. peace, fpeake, fpeake, 238. Sena.] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Wh. 


Jpeake.| peace hol speak, speak, speak. Huds. ie 9. Caps, ts Sen. eVaran ns 
Han. Peace. Speak, speak, speak. et cet. 


Johns. et seq. 239, 240. What...Citie] Lines end: 
232. [peake.] speak, speak. Ktly. True...Citie Cap. et seq. 
235, 236. Lines end: Fie, fie, fie... 240. All.] Cit. Cap. et seq. 

quench Pope et seq. 241-243. Two lines, verse, ending: 
235. you haue nam’d) you nam’d eftablifh’d...remaine Pope et seq. 


To have upbraided the popular magistrates at such a critical juncture would have 
been as impolitic as it would have been alien to the part which Menenius assumed. 
But perhaps I shall be told that the interpretation which I have given is the inter- 
pretation contemplated, stops notwithstanding. 

233. at point to lose] W. A. Wricut: That is, on the point of losing. See 
V, iv, 67, and Cymbeline, III, i, 30, ‘The famed Cassibelan, who was once at 
point . . . to master Cesar’s sword.’ 

234. Martius ... Martius] Apsorr (§§ 475, 476): A word repeated twice in a 
verse often receives two accents the first time, and one accent the second, when it 
is less emphatic the second time than the first. Or the word may occupy the 
whole of a foot the first time, and only part of a foot the second. On the other 
hand, when the word increases in emphasis, the converse takes place. Even at 
the end of the verse Marcius has but one accent as a rule. But here it is unusually 
emphasized. 

239. What is the Citie, but the People?] Rusuron (Sh’s Legal Maxims, ed. 
ii, p. 53): In this passage Shakespeare probably refers to the maxim: Civitas et 
urbs in hoc differunt, quod incol dicuntur civitas, urbs vero complectitur edificia 
(Mirror, cap. 2, sect. 18, Brit. fol. 87, Co. Litt. 109 b). A city and a town differ in 
this, that the inhabitants are called the city, but the town comprises the buildings. 

244. And so are like to doe] Leo (Coriolanus, p. 123): Menenius speaks this to 
himself. Since there is the question who will prevail, Coriolanus or the Tribunes, 


ACTIIT) SCL] CORIOLANUS 317 


Com. That is the way to lay the Citie flat, 245 
To bring the Roofe to the Foundation, 
And burie all, which yet diftinétly raunges 
In heapes, and piles of Ruine. 

Scict. This deferues Death. 249 


245. Com.] Cor. Pope,+, Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Dyce, Hal. Words. 
Huds. ii. 


Menenius fears the latter: ‘I fear you will remain in your place, and Coriolanus 
will lose his new-won consulship.’ [Leo is perhaps right; but at the same time it 
is to be remembered that Menenius is acting the part of conciliator, and by this. 
remark he means to assure the Tribunes that there is no danger of their losing 
their offices under the Consulship of Coriolanus.—Ep.] 

245. Com. That is the way, etc.] Knicur: We give this speech, as in the orig- 
inal, to the calm and reverend Cominius. Coriolanus is standing apart, in proud 
and sullen rage; and yet the modern editors put these four lines in his mouth, as 
if it was any part of his character to argue with the people about the prudence of 
their conduct. The editors continue this change in the persons to whom the: 
speeches are assigned, without the slightest regard, as it appears to us, to the 
exquisite characterisation of the poet. Amidst all this tumult the first words. 
which Coriolanus utters, according to the original copy, are, ‘No, I’ll die here.’ 
He again continues silent; but the modern editors must have him talking; and so: 
they put in his mouth the calculating sentence, ‘We have as many friends as 
enemies,’ and the equally characteristic talking of Menenius, ‘I would they were 
barbarians.’ We have left all these passages precisely as they are in the original — 
Staunton: It is usual, though in opposition to the old copies, to assign this speech 
to Coriolanus on account of what Sicinius says immediately after it, ‘This de- 
serves death.’ But the speech is not at all characteristic of Coriolanus; and the 
observation of the Tribune refers to what he had previously spoken, ‘Marcius 
would have all from you.’ [The Cowpren Crarxes, following the Folio reading, 
give substantially the same reason as has Staunton for retaining this speech as. 
in the original text.—Dvce (ed. ii.), after quoting Staunton’s note, adds: ‘Staunton 
is, in my opinion, mistaken.’—Ep.]—SINGcER (ed. ii.): In the old copies this 
speech is given to Cominius, but it evidently belongs to Coriolanus, as the rejoinder 
of the Tribunes as well as the tenor of speech itself shows.—Rev. JoHN HUNTER: 
The speech is not in keeping with the proud sullenness of Coriolanus; and the fol- 
lowing words of Sicinius refer to his previous accusation. [Thus also RoLFE.—Ep.] 

247. which yet distinctly raunges] W. A. Wricut: That is, which has as yet 
a clearly recognised position, occupies a prominent rank. 

247. distinctly] That is, separately. ABBOTT compares: ‘—on the topmast, 
The yards and bowsprit, would I flame distinctly, Then meet and join,’ Tempest, 
I, ii, 199. Compare also, ‘The Centurions and their charges distinctly billetted 
already in th’ entertainment,’ IV, iii, 40, post.—Ep. 

249. This deserues Death] Scummt (Coriolanus): This refers to the speech 
of Coriolanus, since Sicinius has not heard the whispered colloquy of the other.— 
Rore: This does not necessarily refer to what has just been said by Cominius, 
though it has been made an argument for transferring that speech to Coriolanus. 
Even if it were a comment on the preceding speech, it would not justify our taking 


318 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. i. 


Brut. Or let vs ftand to our Authoritie, 250 
Or let vs lofe it : we doe here pronounce, 
Vpon the part o’th’People, in whofe power 
We were elected theirs, Martius is worthy 
Of prefent Death. 

Scict. Therefore lay hold of him : 255 
Beare him toth’ Rock Tarpeian, and from thence 
Into deftruction caft him. 

Brut. A&diles feize him. 

All Ple. Yeeld Martius, yeeld. 

Mene. Weare me one word, ’befeech you Tribunes, 260 
heare me but a word. 

&idiles. Peace, peace. 

Mene. Be that you feeme,truly your Countries friend, 
And temp’rately proceed to what you would 


Thus violently redreffe. 265 
Brut. Sir, thofe cold wayes, 

That feeme like prudent helpes, are very poyfonous, 267 
252. oth’) Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. you...word Han. Cap. 

o’the Cap. et cet. 260. me] me, my friends Words. 
255. of him] on him Rowe,+. Tribunes,| Ye Tribunes Han. 
256. toth’] Fi, Rowe,+, Wh. Huds. Good Tribunes Cap. 

to the Cap. et cet. 263. Mene.] Men. [to Brutus] 
259. All Ple.] Cit. Cap. et seq. Cam.-+, Neils. 
259-261. As two lines, ending: one friend] friends Rowe,+, Dyce, 

word...a word Johns. et seq. Wh. i, Words. Huds. ii, Craig. 
260-269. Om. Bell. 267. poyfonous] poisons Johns. conj. 
260-261. As two lines, verse, ending: Ran. 


that away from Cominius——E. K. Caamprers (Warwick Sh.): Not Cominius’s 
remonstrance, but Coriolanus’s attack on the people’s liberties. The Tribunes 
disregard Cominius and the other Senators, and address the gathering throng. It 
is unnecessary to give the preceding speech to Coriolanus, who is quite beyond 
reasoning with the Tribunes. 

256. Beare him toth’ Rock Tarpeian] ‘Whereupon Sicinius, the cruellest and 
stoutest of the Tribunes, after he had whispered a little with his companions, did 
openly pronounce, in the face of all the people, Martius as condemned by the 
Tribunes to die. Then presently he commanded the A%diles to apprehend him, 
and carry him straight to the rock Tarpeian, and to cast him headlong down the 
same.’—Plutarch, Coriolanus.—See also Note on Aidiles, |. 205. 

259. Yeeld Martius, yeeld] For this repetition compare |. 234 and note thereon. 

260, 261. one word ...a word] For other examples wherein ‘a’ is used for 
‘one’ see ABBOTT, § 81. 

267. prudent helpes . . . poysonous] JOHNSON’s proposed change of poisons for 
‘poisonous’ seems not only unnecessary, but destroys the antithesis to the adjective 
‘prudent.’ The argument of Brutus is a repetition of the axiom, Violent diseases 


ACT III, sc. i.] 


Where the Difeafe is violent. 
And beare him to the Rock. 
Corio. No, Ile die here : 


CORIOLANUS 319 


Lay hands vpon him, 268 
Corio. drawes his Sword. 


270 


There’s fome among you haue beheld me fighting, 
Come trie vpon your felues, what you haue feene me. 


Mene. 
a while. 
Brut. 
Mene. 
him young and old. 
All. 


Lay hands vpon him. 
Helpe Martius, helpe : you that be noble,helpe 


Downe with that Sword, Tribunes withdraw 


275 


Downe with him,downe with him. Exeunt. 


In this Mutinie, the Tribunes, the A®diles, and the 


People are beat in. 

Mene. 
All will be naught elfe. 

2.Sena. Get you gone. 


280 


Goe, get you to our Houfe : be gone, away, 


Com. Stand faft, we haue as many friends as enemies. 284 


268. vpon] on Pope,+. 

269. Corio....Sword.] Ff, 
Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
his sword. Han. et cet. 

272. me.) me do Ktly. 

273-278. Om. Bell. 

273. Mene.] Com. Globe. 

275, 276. Two lines, verse, ending: 
helpe:...old. Han. Cap. et seq. 

276. Helpe Martius,] Help, help 
Martius Han. Cap. Steev. Sing. 
Walker (Crit., ii, 144), Dyce ii, Words. 


Rowe, 
Drawing 


Huds. ii. Help, Marcius! Varr. Ran. 
Varr. Hal. Help Marcius! Help, help, 
Ktly. 


278. All.] Cit. Cap. et seq. 
Exeunt.] Om. Han. Cap. et seq. 


279. In this...and the...| A great 
Mutiny: Tribunes, Addiles, and... Cap. 

280. are beat] are all beat Var. ’o3, 
13,21, Sing. Hal. Ktly. are beat out 
Sta. 

281. SCENE I. Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. 

our] your Rowe et seq. 

282-284. As two lines, ending: fa/t... 
enemies Cap. et seq. 

283, 284. 2. Sena....Com.] Com....2. 
SsCap; 

283. gone.| gone, away! Han. 

284. Com.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Knt, Coll. Del. Cam.+, Jos. 
Hunter, Beeching, Neils. 2 S. Cap. 
Cor. Warb. et cet. 


require violent remedies; temperate proceedings in such cases, while they may seem 
wise, are actually dangerous.—Eb. 

276. Helpe Martius, helpe] This punctuation of the Folio should here, I think, 
be retained; this is not an appeal to Martius for help, but a call to the nobility 
to aid Martius. The words which follow, ‘helpe him,’ seem to corroborate this. 
See Text. Notes.—Ep. 

281. our House] WALKER (C7it., ii, ch. xlvi, p. 7) gives numerous examples 
from the Folio wherein your is misprinted for our; here the reverse has taken place.— 
Scumint, in defense of the Folio reading, remarks that: It is not unthinkable that 
Shakespeare had before him the idea of Menenius and Coriolanus as house com- 
panions and next door neighbors.—Ep. 

284. Com. Stand fast, etc.] WARBuRTON: This speech certainly should be 


320 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. i. 


Mene. Shall it be put to that? 285 
Sena. The Gods forbid : 

I prythee noble friend, home to thy Houfe, 

Leaue vs to cure this Caufe. 
Mene. For ’tis a Sore vpon vs, 

You cannot Tent your felfe : be gone, befeech you. 290 
Corio. Come Sir, along with vs. 
Mene. I would they were Barbarians,as they are, 


Though in Rome litter’d : not Romans, as they are not, 293 
ie 
288. Caufe] case Han. 292. Mene.}] Cor. Tyrwhitt conj.’ 
289. vpon vs] Om. Pope,+ (—Var. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. 
773), Cap. Words. upon you Ktly conj. Sing. Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), Dyce, Sta. 
291-310. Om. Bell. Hal. Wh. Cam.+, Del. ii, Words. 
291. Corio.] Com. Ff et seq. Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. Beeching. 


given to Coriolanus; for all his friends persuade him to retire. So, Cominius 
presently after, ‘Come, sir, along with us.’—E. K. CuampBers (Warwick Sh.): 
Warburton rightly, I think, transferred this speech to Coriolanus. In all the rest 
of this dialogue after the fight, Cominius does his best to get Coriolanus home. 

288, 289. Leaue vs ... vpon vs] ABBottT (§ 500): Apparent Alexandrines are 
often couplets of two verses of three accents each. They are often thus printed 
as two separate short verses in the Folio. 

292-295. Mene. I would they were... Be gone] Tyrwuitt: The beginning 
of this speech (attributed in the Folio to Menenius) I am persuaded should be 
given to Coriolanus. The latter part only belongs to Menenius, ‘Begone, put not 
your worthy rage,’ etc. [In the Variorwm of 1773 this note is misplaced; it there 
follows Warburton’s note on |. 284, to which it manifestly cannot refer—Ep.]— 
M. Mason (Comments, etc., p. 255): The word ‘Begone’ certainly belongs to 
Menenius, who was very anxious to get Coriolanus away. In 1. 281 he says, 
‘—be gone, away.’ And in l. 306, ‘Pray you be gone.’ [Seealso 1. 290, ‘be gone, 
*beseech you.’—Ep.]—Bapuam (Text of Sh.; Cambridge Essays, p. 277): In Corio- 
Janus, Act III, the second (sic) scene is one of the most corrupt in Shakespeare, 
where, by the consent of modern editors, Menenius, the peacemaker, is made to 
call his countrymen barbarians, and after abusing them, to tell Coriolanus, who 
has been perfectly silent, ‘not to put his worthy rage into his tongue,’ to offer to 
fight the Tribunes (which clearly belongs, as well as what follows, to Cominius), 
and, in pleading for his friend, to admit that he is a mortified limb indeed, but one 
that should be left on the body out of regard for its previous service—ScamMmT 
(Coriolanus): The giving of |. 291 to Coriolanus as in the Folio is plainly an error; 
but that is not sufficient reason for modern editors to give ll. 292-294 to Coriolanus 
instead of Menenius as in the Folio. There the speech of Menenius continues down 
to ‘another,’ l. 296, but evidently with the words ‘ Begone,’ etc., another interlocutor 
is introduced, who can be no other than Cominius. The admonition thus appro- 
priately applies to Menenius, who is heatedly advising, while it comes too late to 
Coriolanus.—W. A. Wricut: Line 295 (‘—put not your worthy rage into your 
tongue’) implies that Coriolanus has just spoken, and justifies the arrangement of 
the speeches proposed by Tyrwhitt. 


ACT III, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 321 


Though calued i’th’ Porch o’th’ Capitoll : 


Be gone, put not your worthy Rage into your Tongue, 295 
One time will owe another. 

Corio. On faire ground,I could beat fortie of them. 297 
_ 294, 295. Though...Be gone] As one Dyce, Sta. Hal. Wh. Cam.+, Del. ii, 
line Cap. et seq. Words. Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. 
_ 204: Vth’] in the Pope, + (—Var.’73). 296-299. As three lines, verse, end- 
athe Cap. et seq. ing: ground...my felfe...Tribunes Cap. 

295. Be gone] Be gone, be gone Han. et seq. (except Knt, Sta.). 

put not...) Mene. Put not... 296, 297. As two lines, ending: 

Tyrwhitt conj. Var. ’78. Men. Be- ground...them Del. 
gone. Put not... Var. 85, Ran. Mal. 297. Corio.] Com. Ff, Rowe. 


294. calued i’th’. . . Capitoll] Was there perhaps lingering in Shakespeare’s 
memory a faint echo of his line in Hamlet, ‘It was a brute part of him to kill so 
capital a calf there’? III, ii, 110 —Ep. 

296. One time will owe another] JoHNson: I know not whether ‘owe’ in this 
place means to possess by right or to be indebted. Either sense may be admitted. 
One time, in which the people are seditious, will give us power in some other time; 
or, this time of the people’s predominance will run them in debt; that is, will lay 
them open to the law, and expose them hereafter to more servile subjection.— 
HEATH (p. 421): The sense is, If we give way now, our present moderation will 
entitle us to expect a more favourable opportunity, when we may be able to set 
everything right again—M. Mason (Comments, etc., p. 255): I believe Menenius 
means, ‘This time will owe us one more fortunate.’ It is a common expression to 
say, ‘This day is yours, the next will be mine. —Matone: The meaning seems to 
be, ‘One time will compensate for another. Our time of triumph will come here- 
after; time will be in our debt, will owe us a good turn, for our present disgrace. 
Let us trust to futurity.—Srncer: I think Menenius means to say, ‘Another 
time will offer when you may be quits with them.’ There is a common proverbial 
phrase, ‘One good turn deserves another.—W. A. Wricut: One time of mis- 
fortune will owe us another of retribution. The people have it all their own way 
now; our time will come.—WHITELAW: Our time will come. ‘Non si male nunc, 
et olim Sic erit.’ Today’s reverse will give us a claim to another day of better 
fortune.—BEEcHING (Falcon Sh.): Yielding today will owe us victory tomorrow. 
—Verity (Student’s Sh.): I take the meaning to be, ‘What you say now will 
have to be accounted for later’; Menenius being afraid that Coriolanus may say 
something, in his present anger, which will compromise his position beyond 
redress.—Casr (Arden Sh.): Your turn will come, Fortune will owe you a good 
turn for a bad one. 

297. fortie of them] Veriry (Student’s Sh.): Elizabethans often use forty to 
imply an indefinitely large number. Cf. Merry Wives, I, i, 205, ‘I had rather 
than forty shillings I had my Book of Songs and Sonnets here’; and Sonnet ii, 
‘When forty winters shall besiege thy brow.’ Other numbers, e. g., 3 and 13, have 
become significant through some ancient belief or historical event; and perhaps 
40 gained some mysterious import through the Scripture. Thus the wanderings 
of the Israelites lasted forty years, the fast of our Lord forty days. [The flood 

21 


322 


Mene. 
them, yea, the two Tribunes. 


Com. But now ’tis oddes beyond Arithmetick, 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


I could my felfe take vp a Brace o’th’ beft of 


[ACE In SCs 
298 


300 


And Manhood is call’d Foolerie, when it ftands 
Againft a falling Fabrick. Will you hence, 
Before the Tagge returne ? whofe Rage doth rend 
Like interrupted Waters, and o’re-beare 


What they are vs’d to beare. 
Mene. Pray you be gone : 


305 


Ile trie whether my old Wit be in requeft 
With thofe that haue but little : this muft be patcht 


With Cloth of any Colour. 
Com. Nay, come away. 


298, 299. As two lines, verse, ending: 
Brace...Tribunes Han. 
298. Mene.] Com. Glo. Wh. ii. 
my felfe] my self, I think, Han. 
o’th’| Ff, Rowe,+, Wh.i. o’the 
Cap. Dyce, Cam.+. of the Var. 73 
et cet. 
298, 209. of them Om. Cap. Var. 773. 
299. yea] yea, even Han. 


Exeunt Coriolanus and 
Cominius. 


310 


300. Com.] Continued to Com. Glo. 
Wh. ii. 

301. Foolerie] Fool’ry Rowe,+. 

307. whether] if Pope, + (—Var. ’73), 
Cap. 

310. Nay] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. 

311. Cominius.] Com. and others. 
Cap. Mal. et seq. 


also forty days. See Deuteronomy, xxv, 3, where the number of stripes to be 
given the culprit is strictly limited to forty —Eb.] 

298. Mene. I could, etc.] Dyce (ed. ii.): The Cambridge Editors (Globe 
Shakespeare) make this the commencement of the next speech. But may we not 
suppose that old Menenius is here speaking rather of what he would like to be 
able to do than of what he really believes he can do?—Scumipt (Coriolanus), so 
far from commending the assignment of this to Cominius, remarks upon it as 
highly characteristic of Menenius. 

298. take vp] W. A. Wricut: That is, encounter, cope with. Compare 2 Henry 
IV: I, iii, 74: ‘—one power against the French, And one against Glendower; 
perforce a third Must take up us.’ 

300. oddes beyond Arithmetick] Case (Arden Sh.): That is, incalculable odds. 
Compare Massinger, Roman Actor, I, iii: ‘Or when a covetous man’s expressed, 
whose wealth Arithmetic cannot number’ (ed. Gifford-Cunningham, 198b). 

303. the Tagge] JouNson: The lowest and most despicable of the populace are 
still denominated by those a little above them, Tag, rag, and bobtail—W. A. 
Wricut: Compare Jul. Ces., I, ii, 260, ‘If the tag-rag people did not clap and 
hiss him.’ In Cotgrave we find, ‘En bloc & en tasche. One with another, tag 
and rag, all together.’ Again in Holland’s Livy, p. 7, ‘A rable and confused 
medley of all sorts, tag and rag, bond and free, one with another.’ 

307. whether] For the sake of the metre ‘whether’ is here to be pronounced as 
though written where, as it frequently is in the Folio. See ABBorT, § 466. 


ACT Ill, sc. i.] CORIOLANUS 323 
Patri. This man ha’s marr’d his fortune. 312 
Mene. His nature is too noble for the World : 


He would not flatter Neptune for his Trident, 

Or Ioue,for’s power to Thunder: his Heart’s his Mouth: 315 
What his Breft forges,that his Tongue mutt vent, 

And being angry, does forget that euer 


He heard the Name of Death. 
Here’s goodly worke. 
Patri. 
Mene. 


A Noife within. 


I would they were a bed. 320 
I would they were in Tyber. 


What the vengeance, could he not fpeake ’em faire ? 
Enter Brutus and Sicinius with the rabble againe. 


Sicin. Where is this Viper, 


312. SCENE Iv. Pope, Han. Warb. 


Johns. 


Patri.] 1 Sen. Rowe,+, Varr. 
Ran. 1. P. Cap. A Patrician. Neils. 


1 Pat. Mal. et cet. 
314-318. Mnemonic Warb. 


315. for’s] for his Cap. Varr. Ran. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Del. Hal. 


Ktly. 
his Mouth] in his mouth Ktly. 


324 


320. Patri.] 2 Sen. Rowe,+, Varr. 
Ranw stb acapsaecbataMalwet 
cet. 

322. ’em] them Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. i, Knt, Coll. Del. Hal. Wh. 
Huds. i. 

323. Enter...rabble againe.] Re-enter 
..tabble. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, 
Coll. Del. Dyce, Sta. Hal. Ktly, 
Cam.+, Huds. Craig, Neils. 


313-318. His nature . . .of Death] Verity (Student’s Sh.): A striking estimate 
of Coriolanus’s character; the estimate of his best friend and a keen judge. 

315. Or Ioue... his Mouth] BADHAm (Criticism Applied to Sh., p. 11): Read, 
‘Or Jove for’s thunder; ’s heart is in his mouth.’ [See Text. Notes, this line, where 
it will be seen that Keightley has adopted a conjecture made by him in his Expositor; 
he is, however, therein anticipated, as Badham’s Essay appeared twenty years 
before.—Ep.] 

316. What his Brest ... must vent] Scummrt (Coriolanus): Compare Much 
Ado, ‘What his heart thinks his tongue speaks,’ [III, ii, 14]; with a metaphor 
which recalls Psalm lxiv, ‘Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their 
bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words.’ Compare also the saying, ‘What 
the heart thinketh, the tongue speaketh.’ 

317. does forget] ABBoTT (§ 399): Where there can be no doubt what is the 
nominative, it is sometimes omitted. [Abbott does not quote the present line, but 
gives several examples of this ellipsis —Eb.] 

322. What the vengeance] Craicre (NV. £. D.,s. v. 3.): Used to strengthen in- 
terrogations. [The present line quoted; also, 1620, Frier Rush, 28: ‘His wife . . 
said vnto him, what a vengeance needest thou to take a servant?’] 

324. this Viper] VerRiry (Student’s Sh.): Referring, perhaps, to the classical 
legends of ravaging monsters like the Lernean Hydra. I suspect, however, that 
the allusion is to the old belief about the young vipers and their unnatural be- 
haviour. Compare Lyly, Midas, III, i, ‘—like vipers that gnaw the bowels of 
which they were born’ (ed. Bond, iii, 130). Bond refers to Pliny, Nat. Hist., x, 82; 


324 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT II, SC. i. 


That would depopulate the city,& be euery man himfelf 325 
Mene. You worthy Tribunes. 
Sicin. He fhall be throwne downe the Tarpeian rock 
With rigorous hands : he hath refifted Law, 
And therefore Law fhall fcorne him further Triall 
Then the feuerity of the publike Power, 330 
Which he fo fets at naught. 


325, 326. Lines end: &...Tribunes 326. Tribunes.] Tribunes— Rowe et 
Pope et seq. seq. 

325. would] will Var. °’78, 785, 330. of the] of Pope,+, Varr. 
Ran. Ran. 


and quotes Sir Thomas Browne’s Vulgar Errors, III, 16, ‘That young vipers force 
their way through the bowels of their dam . . . is a very ancient tradition . . 
affirmed by Herodotus, Nicander, Pliny, Plutarch.’ One of the characteristics of 
Euphuism was a mighty parade of unnatural natural history, hence it is not sur- 
prising to find more than one reference in Euphues to this popular superstitition; 
compare the Epistle Dedicatory, ‘lest . . . I should with the viper lose my blood 
with mine own blood’ (ed. Bond ii, 5), and Euphues, p. 177. See Absalom and 
Achitophel, 1012-15. To Sicinius, Coriolanus is a viper, in seeking to prey upon 
the city that bore and reared him. This interpretation seems to me favoured by 
‘viperous traitor,’ 1. 353 below. The unnatural young viper, but not Lernean 
Hydra, might be so described. [CAsr also interprets ‘viper’ in the sense of un- 
natural offspring; yet, in spite of Verity’s excellent note, I am inclined to think 
that here Shakespeare uses ‘viper’ as the symbol of treachery or a traitor—the 
words ‘viperous traitor’ seem to point to this.—CraiciE (NV. E. D., s. v. Viper, 3. b.): 
In allusion to the fable of the viper reared or revived in a person’s bosom. One 
who betrays or is false to those who have supported or nourished him; a false or 
treacherous person. 1596. Edward III: I, i, 105, ‘Degenerate Traytor, viper to 
the place Where thou was fostered in thine infancy.’ Under section 2. A venomous, 
malignant, or spiteful person, a villain or scoundrel, Craigie quotes the present 
line.—Ep.] 

328, 329. he hath resisted Law... further Triall] Rusaron (Sh’s Legal 
Maxims, ed. ii, p. 58): Merito beneficium legis amittit, qui legem ipsam sub- 
vertere intendit (2 Inst. 53). According to Sicinius, Coriolanus had resisted law 
and therefore lost the benefit of the law.—E. J. WurreE (p. 410): Sicinius declares 
that one who has scorned the forms of law should be dealt with in a summary 
manner as an outlaw, and in this instance that Coriolanus was entitled only to a 
trial by the Comitia, or the vote of the people, whose power he had spurned. This 
verse shows the Poet’s respect for law, in the abstract, as the medium through 
which the rights of the citizens are enjoyed. ‘He hath resisted law’ as presented 
here is a serious charge, and one that the speaker believes entitles the party guilty 
of such offence to no legal protection. Like poor Shylock’s plea, when he ‘stands 
for law,’ this illustrates the deep insight into the world of law, as the only correct 
medium through which the proper ideals of equality and justice can be attained, 
and shows the lawyer’s respect for the law in the abstract that ought to be un- 
derstood by all citizens. 


ACT Il, SC. i.] 


I Cit. 


CORIOLANUS 325 


He fhall well know the Noble Tribunes are 332 


The peoples mouths, and we their hands. 


All. He fhall fure ont. 

Mene. Sir, fir. 

Ne. 
With modeft warrant. 


332-334. Linesend: know...mouths... 
ont Johns. et seq. 

333, 334. The...fhall] As one line 

an. 

334. All.] Cit. Cap. Mal. et seq. 

He shall fure ont] He shall fure 
out Ff, Rowe, Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. He 
shall be sure on’t Pope Han. He shall, 
be sure on’t Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. 


Sicin. 
Do not cry hauocke,where you fhold but hunt 


Peace. 335 


337 


73. He shall, sure, out Cap. He shall 
sure on tt Ktly. He shall, sure ont 
Mal. et cet. 

BB5as ity ft -l SOrs 
Steev. Var. ’o3, ’13, Sing. 

336. not] nor F,. 

337-342. Lines end: ~you...fpeake... 
worthineffe...what Confull? Pope et 
seq. 


Cap. Sir,— 


333- and we their hands] That is, The Tribunes are the mouths of the people, 
and we, the people, are the hands of the Tribunes.— Eb. 

334. He shall sure ont] CAPE t (vol. I, pt i, p. 91): Meaning out of the house 
(either his own or some other) where they supposed he had taken shelter [see 
Text. Notes]. The four later moderns [Pope, Theobald, Hanmer, Warburton] 
give us: He shall be sure on’t, without any authority for be, or, in fact, any for 
on’t; for the ‘ont’ of the First Folio is a printer’s mistake, a (uw) inverted; nor would 
the rabble have expressed themselves so if they had intended to say, He shall 
certainly know it—Matonre: The meaning of these words is not very obvious. 
Perhaps they mean, He shall, that’s sure. I am inclined to think that the same 
error has happened here and in a passage in Ant. & Cleo., and that in both places 
‘sure’ is printed instead of sore. [See Ant. & Cleo., II, v, 133, thised.—Ep.] He 
shall suffer for it, he shall rue the vengeance of the people. The editor of the Second 
Folio reads, He shall sure out; and u and n being often confounded, the emendation 
might be admitted, but there is not here any question of the expulsion of Corio- 
Janus. What is now proposed is to throw him down the Tarpeian rock. It is 
absurd, therefore, that the rabble should, by way of confirmation of what their 
leader Sicinius had said, propose a punishment he has not so much as mentioned, 
and which, when he does afterwards mention it, he disapproves of—‘to eject 
him hence Were but one danger.’ I have, therefore, left the old copy undisturbed. 
[This note, which appears first in Malone’s ed. 1790, is not included among the 
notes on this passage in the Varioruwm of 1821.—Ep.]—STEEVENS: Perhaps our 
author wrote, with reference to the foregoing speech, ‘He shall, be sure on’t,’ 
4. e., be assured that he shall be taught the respect due to both the Tribunes and 
the people. [Rather an unfortunate betrayal of the fact that Steevens had not 
examined the texts of some of his predecessors (see Text. Notes); and doubly 
unfortunate inasmuch as this note evidently misled Dr W. A. Wright, who, in the 
Clarendon Ed., credits this reading to Steevens.—ED.] 

336. ery hauocke] SreEvENS: That is, Do not give the signal for unlimited 
slaughter, &c.—Tyrwuirt: ‘To cry havoc’ seems to have been the signal for gen- 
eral slaughter, and is expressly forbid in Les Ordinances des Battailles, 9 R. ii, 
art. 10: ‘Item, que nul soit si hardy de crier havok sur peine d’avoir la test coupe.” 


326 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, sc. i. 


Sicin. Sir, how com’ft that you haue holpe 338 
To make this refcue ? 
Mene. WHeere me fpeake? As I do know 340 


The Confuls worthineffe, fo can I name his Faults. 
Sicin. Confull? what Confull ? 
Mene. The Confull Coriolanus. 
Bru. He Confull. 
All. No,no,no,no,no. 345 
Mene. If by the Tribunes leaue, 
And yours good people, 
I may be heard, I would craue a word or two, 
The which fhall turne you to no further harme, 


Then fo much loffe of time. 350 
Sic. Speake breefely then, 
For we are peremptory to difpatch 352 
338. com’ ft that] comes it that Rowe, Consul! he Consul. Lettsom. 
Varr. Ran. Mal. Varr. Sing. i, Hal. 345. All.] Cit. Cap. Mal. et seq. 
comes it Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 346, 347. If by...good people] As one 
Johns. comes’t that Cap. et cet. line Pope et seq. 
344. He Confull.] He the consull 348. I would) I’d Pope,+, Cap. 


Han. Cap. He a consul! Steev. Varr. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
Sing. i, Coll. Del. Badham, Hal. Huds. Sta. Hal. Ktly, Dyce ii, Huds. Words. 


So in King John, ‘Cry havoc, Kings,’ [II, i, 357]; and in Jul Ces., ‘Cry havoc, 
and let slip the dogs of war,’ [III, i, 273]—-Topp: Again, ‘For them that crye 
hauoke. Also that noo man be so hardy to cry hauoke, vpon payne of hym that 
so is founde begynher, to die therefore, and the remenaunt to be emprysoned, and 
theyr bodyes to be punysshed at the Kynges wyll,’ Certayne Statutes and Orden- 
aunces of Warre made, &c., by Henry VIII. bl. 1. 4to emprynted by R. Pynson, 1513. 
[See also note on the passage in Jul. Ces. which Tyrwhitt quotes, III, i, 303, this 
edition.—Ep.] 

349. turne you to no... harme] Murray (WN. E. D., s. v. Turn. 43 intr. 
with to): tb. To Turn (a person) to (something). To result in or bring about 
for the person; to put him to (trouble, etc.), to be for his (advantage, etc.). Obs. 
[The present line quoted; also] 3 Henry VI: V, v, 16, ‘All the trouble thou hast 
turned me to.’ Temp., I, ii, 64, ‘O my heart bleeds to think o’ the teen that I 
have turned you to.’ [WRicurT in illustration of the present line quotes As You 
Like It, IV, iii, 23, ‘Come, come, you are a fool And turn’d into the extremity of 
love’; but Murray makes a distinction between the use of this verb with into, 
under 42: ‘To make the subject of (praise, mockery, etc.); now chiefly in phrase 
to turn (a thing) into ridicule,’ and quotes in illustration, Twelfth Night, II, v, 223, 
‘It cannot but turn him into a notable contempt.’—Scummpt (Lew., s. v. Turn, 
vb (g)) gives many other examples of Shakespeare’s uses of the word in the sense, 
put to, bring about, tce.—Ep.] 

352. peremptory] Wricut: That is, firmly determined. Compare King John, 
II, i, 454, “No, not Death himself In mortal fury half so peremptory, As we to keep 
this city.’ 


ACPEIIT SC ot. CORIOLANUS 327 


This Viporous Traitor : to eiect him hence 353 
Were but one danger,and to keepe him heere 


353. Viporous] Viperous Fy. Ktly, Wh. i, Dyce ii, Coll. iii, Words. 
354. one] our Theob. Han. Warb. Huds. ii. moe Cam. Edd. conj. 


353-355. to eiect him...one danger... death] THrosatp (Letter to War- 
burton, Feb. 12, 1729, in Nichols, Illustrations, etc., ii, p. 485): Were is the verb both 
to danger and death; which wards, as you conjecture, will not be. I had corrected 
it, dear Sir, a long while since, in this manner: ‘To eject him hence, Were but 
our danger, etc., 2. ¢., to banish him will be hazardous to us; to let him remain 
at home, our certain destruction; therefore he must die tonight.’ [This is, I be- 
lieve, the only record of Warburton’s conjecture wards for ‘were’ in l. 354; he did 
not repeat it in his own edition, and Theobald, whose note in his own edition four 
years later is substantially as above, did not refer to this conjecture —Ep.]— 
Heatu (p. 421): I can see no reason for altering the common reading, ‘Were but 
one danger’; that is, as I apprehend, the danger from the enemy, if they deprive 
themselves of so able a champion. Mr Theobald objects, that hereby the climax, 
which seems evidently designed, is destroyed. I can see no climax even in his 
emendation, but an antithesis only, which is equally preserved in both readings.— 
KEIGHTLY (Expositor, p. 366): I read our for ‘one’ as Theobald proposed. In 
Ant. & Cleo. (I, iv, 3) we have ‘One great competitor,’ where the sense demands 
our; and in Sonnet xcix, ‘Our blushing shame,’ where editors, as sense requires, read 
One.—C. & M. CowDEN CLarKE (Shakespeare): It appears to us that the sentence 
means: ‘To banish him from hence were but to encounter one danger; and to allow 
him to remain in Rome would be to encounter another—the certain destruction 
of our offices as tribunes.’ We think the word another is ellipitically understood 
after ‘here,’ as thus: ‘To eject him hence were but one danger; and to keep him 
here, another—our certain death.’—Scumut (Coriolanus): That is, one unbroken, 
complete danger. Compare Macbeth, ‘Making the green, one red,’ II, ii, 63; 
also 2 Henry IV: I, i, 157, ‘But let one spirit of the first-born Cain Reign in all 
bosoms.’ See also IV, vi, 172 supra—W. A. Wricut: If this be the true reading, 
it must mean one all-pervading constant source of danger.—RozFe: If this be 
what Shakespeare wrote, we must accept the Cowden Clarkes’ explanation. Per- 
haps it would be better to read (with Theobald) ‘our danger.’ The Cambridge 
Edd. conjecture ‘moe danger’; but moe (as one of these editors has himself else- 
where noted) is used only with a plural or a collective noun.—T. Pace: That is, 
Would be nothing but one all-absorbing cause of danger. Compare Macbeth, 
II, ii, 63. Theobald’s conjecture of our for ‘one’ is highly probable-—[The majority 
of commentators are in favor of the interpretation of ‘one’ here in the sense 
constant, perpetual, though just how the expulsion of Coriolanus would be a con- 
tinual danger is not made evident. This interpretation, moreover, renders the 
rest of Sicinius’s remarks meaningless, or without the needed antithesis. I am 
therefore inclined to think the explanation by the Cowden Clarkes is the more 
rational: To expel this traitor is only one danger; to let him remain is a double 
danger—our destruction. The one danger being, as Heath interprets, the loss of 
such a champion. The adversitive ‘but’ is also against the meaning constant. 
Sicinius would hardly say, The expulsion of this traitor is only a continuous 
danger, as an antithesis to the destruction of the Tribunate. One is almost as 


328 THE TRAGEDIE OF fac mu, sc. i. 


Our certaine death: therefore it is decreed, 355 
He dyes to night. 
Menen. Now the good Gods forbid, 
That our renowned Rome, whofe gratitude 
Towards her deferued Children, is enroll’d 
In Ioues owne Booke, like an vnnaturall Dam 360 
Should now eate vp her owne. 
Sicin. He’s a Difeafe that muft be cut away. 
<Mene. Oh he’s a Limbe, that ha’s but a Difeafe 
Mortall, to cut it off : to cure it, eafie. 
What ha’s he done to Rome, that’s worthy death ? 365 
Killing our Enemies, the blood he hath loft 
(Which I dare vouch, is more then that he hath 
By many an Ounce) he dropp’d it for his Country : 


And what is left, to loofe it by his Countrey, 369 
359. Towards her deferued] Tow’rds 363. Difeafe] disease; Rowe et seq. 
her deserving Pope,+. Towards her 366. Enemies, the...] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
deserving Cap. Var. ’73, Coll. MS. Theob. Warb. Johns. Dyce, Sta. 

363. he’s...Difeafe] he is but a limb Cam.+, Craig, Neils. enemies? The... 
that has disease Han. Han. et cet. 


363, 365. ha’s] has Fs. 


bad as the other. I agree with Heath; Theobald’s emendation is quite unnec- 
cessary.—ED.] 

353. eiect] Thisis the only passage wherein this word appears in Shakespeare.—Ep. 

359. deserued] Matone: ‘Deserved’ for deserving. So delighted for delighting, 
in Othello, ‘If virtue no delighted beauty lack,’ [I, iii, 290]—W. A. WRicHT: 
So ‘dishonoured’ for ‘dishonourable,’ III, i, 75, above —WHITELAW: Her children 
that have deserved well. Not to be compared with delighted for ‘delightful,’ 
dowered with delight (Othello, I, ili, 290), and dishonour’d for dishonourable, 
above, l. 75; both of them participles derived from the substantive. 

360. Ioues owne Booke] Scumipt: In Jupiter’s Journal, where he (after the 
custom of Shakespeare’s contemporaries) records his notes; compare V, ii, 18, 10. 
How widespread in Shakespeare’s time was this custom of entering notes on per- 
sons and-events in a memorandum-book is most plainly shown in Hamlet, where 
the prince, after the account of his father’s murder, makes all haste to take out 
his ‘tables’ in order to register the event.—W. A. Wricut: Shakespeare probably 
had in his mind ‘the book of remembrance’ of Malachi, iii, 16, or the book in 
Exodus, xxxii, 32, from which Moses desired that his name might be blotted out 
if his request were not granted—Gorpon: This probably means the rolls and 
registers of the Capitol, which was Jove’s temple. Compare Jul. Ces., III, i, 
39-41: ‘The question of his death is enrolled in the Capitol; the glory not ex- 
tenuated, wherein he was worthy nor his offences enforced, for which he suffered 
death.’ [See Julius Cesar, this ed. Note on III, ii, 39, 40.—Ep.]—DricHrton: 
That is, is recorded in heaven; probably an allusion to the book of life in Revela- 
tions, Xx, 12, 15; compare Richard II: I, iii, 202, ‘if ever I were traitor, My name 
be blotted from the book of life!’ 


ACT III, SC. i.] CORIOLA NUS 329 


Were to vs all that doo’t, and fuffer it 370 
A brand to th’end a’th World. 

Sicin. This is cleane kamme. 

Brut. Meerely awry : 
When he did loue his Country, it honour’d him. 


Menen. The feruice of the foote 375 
371. th’end] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Wh. 372. kamme] F., Theob. kamm F;. 
i, Dyce ii, Huds. Words. ithe end Cap. wrong Pope. kam F, et cet. 
eticet: 373, 374. Meerely...Country] As one 
ath) oth Fy, Wh.i. o’the Cap. line Pope et seq. 
eucet. 375. Menen.] Sic. Han. Warb. Johns. 
372-377. Om. Bell. Var. ’73, Beeching (Falcon Sh.). 


372. cleane kamme] Murray (WN. E. D., s. v. Cam, adj. and adv.): In English 
probably from Welsh [cam, crooked, bent, bowed, awry, wrong, false], and no 
doubt in oral use long before the 16‘ cent., when first found in literature; the 
derived form, cammed, is in the Promptorium. B. adj. Away from the straight line, 
awry, askew. Clean cam (kam), ‘crooked, athwart, awry, cross from the pur- 
pose’ (J.). Cotgrave, s. v. Contrefoil, The wrong way, cleane contrarie, quite 
kamme. [The present line also quoted. Steevens remarks that ‘Vulgar pronuncia- 
tion has converted ‘‘clean kam” into kim kam’; but, as Wright notes, ‘‘clean”’ 
is used in the sense quite, entirely, as in Jul Ces., ‘Clean from the purpose of the 
things themselves,” I, iii, 35,’ and that ‘kim kam is merely an instance of a re- 
duplicated word such as “‘ding dong,” “‘hodge podge,” “helter skelter,’ and so 
on.’—Ep.] 

373. Meerely] That is, completely, entirely. So in Hamlet, ‘Things rank and 
gross in nature Possess it merely,’ I, ii, 136. 

375-377. The seruice of the foote ... before it was] WARBURTON: Nothing 
can be more evident than that this could never be said by Coriolanus’s apologist, 
and that it was said by one of the Tribunes; I have therefore given it to Sici- 
nius.—THEOBALD (Letter to Warburton, Feb. 12, 1729, Nichols, Illustrations, etc., 
ii, 486): Menenius, I am convinced, did not mean to make any such assertion, 
but rather to declare on the negative side of it. I read this, ‘1s’r not then re- 
spected for what before it was?’ [Theobald does not, however, adopt this reading 
in either edition; this, it will be seen, partly anticipates Steevens’s reading in 
Var. 78; see Text. Notes, 1. 377-—Ep.J—CapeE tt (vol. I, pt i, p. 91): This, at 
first blush, appears no proper speech for Menenius; and accordingly the two 
latter editors have proceeded to take it away from him, and give it to Sicinius; 
not reflecting that this seemingly opposite topic with which he sets out might 
be so winded about by Menenius that the argument might turn out for his pur- 
pose, was he suffer’d to finish it; the topic is the same he had us’d in the speech 
before this, ll. 363, 364; and his intention seems to have been to enforce it again 
in this, and set it in a different light, and in one that was stronger. [W. A. Wright 
gives substantially the same reason for rejecting Warburton’s change of speakers 
as that by Capell. That this speech belongs to one on the side of Coriolanus is 
shown by the next words of Brutus, ‘We’ll hear no more,’ etc., which would 
hardly be addressed to his fellow Tribune—Ep.]—Matone: You allege, says 
Menenius, that being diseased he must be cut away. According then to your 


330 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT mI, SC. i. 


Being once gangren’d, is not then refpected 376 
For what before it was. 

Bru. Wee’l heare no more : 
Purfue him to his houfe, and plucke him thence, 
Leaft his infection being of catching nature, 380 
Spred further. 


376. is] it is Pope,+. Ran. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Sing. Sta. 
377. it was.] it was— Pope, Theob. Hal. Huds. i. 
Han. Del. i was;— Cap. Mal. Var. 380. catching] a catching Fy, Rowe. 


21, Knt, Neils. 7 was? Var. ’78, 85, 


argument the foot, being once gangrened, is not to be respected for what it was be- 
fore it was gangrened.—‘Is this just?’ Menenius would have added, if the Tribune 
had not interrupted him; and indeed, without any such addition, from his state of 
the argument these words are understood —Lertsom (ap. Dyce, ii.): This speech 
is part of the preceding one of Brutus. The next speech (‘We'll hear no more,’ &c.) 
I should say belongs to Sicinius—C. & M. CowpEN CLarKE (Shakespeare): 
Warburton assigned this speech to Sicinius, but it is a following up of Menenius’s 
previous speech and argument. By adopting Steevens’s interrogation point placed 
at its conclusion the consecution is not only rendered obvious, but the same 
interrogatory form is kept up as in the line, ‘What has he done to Rome that’s 
worthy death?’—Hupson (ed. ii.): Here Menenius is probably to be understood 
as urging the logical consequences of the Tribune’s position by way of refuting 
it...I can hardly think the Poet would have put into the mouth of either 
‘Tribune an argument so palpably unjust.— Verity (Student’s Sh.): Grammatically 
the verb ‘is’ has no subject, for the sense prevents ‘service’ being so taken, but 
it is easily supplied from ‘foot’ in l. 375. The simplest change is Theobald’s pro- 
posal, viz., to read is’t and treat the remark as a sarcastic question. The speakers 
are, however, all somewhat stirred, and a touch of verbal irregularity seems to 
fit the context.—CasrE (Arden Sh.): Ellipse confuses the grammar and the precise 
sense, but whether it is the foot or the service of the foot that is no longer regarded 
when the disease of the one terminates the other, signifies little. Either [Warbur- 
ton’s or Lettson’s] change is possible, for Brutus in effect says: when he loved his 
country it honoured him, not now; and he or Sicinius would continue: when the 
foot serves it is regarded, not when mortification has set in, inferring that it must 
then be cut away, as Sicinius said in ]. 362. In Menenius’s mouth the speech is 
bitterly ironical and recurs to |. 363, but there is this inconsistency in the metaphor, 
that ‘a limb that has but a disease; Mortal to cut it off,’ is now a limb that has a 
disease; mortal not to cut it off. 

375. The seruice of the foote] J. C. Cortins (Studies in Sh., p. 51), for the 
similarity of the expression alone, compares Sophocles, Electra: #Si0rov 8 exwv 
Toby ianpérnua—1357, 58 (thou that hast the most welcome service of the feet!). 
Collins, by a slight oversight, gives the reference as Il. 1349-50; in both Franklin’s 
and Brunck’s editions it is as above. The works of Sophocles are not included 
in Miss Henrietta Palmer’s List of English Editions and Translations of Greek and 
Latin Classics printed before 1641.—Ep. 

381, 382. further. . . . One word more] Assort (§ 478): Ey Final seems to have 
been sometimes pronounced with a kind of ‘burr’ which produced the effect of an 


ACT III, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 331 


Menen. One word more, one word : 382 
This Tiger-footed-rage, when it fhall find 
The harme of vnskan’d {wiftneffe, will (too late) 
Tye Leaden pounds too’s heeles. Proceed by Proceffe, 385 
Leaft parties (as he is belou’d) breake out, 
And facke great Rome with Romanes. 

Brut. If it were fo ? 

Sicin. What do ye talke ? 
Haue we not had a tafte of his Obedience? 390 
Our Ediles {mot : our felues refifted : come. 


382. more,| more, hear me Han. Ktly. to’s F, et cet. 
383-385. This...heeles] Om. Bell. 386. below d] beloved Badham. 
384. unskan’d] F.F;. unskann’d F,, 388. it were] *twere Pope,+. 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Sor] fo— FF, et seq. 
unscan’'d Cap. unscann’d Han. et cet. 391. fmot:] fmot; F.. fmot, F;3. 


385. too’s] ¢ its Johns. to its Var. Jmote, F,, Rowe,+. smot? Cap. 
73. to his Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Mal. Schmidt. smote? Var. ’73 et cet. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Del. Hal. come.| come— Rowe et seq. 


additional syllable. Ipm. (§ 485): Monosyllables containing a vowel followed by 
r are often prolonged. [Besides the present line, under the vowel 0, ABBOTT quotes, 


‘Make the | prize light. | One wor | d more, | I charge thee,’ 
Tempest, I, ii, 452; and 
‘Ham. One wér | d more, | good lady. | 
Queen. What shall | I do?’] 


385. Proceed by Processe] E. J. WHITE (p. 411): This is lawyer-like advice, 
to enjoy only the rights which the law guarantees through the remedial pro- 
cedure of the courts, which crystallized into fundamental or organic law, in this 
country, by our provision that no one should be denied his rights except upon 
‘due process of law.’ ‘Process’ is a word used to convey the means of compelling 
a defendant to appear in court after suing out the original writ in a civil suit, 
or after indictment found in a criminal case. 

388. If it were so?] BapHAm (Sh. Criticism, p. 11) adds the line ‘And he would 
prove obedient’ after ‘so?’ ‘as necessary both for the sense and the metre.’ Ten 
years later, in his essay on The Text of Shakespeare, Badham amplified on this, 
saying (p. 278): ‘I have not the least doubt that Brutus’s speech has been mutilated; 
for Sicinius’s remark is applicable to nothing that precedes, nor are the words 
“Tf it were so” grammatically correct, supposing “if” referred to Menenius’s fear of 
civil war; for in that case we should require It if be so. I believe that Shakespeare 
gave proof in this case of his dramatic skill by making the yielding of Brutus 
preparatory to that of Sicinius, and that the missing words were to the following 
effect.’ [Badham then repeats the line as given in his former work, without refer- 
ring to his previous conjecture.—ED.] 

391. smot] Apporr (§ 343): Owing to the tendency to drop the inflection en, 
the Elizabethan authors frequently used the curtailed forms of past participles 
which are common in Early English: ‘I have forgot, writ, chid, &c. ‘How now, 
my masters, have you chose this man,’ II, iii, 162, supra. 


332 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. i. 


Mene. Confider this : He ha’s bin bred i’th’Warres 392 
Since a could draw a Sword, and is ill-fchool’d 
In boulted Language : Meale and Bran together 
He throwes without diftinétion. Giue me leaue, 395 
Ile go to him, and vndertake to bring him in peace, 
Where he fhall anfwer by a lawfull Forme 
(In peace) to his vtmoft perill. 


1.Sen. Noble Tribunes, 399 
392. He ha’s] he hath Rowe,+. he 396-399. Lines end: him...lawfuill... 
has Cap. et seq. Tribunes (omitting In peace, 1. 398) 
Vth] Fi, Rowe,+, Wh.i. ?the Ktly. 
Cap. et cet. 396. in peace] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Coll. i. 
303. @ could] he could Rowe et seq. Om. Pope et cet. 


393. acould] BAYFIELD (p. 198): Here and in V, iii, 137 are the only two 
places where the vulgarism a for he occurs in the verse. In the prose the one 
instance falls by bad luck to Menenius; the rabble, in spite of their many chances, 
never use it. 

396. bring him in peace] MALONE: The words ‘in peace’ were probably in 
the MS. placed at the beginning of the next line, and caught by the transcriber’s 
eye glancing on the line below. [See Teat. Notes.|—CoLier (ed. i.): Pope left 
out ‘in peace’ because the same words occur just below; but Menenius may be 
reasonably supposed to repeat them, by way of emphasis, and to show the 
Tribunes in what condition of mind he will undertake to bring Coriolanus.—Ism. 
(ed. ii.): We think Pope was right; it was probably a printer’s error—BADHAM 
(Text of Sh., p. 274): The absurd repetition in lines 396 and 308 is well worth 
attention, as showing those faults which transposition alone remedies. The most 
natural, I should almost say, the only way of accounting for such a blunder is to 
suppose that the person who dictated the passage to a transcriber, having reached 
the end of one line, skipt the next, and proceeded with the third, and then, upon 
discovering his mistake, went back to the omitted line, and continued to dictate 
without ordering an erasure. Afterwards it would often happen that when the 
redundancy was discovered by a careless or unlearned person the erasure would 
be made in the wrong place. It is to this cause of transcribing from dictation that 
we must also attribute the endless confusions of metre by the ignorant divisions 
of the lines, which some of our modern editors have so religiously restored. 
Anyone who makes such a remark must prepare himself for the taunt that he counts 
the verses upon his fingers. As Shakespeare wrote in numbers, and as numbers 
are intended to be counted, it certainly seems wiser, in case of a deficient ear, to 
count upon our fingers than not to count at all. I am very far from approving 
of Sir Thomas Hanmer’s or Steevens’s practice, of making emendations to suit 
the metre; but there is surely a wise middle course to be observed between retain- 
ing what amends itself, or defending what is incurable, and attempting to repro- 
duce that of which there are no vestiges to guide us. [My own complete agree- 
ment with the concluding portion of the foregoing—expressed so succinctly and 
admirably—must be my excuse for inserting here remarks of a character more 
general than the present particular instance may warrant.—Ebp.] 

399. Noble Tribunes] Gorpon: Such flattery from a senator was scarce. It 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 333 


It is the humane way : the other courfe 400 
Will proue to bloody : and the end of it, 
Vnknowne to the Beginning. 
Sic.Noble Menenius, be you then as the peoples officer : 
Matters, lay downe your Weapons. 
Bru. Go not home. 405 
Sic. Meet on the Market place:wee’l attend you there: 
Where if you bring not Martius, wee’l proceede 
In our firft way. 
Menen. Ile bring him to you. 


Let me defire your company : he muft come, 410 
Or what is worft will follow. 
Sena. Pray you let’s to him. Exeunt Omnes. 412 
[Scene II.] 
Enter Coriolanus with Nobles. I 
Corio. Let them pull all about mine eares, prefent me 
400. humane] human Rowe, Pope. 411. worfl] worse Warb. Johns. 
401. to] too Fi. Knt. 
402, 403. Lines end: Menenius... 412. Sena.] 1. Sen. Rowe et seq. 
officer Pope et seq. you] Om. Pope,+. 
406. Market place] forum Pope,-+ SCENE 1. Cap. et seq. SCENE v. 
(—Var. ’73). Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 
407. Where] Where, F, et seq. The House of Coriolanus. Pope, 
408-412. Lines end: Let me...what... Han. Scene changes to Coriolanus’s 
to him (reading let us, 1 412) Cap. House. Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. 773 
Dyce, ii, Words. Huds. 1. The Same. A Hall in Coriolanus’s 
409. Ile] I’ll go and Han. House. Cap. Coriolanus’s House. Var. 
you] you there Ktly. 78,785, Ran. A Room in Coriolanus’s 
410-412. Om. Bell. House. Mal. et seq. 
410. your] you F;. 1. with Nobles.] Ff, Rowe,+, Neils. 
(To the Senators. Han. Johns. and Volumnia. Bell. with Patricians. 
Var. ’73 et seq. Vary 778, 35. ) Rane Cam.---7 and 


Patricians. Cap. et cet. 


quite melts Sicinius. But he pretends not to have seen it, and, therefore, addresses 
his reply to Menenius. Some acknowledgment, however, was due, so he returns 
the epithet, ‘Noble Menenius.’ 

400. humane] W. A. WricutT: ‘Humane’ has the accent on the first syllable, 
as in Macbeth, III, iv, 76, ‘Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal.’ [Case 
notes that this word is always so accented in Shakespeare. See, if needful, ABBorv, 
§ 492.—Eb.| 

400, 401. the other course ...to bloody] Compare Jul. Ces., II, i, 162, 
‘Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius.’ 

408. In our first way] Apsorr (§ 480) remarks that metrically ‘our’ is here a 
dissyllable, and ‘first’ requires emphasis. 

Scene II.] Veriry (Siudent’s Sh.): The primary interest of the scene lies in 
the clash between the wills—mother’s and son’s. It anticipates, and foreshadows 


334 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


Death on the Wheele, or at wilde Horfes heeles, 3 


the issue of, a yet greater struggle (V, iii.). A similar study is the scene in which 
Lady Macbeth overcomes Macbeth’s reluctance (I, vii.). Incidentally, the scene 
brings out one point of difference between the characters of Volumnia and Corio- 
lanus: her specious argument evokes no response, and she is reduced to the sheer 
personal appeal, edged with reproach and the hint of her own sufferings. By 
the close she has played on every note.—BEECHING (Falcon Sh.): This scene is 
not based directly on Plutarch, who does not suggest any unwillingness on Corio- 
lanus’s part to defend himself. Such unwillingness is, however, dramatically 
consistent with Shakespeare’s conception of the character. 

3. Death on the Wheele, or at wilde Horses heeles] MALONE has, on this line, 
contributed a long note to the effect that neither of these punishments was known 
at Rome, following this with speculations as to how Shakespeare might have 
become acquainted with the latter form of death for traitors. On the question of 
its being known to the Romans Malone quotes from Virgil, Zinezd, viii, 642-645, 
a reference to the death of Mettius Suffetius, and from Livy, I, ch. xxviii, where 
the same incident is recorded with details as to the rending apart of Mettius by 
horses harnessed to chariots. As Malone remarks, since Shakespeare mentions 
death on the wheel, which was certainly unknown to the Romans, it is highly 
improbable that he knew anything about the fate of Mettius; he suggests, how- 
ever, that: ‘Shakespeare had probably read or heard in his youth that Balthazar 
Gerard, who assassinated William Prince of Orange in 1584, was torn to pieces 
by wild horses; as Nicholas de Salvedo had been not long before, for conspiring to 
take away the life of that prince.’ Malone also refers to the infliction of this same 
punishment upon John Chastel in 1594 for his attempt on the life of Henri IV.— 
STEEVENS: Shakespeare might have found mention of this punishment in our 
ancient romances. Thus, in The Sowdon of Babylone, p. 55: ‘—Thou venomouse 
serpente With wilde horses thou shalt be drawn to morowe And on this hille be 
brente.’—C. & M. CowbEN CrarkE (Shakespeare), in reference to any objection to 
the mention of these punishments as violating historic accuracy, say: ‘With almost 
as much justice might it be gravely objected that to “pile ten hills on the Tarpeian 
rock”? was never known to be done in Rome as a means of punishing by death. 
For poetic and dramatic purpose Shakespeare putting these words into Corio- 
lanus’s mouth has a truth of appropriateness far beyond that demanded by the 
accuracies of chronological fact.—Casr (Arden Sh.): It has not been observed that 
the expression ‘at wild horses’ heels’ (notwithstanding the plural horses) would 
apply equally well or better to the different punishment inflicted, for example, 
upon Brunhault (or Brunhilda) in 613, under Clotaire II, who was put to death 
by being dragged at the heels of a wild horse. See Beard, The Theatre of God’s 
Iudgements, 1597, Ch. xiii, Of Queenes that were Murderers, p. 281 (sic, really 
293): ‘shee was adjudged to be tyed by the haire of her head, one arme and one 
foot to the taile of a wild and untamed horse, and so to bee left to his mercy to 
bee drawen miserably to her destruction; which was no sooner executed, but her 
miserable carkasse (the instrument of so many mischiefes) was with mens feet 
spurned, bruised, trampled, and wounded after a most strange fashion; and this 
was the wofull end of miserable Brunchild.’ See also ibid., xviii, p. 349: ‘some he 
tied to the tailes of wild horses, to be drawne ouer hedges, ditches, thornes and 
briers.” Case compares, with the present line, Dekker, Olde Fortunatus, 1600: 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 335 


Or pile ten hilles on the Tarpeian Rocke, 
That the precipitation might downe {tretch 5 
Below the beame of fight; yet will I {till 
Be thus to them. 
Enter Volumnia. 


Noble. You do the Nobler. 9 
7-9. them....the Nobler.| them. Vol. ...coming slowly forward. Coll. iii. 
But hear me, Marcius. Bell. g. Noble.] Ff, Rowe,+, Neils. Pat. 


8. Enter Volumnia.] After Warre, 1. Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. First Pat. 
16 Coll. ii. (MS.), Dyce, Sta. Cam.+, Dyce, Words. A Patrician. Cam.+. 
Words. Craig. after you, 1. 16, and Volum. Bell. 1. Pat. Mal. et cet. 
reading: to Vol. who enters. Ktly. Nobler.] nobler part. Ktly. 


‘Thou shalt be tortured on a wheele to death, Thou with wild horses shalt be 
quartered’ (ed. Pearson, I, 170). [Inasmuch as Dekker’s comedy and Coriolanus 
are nearly contemporaneous and ‘the wheel’ and ‘wild horses’ are mentioned in 
both, small room is left for doubt that we have here the main source of Shakespeare’s 
reference. Either of the quotations from Beard’s volume are, to my mind, much 
more likely sources than any of those incidents cited by Malone, if historic refer- 
ence is sought.—Ep.] 

5. precipitation] WHITELAW: That is, precipice—Scummpt (Coriolanus): Not 
precipice, but rather downfall. ‘Might’ instead of may, required by sequence of 
tense, may be referred to other cases, and is here better to elucidate the purely 
hypothetical character of the expression—W. A. Wricut: Precipitousness, the 
space through which anything is precipitated—Casr (Arden Sh.): Not apparently 
as Schmidt (Lex.) explains it, ‘the throwing or being thrown headlong,’ but the 
precipitousness, the precipice. The whole expression means: so that no man, 
standing at the top, however keen-eyed, could see the bottom. 

6. the beame of sight] W. A. WricuT: That is, farther than the eye could pierce. 
Compare Merry Wives, I, iii, 68: ‘Sometimes the beam of her view gilded my 
foot,’ like a ray of light proceeding from a luminous body. 

8. Enter Volumnia] Cottier (Notes and Emendations, etc., p. 357): A rather 
noticeable change is made by the old annotator in the entrance of Volumnia: 
in print, she is made to come in just before the Patrician’s speech, ‘You do the 
nobler,’ standing by and saying nothing, while Coriolanus speaks of her in the 
third person. A manuscript emendation fixes her arrival on the scene, more 
naturally perhaps, at the words of Coriolanus addressed expressly to her, ‘I talk 
of you,’ &c. We may suppose that this arrangement represents the practice of 
our old stage in this respect. 

9. You do the Nobler] BapHam (Criticism A pplied to Sh., p. 10): What a strange 
jumble is here!—‘You do the nobler!’ Can any critic produce a passage from 
Shakespeare to justify such an expression as this? or if he could, shall we believe 
that the Patrician is intended to encourage him in his contumacy? If so, why does 
Coriolanus bring in the mention of his mother, and justify himself, as he is here 
made to do, by her example? And then what a gross contradiction to the general 
economy of the play, that Coriolanus whose respect for his mother is stronger 
than his ambition or his revenge,—who is to him the single object of his deepest 
passion, family pride—should talk at her, and then turn round and tell her so; 


336 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Il, Sc. ii. 


Corio. I mufe my Mother 10 
Do’s not approue me further, who was wont 


11. further) farther Coll. Wh. i. 


and a pretty character he gives of her. She, a high born, calls the plebeians by 
the vilest names; as if the coarseness, which political animosity barely excuses in 
a man, was becoming in a Roman matron. And then observe how the ingenious 
editors distort the plain meaning of words. ‘I muse’ is J think, but here, forsooth, 
it must mean I wonder. The truth is, Volumnia does not enter until the words 
‘I talk of you,’ as the very words declare; for had she been on the scene that 
information would have been superfluous. But Volumnia’s name was there, no 
doubt, and the nearest approximation to the original passage which we have to 
offer is this: 
‘Yet will I still 
Be thus to them. 
Pat. You do the noble Jady 
Volumnia wrong in this. 
Cor. I muse my mother 
Does not approve my father, who was wont,’ &c. 


[Ten years later Badham, in his Essay on the Text of Shakespeare (Cambridge 
Essays, p. 278), returns to this passage, not having, in the meantime, discovered 
any satisfactory explanation of the line ‘You do the nobler.’ He remarks: ‘Iam 
very sure that Shakespeare himself would not have understood it; but, even sup- 
posing that it means something, it cannot mean anything which can suggest to 
Coriolanus’s mind the reflection about his mother.’—Since the issuance of Badham’s 
earlier work Collier’s publication of his MS. annotator’s notes had appeared, 
wherein was a corroboration of Badham’s conjecture as to the proper placing of 
the entrance of Volumnia. Badham makes, however, no reference to his having 
been thus anticipated, but cites the MS. correction as a proof of her later 
entrance, and thus continues: ‘If the appearance of Volumnia did not first bring 
her to Coriolanus’s mind, something else must have done so, as it is plainly re- 
pugnant to all dramatic propriety that such a subject should be introduced by an 
abrupt reminiscence. Now the only thing that could have suggested the thought of 
his mother must be the previous mention of her name in the speech of the Patrician. 
When this was corrupted, the word Volumnia remained as if it had been a stage- 
direction, and the rest was omitted.’ Badham’s conjectural restoration of the 
whole passage as it must have stood before corruption is, with but slight change, 
similar to that given in his earlier work; instead of ‘wrong in this’ he substitutes 
‘wrong herein’; and, commendably, omits any mention of Coriolanus’s father in 
]. 11.—Ep.]—Dvyce (ed. ii.): Dr Badham thinks that there is a considerable hiatus 
here—which I doubt. The Patrician is commending Coriolanus’s obstinate 
determination to stand out against the plebs. 

10. I muse] JOHNSON: That is, J wonder, I am at a loss—W. A. WRricuHT: 
Compare Richard IIT: I, iii, 303, ‘I muse why she’s at liberty’; where for ‘muse 
why’ the quartos read ‘wonder.’ 

11. further] Cottier and R. G. Waite, ed. i., are, I think, at fault in here 
reading farther. Farther refers to physical distance, further is the comparative of 
forth and refers to process of thought, as, one proceeds farther on a journey, and 


ACT III, Sc. ii.] CORIOLANUS 337 


To call them Wollen Vaffailes, things created 12 
To buy and fell with Groats, to fhew bare heads 
In Congregations, to yawne, be ftill, and wonder, 


When one but of my ordinance ftood vp 15 
To {peake of Peace, or Warre. I talke of you, 
12. Wollen] woollen Rowe. 16. Warre.] Warre, F,F;. War, F,, 


13, 14. heads In Congregations, to Rowe. war; Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
yawne,) heads, In congregations to Var. ’73. war:— Cap. 


yawn, Schmidt. [To his Mother. Han. [To Vol. 
14. to yawne] yawn Pope, Theob. Johns. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Han. Warb. Johns. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Wh. Neils. 


advances further in an argument. ‘Further’ is, therefore, here the correct word 
to use in connection with ‘approve.’—Ep. 

12. Wollen Vassailes] CaPELL (vol. I, pt i, p. 92): What shall we say is the sense 
of the epithet ‘Woolen’? Clothed in wool does not satisfy; and the editor rather 
inclines to think it has some particular meaning which does not occur to him; or 
else, that the word is not right, and yet he does not think it is—wooden.—C. & M. 
CowbEN CLARKE (Shakespeare): The way in which ‘them’ is used here, alluding 
to the common people, affords a fine instance of Shakespeare’s dramatic way of 
abruptly commencing a scene, as well as of using a pronoun in reference to an 
unnamed but thoroughly understood antecedent. The term ‘woolen vassals’ 
here shows Shakespeare’s intention to convey the circumstance that the garment 
worn by the Plebeians was of wool; and this lends support to our interpretation of 
the word ‘woolvish’ as given in our note on II, iii, r15. At the same time the 
epithet ‘vassals’ affords confirmation to our surmise that slavish may have been 
the word for which the Folio printers mistakenly substituted ‘wooluish.’— 
Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): So the ‘rude Mechanicals’ of Mid. N. Dream 
(III, i, 79) are called ‘hempen home-spuns.’ The ‘woolen statute cap,’ by English 
law worn by commoners whose income was under 20 marks, has perhaps influenced 
this reference to coarse clad vassals or dependents. [All sumptuary laws were 
repealed in the first year of King James I. (1603); six or seven years before the date 
of composition of this present play.—En.] 

15, 16. When one but... stood vp To speake] C. & M. CowpDEN CLARKE 
(Shakespeare): When one of my rank did but stand up to speak, &c. As we inter- 
pret this sentence, the construction is transposed here; but the line so runs that 
it will admit of three different interpretations: first, the one we have given; second, 
when but a single man of my rank stands up, &c.; third, when a man but of my 
rank in the state stands up, &c. ‘Ordinance’ is here used in the sense of order, 
vank. [This is the only passage wherein Shakespeare uses the word in just this 
sense; elsewhere it means established rule or divine dispensation, as is shown by 
Scumipt (Lex.) from several examples. In his edition of this play, which appeared 
subsequently, Schmidt dissents at interpreting ‘ordinance’ in the sense of rank, for 
the very reason that it is not thus used elsewhere, and is disposed to accept the 
alternative meaning given by Delius, Authority, power, paraphrasing thus: Except, 
indeed, one who is not, as I am by my authority, ordained to speak of peace or 
war. ‘We should notice,’ adds Schmidt, ‘that Coriolanus speaks the words for 
himself and drops the ordinarily accepted modesty.’ CasE notes that no other 
instance of ‘ordinance’ in the sense of rank appears to be known.—Eb.] 

22 


338 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ii. 


Why did you wifh me milder? Would you haue me HOT7 
Falfe to my Nature? Rather fay, I play 
The man I am. 

Volum. Oh fir, fir, fir, 20 
I would haue had you put your power well on 
Before you had worne it out. 


Corio. Let go. 23 
18. Falfe...fay] As one line, and 23. Let go] Lets go F;. Let’s go Fy, 
reading: ...zature, mother? Lettsom. Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. 
19. The] Truly the Han. Huds. ii, 73. Why, let it go. Han. Cap. Let it 
Words. WNobly the Cap. go all Ritson. Let go, let go. Lettsom, 
20. fir, fir, fir,| son, son, son! Coll. ii, Anon. ap. Cam. i, Words. 
iii. (MS.). 


18, 19. Rather say ...I am] SteeveNs: Sir Thomas Hanmer supplies the 
defect in this line [l. 19] very judiciously, in my opinion, by reading: ‘Truly 
the man I am.’ Tvuly is properly opposed to ‘False’ in the preceding line.— 
Bapuam (Text. of Sh.; Cambridge Essays, p. 278): This defectiveness of the line 
[18] would not appear, to many competent judges, a matter of suspicion. I will 
freely confess that the line of eight syllables occurs so often in Shakespeare that 
in any less corrupt text it would be ridiculous to retain the least misgiving about it; 
but to my ear, at least, it sounds as unrhythmically abrupt as the dramatic Alex- 
andrine is abrupt and yet rhythmical, or as the six-syllable line is well suited to an 
harmonious pause; but in the passage before us, if there is any meaning, it is at 
least very obscurely expressed; I venture, therefore, to propose an insertion: .. . 
Rather say you are glad I play the man I am. 

20. Oh sir, sir, sir] CoLLTER (Wotes and Emendations, etc., p. 357): The alter- 
ation of the MS. Corrector is certainly the more proper—T. MommsrEn (Der 
Perkins Folio, p. 181): Either reading is acceptable, yet son is more dignified. 
‘Sir’ said to a child is, now at least, somewhat trivial—Dvyce (Strictures, etc., 
p. 156): Here the MS. Corrector’s ‘improvement’ entirely does away with one 
of Shakespeare’s touches of nature. In the reiterated ‘sir’ Volumnia testifies 
her displeasure at Coriolanus. [Dyce later, in his ed. ii, repeats the foregoing 
objection to the change of the MS. Corrector; and records the fact that W. N. 
Lettsom makes the same change.—Ep.]—KerIcuTLEy (Expositor, p. 366): The 
son, son, sont of Collier’s Folio is much better. She never elsewhere says Sir to 
him. [See Appendix: Cottter’s Trilogy, p. 595.] 

23. Let go] STEEVENS commends the alterations of Hanmer and Ritson as 
proper to complete the metre, adding: ‘Too many of the short replies in this and 
other plays of Shakespeare are apparently mutilated.’—C. & M. CowpENn CLARKE 
(Shakespeare): Various alterations have been proposed to supply the two addi- 
tional feet in the line, which metre-mongers suppose it to require, but which we 
think Shakespeare’s dramatic judgment and poetic taste caused him occasionally 
and purposely to omit. ‘Let go’ is an idiomatic use of the words (as the French 
employ their phrase ‘laissez donc’) to express dissent from a last spoken opinion, 
and to signify prohibition of further discussion—W. A. WricHt: The usual form 
of this expression is ‘Let it go,’ that is, let it pass, never mind. See King John, 
III, iii, 33, ‘I had a thing to say, but let it go.’ 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 339 


Vol. You might haue beene enough the man you are, 


With ftriuing leffe to be fo : Leffer had bin 25 
The things of your difpofitions, if 
You had not fhew’d them how ye were disfpos’d oy | 
25. Lefer] less Anon. ap. Cam. 26. difpofitions] disposition Han. 
26. things of] Ff, Schmidt. things 27. ye] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Dyce, 
that thwart Rowe, Pope, Han. thwart- Sta. Cam.++, Words. Huds. ii, Neils. 
ings of Theob. et cet. you Han. et cet. 


26. The things] TazoBatp: A few letters replaced, that by some carelessness 
dropped out, restore us the poet’s genuine reading, ‘The thwartings of,’ etc —CAPELL: 
A most certain correction.—Matone: Mr Theobald only improved on Mr Rowe’s 
correction. [See Text. Notes.|—Coximr: It would be difficult to find a better 
word [than ¢hwartings], considering either the sense or the probability that the 
compositor misread the manuscript from which he printed—Scumupt (Coriolanus): 
“The things,’ that is, the Plebeians (compare II, ii, 117; III, i, 212; II, ii, 12). 
They would have been less of your disposition, had you but shown yourself less 
like yourself, and like the man you played, if, etc. This is intelligible, and yet 
editors have conjectured about the passage, and almost unanimously adopted 
Theobald’s correction. The plural ‘dispositions’ is favorable (if not quite con- 
clusive) for the Folio reading, besides the fact that ‘them’ and ‘they’ according to 
the new reading have no expressed connection. Furthermore, the tone of the speech, 
which through the remark that the despised Plebeians, the things, could equally 
extol their manhood, retains its pointed character—[LEo (Jahrbuch, xv, 1880, 
p- 52), in a review of Schmidt’s edition of this play, singles out the foregoing note 
for special notice. He refuses to accept the three passages cited by Schmidt as 
proof that the word ‘things’ is necessarily used by Shakespeare in a technical 
sense for the Plebeians. These passages are: ‘a thing of blood,’ where Cominius 
thus speaks of Coriolanus; ‘hence rotten thing,’ where Coriolanus thus addresses 
Sicinius; and ‘woolen vassals, things created,’ etc. In these two latter examples 
Leo points out that ‘things’ is not a contemptuous epithet, so much as a term 
equivalent to creature. Leo, in fact, does not agree to any one of Schmidt’s argu- 
ments in favor of the intelligibility of the Folio reading. As this is, however, 
but an interpretation of another’s interpretation and not an elucidation of Shake- 
speare’s text I have refrained from a more detailed transcribing of Leo’s remarks. 
He concludes with a question for consideration as to whether with the word 
thwartings the adjective ‘lesser’ is not the more appropriate, while with ‘things’ 
less must be inserted as an emphatic adverb. An emendation which was also 
proposed by an Anonymous commentator ap. Cam.—Ep.]—W. A. Wricut: Per- 
haps, having regard to what follows, we might read, ‘The things that cross.’ 

26. dispositions] That is, mood, caprice. Compare Lear, I, iv, 242: ‘—put 
away These dispositions that of late transform you.’ 

27, 28. them... they] C. & M. Cowpen Crarke (Shakespeare): The intro- 
duction of ‘them’ here, which in strict grammatical construction refers to thwart- 
ings, but which really and in Shakespearian construction refers to the Plebeians, 
admirably serves to maintain the characteristic effect of the dialogue, both mother 
and son alluding to the unmentioned but perfectly comprehended theme of their 
wrathful antipathy by the same pronoun. See 1. 2 above. 


340 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ii. 


Ere they lack’d power to croffe you. 28 
Corio. Let them hang.1 
Volum. I, and burne too. 30 


30. Volum.] A Patrician. Glo. 


28. Ere they lack’d] Bartey (ii, 371): Theobald, by substituting thwartings 
for ‘things,’ restored both significance and rhythm to |. 26; but, strange to say, 
he took no notice of the equally obvious defect in this line, expressing a sense 
exactly the reverse of that which the context requires. The genuine reading is 
doubtless ‘when they lack’d,’ etc. It is probable that when was first perverted 
into where, and the latter, not suiting the sense, was abbreviated to ‘ere,’ or shrank 
perhaps to the same dimensions from being misheard.—VeERity (Student’s Sh.): 
That is, before they lost the power, while they still had it in their power (by refusing 
to assent to his nomination to the Consulship). With verbs signifying a negative 
idea, e. g., ‘lack,’ ‘want,’ there is often some ambiguity of expression due to the 
general tendency to duplicate the negative. A striking instance is Macbeth, 
III, vi, 8: ‘Who cannot want the thought? = Who can want (i. e., ‘lack’) the 
thought?’ [An interpretation more rational than Bailey’s, since it does not 
involve a change of the text.—Eb.] 

30. Volum. I, and burne too] Dyce (ed. ii.): The Cambridge Editors (Globe 
Shakespeare) give this speech to ‘A Patrician.’ Ican only say that whoever re- 
collects Mrs Siddons in this scene will, I am sure, allow that the words ‘Ay, and 
burn too’ seemed to come quite naturally from the lips of Volumnia as a sudden 
spirt of contempt for that rabble whom, however, she saw the necessity of her son’s 
endeavoring to conciliate-——W. A. WricutT: In the Folios this speech is given to 
Volumnia, but as it seems strange in the mouth of one who is counselling modera- 
tion, the editors of the Globe edition gave it to ‘A Patrician.’ Dyce says that no 
one who had heard it spoken by Mrs Siddons could doubt its appropriateness, but 
surely it ought to be ‘Aside.’—Pacer: Perhaps this is said sarcastically: Yes, but 
what if they take to rioting and burning. Compare Jul. Ces., III, ii, 208: ‘Re- 
venge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire!’ Though, of course, it may simply be expressive 
of her hearty wish that they may be burned as well as hanged.—E. K. CHAMBERS 
(Warwick Sh.): The Globe editors transfer this to ‘A Patrician,’ but we may take 
it as an outburst of Volumnia’s inmost personal feeling, and hardly inconsistent 
with the policy she is urging —Herrorp (Eversley Sh.): The Folios give this 
speech to Volumnia, but modern editors, arguing that she is advising patience, 
take it from her. Yet her point of view is quite clear. She despises and hates 
the plebeians as much as Coriolanus can, but she would choose her own time to 
show her wrath. Compare ll. 37, 38, and 79-81. Compare also Menenius in 
III, i, 322.—Miss,C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Volumnia says this with a skill 
peculiar to her creator, the Poet. She does not contrary her son by mollifying 
him. She is as completely of his opinion as to unworthiness as he can be, she vir- 
tually thus reminds him. She makes her point of policy the clearer and the more 
effective with him by agreeing with him here. Menenius is not so wise and not 
so effective as Volumnia. [Wright would make this an Aside.] This, of course, 
would make it useless as a challenge of her son’s attention to her on just the point 
she raises and no other. The part Volumnia plays in this scene is all Shake- 
speare’s.—Gorpon: I think, with Aldis Wright, that this should be an Aside.— 


ACT III, SC. ii.] 


CORIOLANUS 341 


Enter Menenius with the Senators. 31 


Men. 


Come, come, you haue bin too rough, fomthing 


too rough : you muft returne, and mend it. 


Sen. There’s no remedy, 


Vnileffe by not fo doing, our good Citie 35 


Cleaue in the midd’ft, and perifh. 
Volum. Pray be counfail’d ; 


I haue a heart as little apt as yours, 38 


31. with the] Ff, Rowe,+, Varr. 
Ran. Cam. Cla. Neils. and Cap. et cet. 

32, 33. As two lines, ending: rough 
...dt. Pope et seq. 

32. you haue] yow’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, 
Words. Huds. ii. 

Ban sen.|-at. 9. Cap. 1 Sen. Mal. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Sta. 
Hal. Ktly, Wh. First Sen. Dyce. 


(conj.), Gordon, Craig ii. as tickle- 
shaped P. A. Daniel. of metile, apt 
Craig i. as tickle-apt Huds. ii. (Daniel 
conj.). as little warp’d Bulloch. 

38. as yours,| as your’s To brook re- 
proof without the use of anger, Coll. ii. 
as your’s To brook control without the 
use of anger Coll. iii. (MS.). as yours 
to yield Ktly. 


38. as little apt] of metile apt Sta. 


Case (Arden Sh.): It is clear that the strange feeling of scorn which the noble 
Coriolanus nourished for the commons of Rome had been sucked in with his very 
milk. In North’s Plutarch we get nothing of this side of the character of Volumnia. 
See also Il. 37 to 40 below, and what follows. 

34-36. There’s no remedy ... and perish] W. A. WricuT: That is, there’s no 
help for it; it cannot be helped. Compare Meas. for Meas., II, i, 295: ‘It grieves 
me for the death of Claudio; But there’s no remedy.’ We should have ‘Lest’ 
{in place of ‘Unless’]. The construction is loose, and perhaps Shakespeare meant 
to say: ‘Unless you would have our good city cleave in the midst,’ &c., or ‘Unless 
our good city is to cleave,’ &c.—DEIGHTON: There’s no way out of it; you must 
eat humble pie, unless, by your not doing so, you are content that our city should 
go to wrack and ruin. I owe this explanation to Mr W. J. Craig. [Case does 
not, however, include this among Craig’s notes on this play in the Arden Shake- 
speare.—ED.] 

38. I haue a heart as little apt as yours, etc.] CoLtrer (Notes and Emenda- 
tions, etc., p. 357): To what was Volumnia’s heart ‘as little apt’ as that of Corio- 
lanus? The insertion of a missing line (the absence of which has not hitherto 
been suspected) enables us to give the answer: ‘I have a heart as little apt as yours 
To brook control without the use of anger.’ The line in Italics is written in a blank 
space, and a mark made to where it ought to come in. The compositor was, 
doubtless, misled by the recurrence of the same words at the ends of the two lines, 
and carelessly omitted the first. From whence, if not from some independent 
authority, whether heard or read, was this addition to the text derived? —SINGER 
(Sh. Vindicated, etc., p. 220): This interpolation [by the MS. Corrector] is absurd; 
if a line is missing it must have been something very different. It seems probable 
that the word ‘apt’ has been misprinted for soft, and we may then read, without 
the superfluous and tautologous line interpolated, ‘I have a heart as little soft 
as yours, But yet a brain,’ etc. The poet’s use of the word elsewhere countenances 


342 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


[38. I haue a heart as little apt as yours] 


this conjecture. Thus Baret: ‘To become or wax soft, to appease itselfe, and 
become gentle; to wax effeminate.—ANon. (Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, P- 
323): Here the old corrector is again at his forging tricks upon a large scale. The 
interpolated line is very unlike the diction of Shakespeare, and is not at all called 
for. ‘Apt’ here means pliant, accommodating. ‘I have a heart as stubborn and 
unaccommodating as your own; but yet,’ &c. Mr Singer proposes soft for ‘apt’; 
but this seems unnecessary. [‘Seems,’ nay it is; I know not ‘seems.’-—Ep.]— 
STAUNTON: Mr Collier’s annotator here indulges in one of his most daring flights— 
the intercalation of a whole line!—rendering the passage thus, ‘To brook reproof 
without the use of anger.’ This interpolation (which, by the way, has been corrupted 
or corrected since its publication in Mr Collier’s Notes and Emendations, and in 
his Mono-volume Shakespeare, where it reads, ‘brook control’) we hold to be quite 
superfluous, and, if even a /acuna were manifest, to be altogether inadmissible. 
For admitting, which we are not guilty of, the antiquity claimed by Mr Collier for 
the marginal annotations of his copy of the Second Folio, we agree with Mr R. G. 
White (Shakespeare’s Scholar, p. 76) that ‘the interpolation of an entire line by one 
man in 1662 is as little justifiable as the entire interpolation of an entire scene by 
another man in 1762 or 1853.’ That there is a difficulty in the construction of the 
speech as it stands in the ancient text nobody can deny. But it is surely one sus- 
ceptible of a solution less perilous and arbitrary than the insertion of a new line. 
Our own impression, long before the Perkins Folio came to light, was that the 
transcriber or compositor had slightly erred in the words ‘as little,’ and that the 
poet probably wrote, of mettle, i. e., of temper, &c.—‘I have a heart of mettle apt 
as yours,’ which naturally enough led to ‘But yet a brain,’ &c.—[The reading 
‘reproof’ instead of ‘control’ in the interpolated line, to which Staunton calls atten- 
tion, appears in the text of Collier’s ed. ii.; it is, I think, due to inadvertence on 
Collier’s part, as it is not thus printed in his subsequent lists; and in the text of 
his ed. iii, 1878, the error—if such it be—is corrected without remark. See also 
Appendix: CoLtrer’s Trilogy, where reference is made to this interpolation, p. 
595.—Ep.]—Lro (Coriolanus): I prefer another reading [to either Singer’s or to 
Collier’s MS. interpolation], and propose, therefore, ‘I have a heart as lightly rapt 
as yours,’ etc. Many instances of this use of the word lightly are to be found in 
Johnson Richardson (R. of Brunne, Chaucer, Gower, Holland, Plinie), and 
Coleridge’s Glossarial Index (R. of Gloucester), and even in this play we find it, 
IV, i, 34; as to rapt see Johnson Richardson (rapt: borne, carried away, trans- 
ported; and hence (met.) rapt, rapture, transport, trance, ecstasy, etc.), and IV, v, 
t19 below, where the heart is rapt in joy; but it might as easily be rapt in anger. 
But without the violence of interpolating a line for which no evidence can be 
brought due significance may be given to the passage by substituting a single word. 
Let ‘apt’ be replaced by ‘cool’ or calm or tame. The proposed substitution would, 
at all events, effect the requisite antithesis between the fiery heart and the cool 
head.—KEIcuHTLeEy (Expositor, p. 366): There is, I think, either an aposiopesis at 
the end of this line, or a line is lost, as Volumnia is speaking quite calmly; or, to 
stoop, to yield, or something of that sort is omitted—Scumupr (Coriolanus): ‘Apt’ 
is here impressible, and then in the ethical sense, pliant, accommodating. In Venus 
and Adonis, ‘His tenderer cheek receives her soft hand’s print As apt as new-fall’n 
snow takes any dint,’ [I. 354]. In Timon, ‘She is young and apt,’ [I, i, 132]. The 
numerous attempts by editors at emendation here bear witness to their lack of 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 343 


[38. I haue a heart as little apt as yours] 
knowledge of the language of Shakespeare. [The presumptuousness of the con- 
cluding sentence is somewhat mitigated by the valid claim to a wide knowledge of 
Shakespearian language resulting from Schmidt’s compilation of the Shakespeare 
Lexicon. ‘This does not, however, seem to have been a sufficient justification, since 
his own countryman, Leo (Jahrbuch, xv, p. 53), thinks it necessary that he ‘take a 
lance in defence of the Editors,’ remarking that their lack of knowledge of the lan- 
guage of Shakespeare should be shown by definite examples, without which such a 
charge is either unjust or at least unsupported. Leo objects to Schmidt’s examples 
in illustration of ‘apt’ in the sense impressible, because in that from Ven. & Ad. 
the word is there used ‘adverbially and thus stands in grammatical relation to 
what precedes and follows.’ The example from Timon is unfortunately chosen 
since the sentence is uncompleted, and therefore might raise the question with 
many editors as to whether a part of the passage had been lost. Suppose the 
rest of the sentence had been, for example, ‘She is young and apt to yield to new 
impressions?” How then?—Leo, for his part, thinks the only rational explanation 
of the passage to be that ‘the words “that leads my use of anger To better van- 
tage” depend equally upon “heart” and “brain,” and if this indeed is not verbally 
correct, I am led to think,’ he continues, ‘that we have here one of those cases 
where it is necessary to call upon the language of Shakespeare, and especially that 
peculiarly characteristic rapidity of thought which caused him to make verbal 
leaps, which so irritate the scrupulosity of grammarians. His thought may have been 
as follows: “I have a heart as little apt as yours to lead, etc., but yet a brain that 
leads my use of anger to better vantage.” And that he has clothed this in a verbal 
unprecise form. Such an interpretation is quite allowable to almost any editor, 
even the possibility of another emendation, and so I do not in the least regret that 
in my edition of Coriolanus I proposed the reading lightly rapt, and that I there 
supported it with examples.’ This must, indeed, have caused Schmidt to smile 
grimly at the wincing of at least one galled jade, smarting under the accusation 
of a lack of acquaintance with the language of Shakespeare—Ep.]—W. A. WRIGHT: 
That is, as little capable of being taught by others, as little susceptible. Compare 
Jul. Ces., V, iii, 68: ‘O hateful error, melancholy’s child, Why dost thou show to 
the apt thoughts of men The things that are not.’ [Wright considers that the 
line in the Perkins Folio is unnecessarily inserted.|—Hupson (ed. ii.), on the ground 
that it ‘seems hardly possible to gather any fitting sense’ from the folio text, 
adopts a reading, partly his own and partly due to P. A. Daniel, which he credits, 
however, wholly to Daniel [see Text. Notes]. This hybrid reading, tickle-apt, 
Hudson thus explains: ‘As dangerous to meddle with; as sensitive; as apt to explode 
if stirred, or to fire up if touched with provocation. The Poet has tickle repeatedly 
in a kindred sense.’ In illustration of this very term Hudson quotes ‘follow all 
his [water’s] sways And tickle-aptness to exceed his bounds.—Chapman, Byron’s 
Conspiracy, (II, i, p. 212, ed. Pearson]. Daniel neither explains nor illustrates by 
example his compound.—Ep.—Batey (i, 167): The MS. interpolation undoubt- 
edly restores sense to the prior line, but there is no external evidence for it; there 
are no grounds for admitting it in preference to a score of other amendments; 
and it does not commend itself to our acceptance by any peculiar felicity. Far 
from being happy, the new line is indeed intrinsically feeble, while it causes an 
awkward repetition of the phrase ‘use of anger,’ and, if I mistake not, involves the 
necessity of putting a different construction on the repeated phrase in each line,— 


344 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ii. 


But yet a braine, that leades my vfe of Anger 
To better vantage. 40 
Mene. Well faid, Noble woman : 


confounds, in fact, two different meanings. In the interpolated line the use of 
anger can mean only actual anger; in the next line it means proneness to anger— 
the custom or habit of growing angry. [As another mode of dealing with the Folio 
text Bailey suggests the reading, ‘I have a heart to kindle apt as yours.’ ‘The 
transition,’ he concludes, ‘is not easy to imagine, and the suggested reading con- 
sequently is not entitled to more than to be held in doubt with the rest of the 
conjectures I have cited.—Ep.J—Kinnear (p. 319): The Folio has ‘as little 
apt’—probably the last part of stoops in a mutilated MS. corrupted into ‘apt.’ 
The ‘well said’ of Menenius, who repeats the most important word ‘stoop,’ apply- 
ing it to Marcius, indicates that it is the true reading. Their whole aim was 
to induce Marcius to stoop. Volumnia says, ‘correcting thy stout heart Now 
humble as the ripest mulberry.’ <A brain that leads suggests that a verb is re- 
quired with ‘heart.’ All the compared editions retain ‘apt,’ but this word is never 
used by Shakespeare in a sense appropriate here. [Had Kinnear but consulted 
a Concordance or Schmidt’s Lexicon he would, I am sure, have seen fit to modify 
this last assertion. See following note——Ep.]—Casr (Arden Sh.): Desdemona, 
according to Iago (Othello, II, iii, 326), ‘is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a 
disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more than she is requested.’ 
Volumnia has as little apt a disposition (heart) as Coriolanus. The use of apt 
is essentially the same in both plays, and the context in Coriolanus makes its mean- 
ing as plain within certain limits as if Volumnia had proceeded to define it ex- 
tensively. We may take it as impressible, or flexible (‘as little apt’ = inflexible), 
or compliant, or docile, or (with closer reference to the context demanded), ready, 
willing (to return and mend a roughness, or eat humble pie). Shakespeare uses 
the word many times for receptive, teachable, prone, either alone (Hamlet, I, 
v, 31, ‘I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be,’ etc.) or with extension (Lear, 
II, iv, 309, ‘And what they incense him to, being apt To have his ear abused,’ etc.). 
No commentator has objected to the word in Othello, but the text has been 
tampered with here. Mr Craig seems to have felt a difficulty in interpreting 
‘apt,’ and believing that ‘anger,’ 1. 39, pointed to Staunton’s mettle, intended to 
suggest ‘to mettle apt as yours,’ 7. e., as prone to anger as yours. [This last refers 
to the notes prepared by W. J. Craig for the edition of this play in the Arden Sh., 
and left unfinished by his untimely death. Case undertook the task of arranging 
and completing the work. It is noteworthy, I think, that up to the time of the 
unnecessary interpolation by the MS. Corrector neither editors nor commentators 
had been conscious of any corruption or difficulty in this passage. The meaning 
of the word ‘apt’ was perfectly understood apparently. It is not included in the 
Glossaries of either Hanmer or Capell. Neither Collier nor Singer suggest a 
change; but with the appearance of the MS. interpolation the whole pack is at 
once in full cry. Singer is the one who, unconsciously perhaps, metaphorically 
drew a herring across the trail and started them all on a false scent, hunting a 
substitute for the word ‘apt,’ a word which Shakespeare uses in many other places, 
and which, as Case says, has not been elsewhere suspected. ‘The latter’s excellent 
note is a fitting finish to the discussion —En.] 


ACT II, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 345 


Before he fhould thus ftoope to’th’heart, but that 42 
The violent fit a’th’time craues it as Phyficke 
For the whole State; I would put mine Armour on, 
Which I can fcarfely beare. 45 
Corio. What muft I do ? 
Mene. Returne to th’ Tribunes. 
Corio. Well, what then?what then? 
Mene. Repent, what you haue {poke. 


Corto. For them, I cannot do it to the Gods, 50 
42. to’th’heart] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 44. I would] I’'d Pope+, Sta. Dyce 
Schmidt. to th’ herd Theob. Han. ii, Words. Huds. ii. 
Warb. Johns. Wh. i, Dyce ii, Huds. mine] my Hal. 
Words. 0’ the heart Coll.ii.(MS.). to 46-48. What...Well] As one line Cap. 
the herd Cap. et cet. Steey. Var. 03, 13, Sing. Knt, Hal: 
43. @th’| oth’ Fy, Rowe,+, Wh. i. Ktly. 
o’ the Cap. et cet. 50. For them,| For them? F;F,, Rowe 
time] times Rowe,+. et seq. 


to the] for the Rowe,+. 


42. stoope to’th’heart] THEosBaLp: But how did Coriolanus stoop to his 
heart? We rather, as we vulgarly express it, made his proud heart stoop to the 
necessity of the times. I am persuaded my emendation [herd] gives the true read- 
ing. So before in this play, ‘Are these your herd?’ [III, i, 45]. So in Jul. Cas., 
‘—when he perceived the common herd was glad he refus’d the crown,’ &c., [I, 
li, 264.—W. A. Wright notes that this reading was suggested to Theobald by 
Warburton, but in a letter to Warburton, dated 1729, Theobald gives this emenda- 
tion as his own. Warburbon in his ed. 1747 terms the Folio reading ‘nonsense,’ 
remarking that it should be herd, without any mention of Theobald’s change.—Ep.] 
—Matone: Mr Theobald’s conjecture is confirmed by a passage in which Corio- 
lanus thus describes the people, ‘You shames of Rome. You herd of—’ [I, v, 
49]. Herd was anciently spelt heard. Hence ‘heart’ crept into the old copy. 
[For this spelling see line quoted by Theobald, and also the above.—Ep.]—CoL1iiER 
(ed. ii.): The MS. Corrector gives us a better change [than Theobald’s] in reference 
to the required submission of Coriolanus, viz., ‘stoop o’ the heart,’ which only 
supposes the misprint of the preposition fo, ‘o’’ or of by the early printer; to ‘stoop 
o’ the heart’ is a very strong and intelligible expression. The hero had been 
called upon to make his heart stoop to the demands of the populace.—Scumipt 
(Coriolanus): None of the modern editors, who follow Theobald’s change, have 
been regardful of the fact that Menenius, in his own way, wishes to make a com- 
ment on Volumnia’s words and here refers to ‘heart’ in 1. 38, ‘Before he should 
so humble himself, that it goes to his heart, to his soul.’ Compare ‘It angered him 
to the heart,’ 2 Henry IV: II, iv, 9; ‘He lies to the heart,’ Othello, V, ii, 156. 

so. For them...to the Gods} Turoparp (Letter to Warburton, 12 Feb., 
17209; Nichols, Illustrations of Literature, ii, 486): Coriolanus is nowhere else in 
the least irreligious, or speaks with a disrespect to the heavenly powers. I cannot 
think then that he would say here he cannot repent even for the Gods; besides, the 
expression is very exceptionable. I have suspected, ’ForE them? I CAN BUT 
do it ’FoRE the Gods, &c. [Theobald did not repeat this in either edition; it may, 


346 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 111, sc. ii. 


Mutt I then doo’t to them ? 51 
Volum. You are too abfolute, 

Though therein you can neuer be too Noble, 

But when extremities fpeake. I haue heard you fay, 

Honor and Policy, like vnfeuer’d Friends, 55 

I’th’Warre do grow together : Grant that,and tell me 

In Peace, what each of them by th’other loofe, 

That they combine not there ? 
Corio. Tufh,tutfh. 


<Mene. A good demand. 60 
Volum. If it be Honor in your Warres,to feeme 
53, 54. Noble,...fpeake.] noble.... 56. I’th’] I’the Cap. et seq. 
speak, Var. ’78, 85, noble;...speak— together] toge’y Badham. 
Del. noble,...speak,— Ktly. noble... 57. of them] o’ them Var. 73. 
speak— Id. conj. loofe] loses Pope,+. 
54. I haue] I’ve Pope,t+, Dyce ii, 61-66. Om. Bell. 


Words. Huds. ii. 


therefore, be considered withdrawn—Ep.]—Scumipt (Coriolanus): What the 
modern editors imagine when collectedly they place either an exclamation or 
interrogation point after ‘For them’ they have left unexplained. ‘For them’ 
simply means, as for them. ‘I cannot repent before the gods of my actions con- 
cerning the people, and must I do it to them themselves?’ 

50. For them] For the use of this preposition with ‘repent,’ compare, ‘—For 
this same lord, I do repent’; also, ‘I never did repent for doing good,’ Mer. of 
Ven., III, iv, 10.—Eb. 

52-54. You are...speake] Matone: Except in cases of urgent necessity, 
when your resolute and noble spirit, however commendable at other times, ought 
to yield to the occasion. 

54. But when extremities speake] Drzius: Volumnia leaves her sentence 
unfinished, the conclusion of which must be, You must accommodate yourself 
accordingly. The editors place a period after ‘speak’ and connect the sentence 
with what has preceded it: Though therein you can never be too noble, except 
when necessity prompts—which gives a very dull meaning to the passage. 

55. Policy] Casr (Arden Sh.): That is, prudent, or dexterous, or crafty manage- 
ment, or stratagem. Compare r Henry VI: III, ii, 2, ‘the gates of Rouen, 
Through which our policy must make a breach.’ 

55. vnseuer’d] W. A. Wricut: That is, inseparable. So ‘unvalued’ for inval- 
uable in Richard III: I, iv, 27, ‘Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels.’ 

57, 58. In Peace... not there] W. A. Wricur: Compare Crabbe, Tales of 
the Hall, iv, 71, 72° 


‘Sounds too delight us,—Each discordant tone 
Thus mingled please, that fail to please alone.’ 


57. each... loose] For other examples wherein ‘each’ is used for both, and 
with a plural verb, see ABsort, § 12. 

61-66. If it be Honor . . . request] CASE: Volumnia is neither concise nor lucid 
here, but she says in effect: If your use of false appearances to serve your purpose 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 347 


The fame you are not, which for your beft ends 62 
You adopt your policy : How is it leffe or worfe 
That it fhall hold Companionfhip in Peace 
With Honour,as in Warre ; fince that to both 65 
It ftands in like requeft. 

Corio. Why force you this ? 


Volum. Becaufe, that 68 
63. adopt] adapt F;. call Pope,+ 68-73. Lines end: (/feake...in- 
(—Var. ’73). Struction...you...in...Syllables Mal. et 
ts it] is’t Pope,+. seq. 
66-68. It...Becaufe] As one line Cap. 68, 69. As one line (omitting that 
Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Sta. Now) Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. 


As one line Var. ’73. 


in war is reconcilable with honour, what makes it less so in peace, when it is just as 
necessary? 

63. your policy] WHITELAW: That is, as your policy. ‘It,’ the policy of seeming 
other than you are.—Scumipt (Coriolanus) objects to this latter interpretation, 
since the question is not concerned with the quantity of craft, but rather with 
the compatibility with honour. 

65. since that] For other examples of ‘that’ as a conjunctional affix see ABBOTT, 
§ 287. 

67. force] JoHNSON: That is, Why urge you—Matone: So in Henry VIII: 
‘If you will now unite in your complaints, And force them with a constancy,’ 
[EE]. 

68-73. Because, that ... Syllables] Ritson (Cursory Criticism, etc., p. 80) 
offers the following arrangement of these lines as being more harmonious than that 
given by Malone: 

“Because 
That now it lies you on to speak to th’ people, 
Not by your own instruction, nor by th’ matter 
Which your heart prompts you to, but with such words 
That are but roted in your tongue, but bastards, 
Of no allowance to your bosom’s truth.’ 


[It is, I think, unnecessary to transcribe the coarse abuse of Malone with which 
this re-arrangement is accompanied.—Ep.]—BavyFieELp (p. 198): Line 73 can be 
scanned if we make ‘heart’ a monosyllabic foot, but it has no rhythm and is 
not such a line as Shakespeare would have written. I venture to suggest the 
following arrangement. There can be no omission of own before ‘heart,’ as Badham 
suggests [see Text. Notes]; the antithesis is between his heart and his tongue: 


‘Because that now it lies you on to speak 

To the people; not by your own instruction, nor 

By the | matter | which your | heart | prompts you, but | with 

Such words that are but rooted in your tongue, 

Though but | bastards and | sylla | bles of | no al | lowance 

To your | bosom’s truth.’ 
The play itself, to go no further, affords abundant parallels to the enjambement at 
Il. 71 and 72.—Sraprer (p. 452): This whole passage recalls the famous line in 


348 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT UI, SC. ii. 
Now it lyes you on to {peake to th’people: 

Not by your owne inftruction, nor by’th’matter 70 
Which your heart prompts you, but with fuch words 

That are but roated in your Tongue; 72 


69. you on] on you Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. Cap. Wh. i. 

71. your heart| your own heart 
Badham, Huds. ii. 

you] you to Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. 
Ran. Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Sing. Hal. 
Words. you with Ktly. 

72, 73. That are...Syllables|] But roted 
in your tongue, bastards and Syllables 
Pope,+. That are but rooted in your 
tongue, but bastards Cap. Var. 73. 
As one line, omitting Though Var. ’78, 


85, Ran. That are but roted on... 
thought’s bastards, and but... Badham, 
Huds. ii. that are but rooted...naught 
but... Jervis. that are but rooted in... 
thorough bastards, and... Cartwright 
(N. & Q., June 20, 1868). that are 
but rooted in...so but bastards, and... 
J. Wetherill (N. & Q., June 27, 1868). 

72. roated] rooted Johns. Cap. Dyce, 
Glo. Cla. Wh. ii, Words. Gordon, 
Craig. 

in] on Han. 


Hippolytus, for which Aristophanes so severely blamed Euripides as for a maxim 
of more than doubtful morality, ‘My mouth has sworn, but not my heart,’ 
[l. 612. Verity also compares this passage to the ‘Euripidean formula,’ though he 
gives a slightly different rendering of the Greek line: ‘The tongue hath sworn but 
the mind is unpledged.’—Ep.] 

69. it lyes you on] R. G. WurTE, whose text reads ‘on you,’ remarks that for 
this obvious transposition he is responsible; the Text. Notes will show, however, 
that even so careful an editor as White at times failed to examine all the texts 
of his predecessors.—Ep. 

70. by... by’] That is, like, according to; for other examples of this use see 
ABBOTT, § 145. 

71, 72. such words That are, etc.] Compare, for this construction, ‘I cannot 
but remember such things were That were most precious to me,’ Macbeth, IV, iii, 222. 

71. Which your heart prompts you] MALoneE: Perhaps the meaning is, which 
your heart prompts you to. We have many such elliptical expressions in these 
plays. So in Jul. Ces., ‘Thy honourable metal may be wrought From that it is 
dispos’d [fo],’ I, ii, 313. But I rather believe that our author has adopted the 
language of the theatre, and that the meaning is, which your heart suggests to 
you; which your heart furnishes you with, as a prompter furnishes the player with 
the words that have escaped his memory. So afterwards, ‘Come, come, we’ll 
prompt you.’ The editor of the Second Folio, who was entirely unacquainted with 
our author’s peculiarities, reads, ‘prompts you fo,’ and so all the subsequent 
copies read.—STEEVENS: I am content to follow the Second Folio; though perhaps 
we ought to read, ‘which your heart prompts iz you.’ So in A Sermon Preached 
at St. Paul's Crosse, &c., 1589, ‘—for often meditation prompteth in us goode 
thoughtes, begettyng therein goode workes,’ &c. Without some additional 
syllable the verse is defective-—Dycr: We can scarcely doubt that the earlier 
part of this speech has suffered from the transcriber or the printer; with the 
present text, whatever arrangement of the lines be adopted, the verse halts miser- 
ably—WurreLtaw: The 2™4 Folio has ‘prompts you to,’ making ‘heart’ much 
less emphatic. Steevens is wrong in saying that the verse wants the additional 
syllable. With it, ‘matter’ is virtually one syllable; without it, two. For the 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 349 


Though but Baftards, and Syllables 73 
73, 74. Though...allowance,] not privy Words. 


apparently trochaic ending we have, in reality, by laying a strong emphasis on heart, 
two unaccented syllables. Compare 2 Henry IV: I, i, 87, ‘Yet speak, Morton.’ 
72. but roated in your Tongue] BosweELL: Perhaps we should read rooted. 

[Dyce (Remarks, p. 161) makes the same conjecture, apparently as unaware as 
Boswell that he had been therein anticipated [see Text. Notes], and later adopts 
this reading in his text.—CoLmr (ed. ii.): Dyce proposes an emendation here, 
which seems to show that he did not understand the drift of the passage: he wishes 
‘roted’ to be printed rocted, but the words were to be said by rote by the tongue, 
and not to be rooted in it. Besides, Dyce’s proposal is not novel, since Boswell 
formerly hinted at rooted, but did not venture to print it. [Naturally he did not; 
he was printing Malone’s text, not Shakespeare’s.—Ep.]—Dvyce (Strictures on 
’ Collier’s Shakespeare, p. 157): The whole of this passage is very obscure because 
corrupted. As I cannot believe with Mr Collier that ‘words roted In your tongue’ 
could mean ‘words said by rote By the tongue,’ I continue to think that here 
‘roated’ should be ‘rooted.’ (Richardson, in his Dictionary, quoting the passage 
sub ‘Rote,’ observes, ‘Roated in Shakespeare is, perhaps, rooted, fixed, infixed, 
impressed,—no deeper than your tongue.’)—[In his ed. Dyce adds to this quota- 
tion from Richardson, ‘That it is so I make no question.’—Ep.]—C. & M. CowpENn 
CLARKE (Shakespeare): Out of the four passages where ‘rote’ occurs in Shake- 
speare’s plays, the Folio twice spells it, as here, ‘roate.’ We are thus particular 
in stating this point, because Johnson and others change ‘roted’ to rooted here. 
‘Such words that are but roted in your tongue’ appears to us to mean ‘Such words. 
as are but retained by rote in your tongue’; mere words acquired by rote and held 
ready for conventional utterance. Shakespeare uses the expression ‘by rote” 
to convey the idea of ‘without real meaning,’ as well as ‘by a routine process of 
memory,’ in the passage, ‘Oh she knows well Thy love did read by rote and could 
not spell,’ Rom. & Jul., I, ili, 88; and Bacon (in the Essay on Atheism) employs 
it in this comprehensive sense when observing, ‘He rather saith it by rote himself, 
as that he would have, than that he can thoroughly believe it, or be persuaded 
of it.’ We think that to throw out a word like ‘roted’ merely because there has 
been no instance of its use prior to Shakespeare’s is to reject the advantage afforded 
by having such a genius to create expressive words for the language——Casr 
(Arden Sh.): Rooted gets rid of any difficulty about the preposition, and gives the 
sense that the words suggested go no deeper than the tongue. Reading ‘roted’ 
we must interpret memorized, learnt by rote, and (recollecting also the freer use 
of prepositions in Shakespeare’s time) explain ‘in’ as due to preoccupation with 
place, the thought of words which are in or on the tongue with nothing to prompt 
them in the heart. Roat is used = to repeat or sing (Skeat and Mayhew’s 
Tudor and Stuart Glossary) by Drayton, e. g., The Muses Elizium, Nymphal vi. 
(Melanthus, 8): 

‘I to my Bottle straight, and soundly baste my Throat 

Which done, some Country Song or Roundelay I roate 

So merrily.’ 


73. Though but Bastards, and Syllables] Sraunron: In this speech we follow 
the arrangement of the old copies, which, though imperfect, is infinitely preferable 


350 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ii. 


Of no allowance, to your bofomes truth. 74. 


74. allowance] alliance Johns. conj. Cap. 


to that adopted by all the modern editions. The verse before us is evidently 
corrupt; ‘but’ seems to have crept in from the preceding line, and some word 
to have been lost; we may be permitted to guess that it originally ran, ‘Thought’s 
bastards, and persuading syllables,’ or ‘Thought’s bastards, and glib syllables.’— 
BatLEy (ii, 56): Instead of the unmetrical jargon of the received text, read: 


‘But with such words that are but rooted in 
Your tongue, thought’s bastards, airy syllables, 
Of no allowance to your bosom’s truth.’ 


Here we have a clause full of significance and perfect in metre. No difficulty 
can be experienced in accounting for thought’s being perverted into though but, 
or for airy being turned into and. If I had entertained any doubt of this emenda- * 
tion it would have been dissipated by a passage in A Lover’s Complaint: 


‘Knew vows were ever brokers to defiling; 
Thought characters and words merely but art, 
And bastards of his foul adulterate heart,’ [ll. 173-175]. 


Here is precisely the same train of ideas brought in this case to characterise the 
seducer of female innocence, but in the other to recommend hypocritical subser- 
vience to the humours of the people. [Reference to the Text. Notes will show that 
both Staunton and Bailey were anticipated by Badham in the reading thought’s 
for ‘though but.’ Staunton’s examination of the work of his predecessors was 
confined mainly to that of the editors themselves; the same may be said of Bailey, 
and thus Badham’s reading, which occurs in his Essay on the Text of Shakespeare, 
escaped them. Staunton is, I think, less blameworthy than Bailey for this over- 
sight. Bailey’s work is entitled The Received Text of Shakespeare, and he should 
at least have examined other works on the same subject.—Eb.] 

74. Of no allowance] THEOBALD (Letter to Warburton, Feb. 12, 1729; Nichols: 
Illustrations of Literature, ii, 486): Dr Thirlby says forte ALLIANCE. But I think 
the other may do very well. Syllables not allowed by your heart to be true.— 
Jounson: I read, ‘of no alliance’; therefore bastards. Yet ‘allowance’ may well 
enough stand as meaning legal right, established rank, or settled authority —CAPELL 
(vol. I, pt i, p. 22): ‘Though’ and ‘and’ [l. 73] seem to be compositors’ blunders 
occasion’d no one knows how; ‘bastards’ and the word that is quoted [alliance] 
second thoughts of the author, instead of ‘allowance’ and ‘syllables’; but the last 
not being eras’d, and the other not alter’d, the gentlemen, at whose mercy it was his 
fortune to lye, gave us what we have seen. [See Text. Notes, ll. 72, 73, for Capell’s 
own reading. Johnson’s edition and Capell’s are so nearly synchronous that it is 
hardly likely that Johnson was aware of any of Capell’s readings until some time 
after his own were published; and, of course, neither Johnson nor Capell knew of 
Thirlby’s suggestion. Capell’s Notes did not, however, appear until 1779, and for 
that reason Johnson’s note is here given priority —Ep.|—StrEvens: ‘Allowance’ is 
certainly right. So in Othello, ‘his pilot Of very expert and approv’d allowance,’ IT, 
i, 48. Dr Johnson’s amendment is, however, countenanced by an expression in the 
Tam. of Shrew, where Petruchio’s stirrups are said to be ‘of no kindred,’ [III, ii, 
50].—Matone: [| at first was pleased with Dr Johnson’s emendation, because ‘of 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLA NUS 351 


Now, this no more difhonors you at all, 75 
Then to take in a Towne with gentle words, 


75-78. Om. Bell. 


no allowance, 7. e., approbation to your bosom’s truth,’ appeared to me unintelli- 
gible. But ‘allowance’ has no connection with the subsequent words, ‘to your 
bosom’s truth. The construction is, though but bastards to your bosom’s truth, 
not the lawful issue of your heart. The words, ‘and syllables of no allowance,’ are 
put in opposition with ‘bastards,’ and are, as it were, parenthetical—Mason (Com- 
ments, etc., p. 255): The word alliance differs so little from ‘allowance,’ it makes 
the meaning of the sentence so clear, and corresponds so well with the word ‘bas- 
tards,’ in the line preceding, that I should not hesitate in adopting this amendment 
of Johnson’s. Steevens very roundly asserts that ‘allowance’ is the right reading, 
but he offers nothing in support of that assertion except a line from Othello, which 
is nothing to the purpose. ‘A pilot of very expert and approved allowance’ means 
only a pilot, acknowledged and approved to be an expert one; and I don’t see how 
the word ‘allowance,’ in this sense, will apply to the present passage: There can 
be no doubt that ‘allowance’ was used in Shakespeare’s time in the sense of ap- 
probation. So Lear says, ‘O Heavens! If you do love old men, if your sweet sway 
Allow obedience,’ [II, iv, 194]. And Johnson, I believe, is right in asserting that it 
means legal right, established rank, or settled authority; but none of these words 
would make sense of the present passage if substituted in the place of ‘allowance’ 
unless we alter it by reading ‘from your bosom’s truth’ instead of to; and if the 
passage is to be amended, the most natural amendment is to read alliance — 
W. A. Wricut: Though they (the syllables) are not acknowledged as the legit- 
imate issue or genuine expression of your inmost thoughts. For ‘allowance’ 
in the sense of acknowledgment, recognition, which keeps up the figure suggested 
by ‘bastards,’ compare Tro. & Cress., I, iii, 146, ‘A stirring dwarf we do allow- 
ance give Before a sleeping giant. —Hupson (ed. ii.): ‘Allowance’ is here used 
in the old sense to allow, that is, to justify or approve, as in Psalm xi. of the Psalter, 
‘The Lord alloweth the righteous.’ Also in many other places of the English 
Bible. Shakespeare has ‘allowance’ repeatedly in the same sense; as in Lear, 
I, iv, 228, ‘that You protect this course and put it on By your allowance.’ The 
best explanation of the passage in the text that I have met with is furnished me 
by Mr Joseph Crosby: ‘Truth sits enthroned on your bosom, to sanction your 
thoughts and language; but in the present case your words will be but illegitimate 
offspring, not born of your heart, having no approval or justification from that 
truth, but merely roted in your tongue—spoken, as a parrot or child talks, by 
rote. A verse from Psalm cxxxix. is not irrelevant here, ‘There is not a word 
in my tongue, but Thou, O Lord, knowest it altogether.’ I was once led to favour 
alliance, but am now thoroughly satisfied that ‘allowance’ is right.—VERITY 
(Student’s Sh.): That is, utterly disavowed by the real feelings in your heart.— 
E. K. Caampers (Warwick Sh.): Not allowed as true in your secret heart.—Casr 
(Arden Sh.): That is, of no acceptance to your heart’s truth, 7. e., to your real 
feelings. ‘Allowance’ is used with various shades of meaning by Shakespeare, 
such as acknowledgment, approbation, etc., but acceptance (as in Jsaiah, Ix, 7, 
‘they shall come up with acceptance on mine altar’) best accounts for the use 
of the preposition ‘to,’ in which a difficulty is sometimes found. 
76. to take in] MALONE: That is, subdue or destroy. Compare I, ii, 29 ante. 


352 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ii. 


Which elfe would put you to your fortune,and a7 
The hazard of much blood. 
I would diffemble with my Nature, where 
My Fortunes and my Friends at ftake, requir’d 80 
I fhould do fo in Honor. I am in this 
Your Wife, your Sonne: Thefe Senators, the Nobles, 
And you, will rather fhew our generall Lowts, 
How you can frowne, then fpend a fawne vpon ’em, 
For the inheritance of their loues, and fafegard 85 
Of what that want might ruine. 
<Menen. Noble Lady, 
Come goe with vs, fpeake faire: you may falue fo, 
Not what is dangerous prefent, but the loffe 
Of what is paft. go 
Volum. I pry thee now,my Sonne, 
81. I am] I’m Pope, Theob. Han. Sing. i, Knt, Hal. 


Warb. Johns. 89. Not...but] As one line, and read- 
82. Sonne:...Nobles,] son,...nobles.— ing Not only Ktly. 

Theob. (Warb.), Han. Johns.  son,... gl. pry thee] prethee F.. prithee F3F 4, 

nobles; Cap. et seq. Rowe, Knt, Dyce. pr’ythee Pope et 


84. ’em] them Mal. Steev. Varr. cet. 


8x. in Honor] CasE (Arden Sh.): The interpretation occasionally found (‘as far as 
I could without sacrificing my honour’) is less appropriate to the context than the 
obvious one. It could hardly have been suggested if the text had read, ‘I should in 
honour do so,’ and Volumnia has already said that dissembling does not dishonour. 

81, 82. I am in this Your Wife ...the Nobles] WarBuRTON: Volumnia is 
persuading Coriolanus that he ought to flatter the people, as the general fortune 
was at stake; and says, that in this advice, she speaks as his wife, as his son; as 
the senate and body of the patricians, who were in some measure link’d to his 
conduct.—Jounson: I rather think the meaning is, ‘I am in their condition, I 
am at stake, together with your wife, your son. —M. Mason (Comments, etc., p. 
256): ‘I am in this’ means I am in this predicament.—Matone: I think the 
meaning is, In this advice, in exhorting you to act thus, I speak not only as your 
mother, but as your wife, your son, &c., all of whom are at stake —W. A. WRIGHT: 
I am involved in this, I am of those whose lives and fortunes are at stake.— 
E. K. CaampBers (Warwick Sh.): Some explain, ‘I speak for’; but the point is 
rather, ‘I am at stake in this; so are your wife and the rest, for we are in danger 
of losing you.—CasrE (Arden Sh.): Probably everyone at first reading under- 
stands as Malone, for it is natural to read putting stress on ‘this. But if ‘I 
is stressed Johnson’s interpretation, and of a successive naming of the friends at 
stake, at once appears. 

88. you may salue so] That is, remedy; compare, ‘I do beseech your majesty 
may salve The long-grown wounds of my intemperance,’ z Henry IV: III, ii, 155. 

89. Not what is dangerous] Jounson: In this place ‘not’ seems to signify 
not only. [ABBotr (§ 54) quotes the present passage and also III, iii, r21, 122 
below as the only two examples wherein ‘not’ is used in this particular sense.] 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 353 


Goe to them, with this Bonnet in thy hand, 92 
And thus farre hauing ftretcht it (here be with them) 


92-105. Mnemonic Warb. 93. be with] bow to Anon. ap. Cam. 
92. this] thy Mal. conj. Ran. 


92. this Bonnet in thy hand] MAtone: Surely our author wrote, ‘thy bonnet in 
thy hand’; for I cannot suppose that he intended that Volumnia should either 
touch or take off the bonnet which he has given to Coriolanus—STEEVENS: When 
Volumnia says ‘this bonnet,’ she may be supposed to point at it, without any 
attempt to touch or take it off. 

93. (here be with them)] WALKER (Crit., i, 228): I suspect something is lost: 


‘———— thy knee 
Bussing the stones, (for in such business) 
Action is eloquence,’ &c.— 


STauNTON: That is, adopt this action. So in Brome’s comedy, A Jovial Crew, II, 
i, Spring-love, describing his having solicited alms as a cripple, says, ‘For here I 
was with him.’ (Halis——Battey (ii, 58): This phrase appears to be without ap- 
propriate meaning, and I would alter it to ‘here beseech them,’ without any paren- 
thesis.—ORGER (p. 63): ‘Here be with them’ is, I suppose, unintelligible and can 
derive no explanation from the following words, ‘thy knee bussing the stones,’ 
which clearly refer to the ‘courtesy’ he should make the people at the same time 
that he held his bonnet low. It may readily be corrected to ‘bewitch them’ in 
accordance with II, iii, 105, ‘I will counterfeit the bewitchment of some popular 
man,’ in which case ‘here’ must be changed to there, i. e., when he is before the 
people. Possibly a line may have dropped out, which might be supplied from the 
parallel passage in Richard II: I, iv, 26: 


‘there bewitch them 
With humble and familiar courtesy 
Thy knee bussing,’ etc., 


but sense is made even without the supplemental line by the change proposed: 


“there bewitch them 
Thy knee bussing the stones.’— 


BEECHING (Falcon Sh.): That is, ‘get hold of them.’ To ‘be with’ a person means 
to ‘come to’ them, ‘come at’ them, in various senses. The nearest parallel to 
the text is Winter’s Tale, I, ii, 217, ‘They’re here with me already, whispering, 
rounding.’ Compare IV, iii, 128, ‘I’ll be with you at your sheep-shearing too’ 
(by which Autolycus means ‘pick your pockets’). See also Rom. & Jul., II, iv, 
78, ‘Was I with you there for the goose?’ (7. e., ‘did my repartee strike home?’).— 
VERITY (Student’s Sh.): That is, humour them thus much!—Gorpon: Go thus far 
with them. She suits the action to the word.—Dericuron: At this point salute them 
with a courteous gesture, a sweeping bow. The expression seems to have been espe- 
cially used with contemptuous gestures, as in Winter’s Tale, I, ii, 217; so Chapman, 
May Day, near the end of Act IV, where the hooting of a cuckold is the subject 
of conversation, Faunio says, ‘That dare I not do’ (i. e., laugh openly when he saw 
him), ‘but as often as he turns his back to me, I shall be here V with him, that’s 
certain,’ the V indicating the gesture of his open fingers to imitate the cuckold’s 


23 


354 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ii. 


Thy Knee buffing the ftones: for in fuch bufineffe 04 


horns.—CasE (Arden Sh.): This phrase varies in meaning according to circum- 
stances. Here it approximately means, get at them this way. [In the passage 
quoted by Staunton] the stage-direction does not determine the sense there, which 
is: For thus I got at him, got on his weak side. Brome also uses the phrase in 
The Sparagus Garden, I, i. (ed. Pearson, p. 119): ‘Gil. And the cause or ground of 
your quarrel . . . may be as triviall, as that which was derided in our father’s. 
Touch. Are you there with me?’ (Is that what you are at? Is that where you 
think you have me?), and in The Queen and Concubine, sc. viii. (ibid., p. 39): 


‘nay, he that keeps me 
Till now, he call’d me forth never spake a word 
If I ask’d him, what News? here he was with me: 
Or when he heard from Court? then there again: 
Or why I was committed? still the same answer.’ 


Here the meaning is more or less defined by what precedes, viz., ‘never spake a 
word,’ and, that was his way with me, or that’s how he had me. Shakespeare also 
uses the phrase, or a similar one, in Lear, IV, vi, 149, in As You Like It, V, ii, 32, 
and in Winter’s Tale, I, ii, 217, similarly with slightly varaible meanings, but always 
indicating that the speaker, as the case may be, is conscious of making a good move 
against another, or of being taken, or sought to be taken, at a slight disadvantage.— 
[Case’s admirable summing up of the question and his conclusion that the phrase 
bears variable meanings leaves little to be desired. That here it means, Treat 
them thus, is to the purpose much more than Staunton’s paraphrase, suit the action 
to the word, which hardly bears out the forceful character of Volumnia’s 
remarks.—Eb.] 

94. Thy Knee bussing the stones] Appott (§ 453): Between noun and par- 
ticiple a pause seems natural. Often the pause represents in or a-. ‘The smile | 
mocking | the sigh,’ Cymbeline, IV, ii, 54; ‘My wind | cooling | my broth,’ 
Mer. of Ven.,1,i, 22. In these lines the foot following the emphasized monosyllable 
may (as an alternative to the ‘pause-accent’) be regarded as quasi-trisyllabic. 

94. bussing] W. A. Wricut: A familiar word, suggesting something of coarseness 
or wantonness. Compare Tro. & Cress., IV, v, 220, ‘Yond towers whose wanton 
tops do buss the clouds Must kiss their own feet.’—VERITy (Student’s Sh.): She is at 
pains to show, by her contemptuous choice of words, that she despises, every whit as 
much as Coriolanus himself, the course of action which for expediency alone she is 
counselling. Thus ‘waving’ [l. 96], to express ‘often bending,’ gives an admirable 
touch of irony and burlesque-—Gorpown: She takes it like a great dame. This 
homely language is her way of shrugging at the whole vulgar necessity. She and 
her son were so much alike that she knew her tone would please him. She chooses 
‘waving’ rather than ‘bowing,’ because it is more off-hand. To be offhand about 
the business is her way of making it palatable to Coriolanus.—Casr (Arden Sh.): 
This is a vulgar word now, and would not be used in a serious passage; but in 
Shakespeare’s day it was otherwise. See King John, II, iv, 35: ‘Const. Death .. . 
Come grin on me, and I will think thou smilest And buss thee as thy wife,’ and 
Golding’s Ovid, x, 647, ed. Rouse, p. 213: ‘She thus began, and in her tale she 
bussed him among.’ Herrick, however, makes a distinction in degree in 1648, 
Hesperides (ed. Grosart, ii, 145), Kissing and bussing: ‘Kissing and bussing differ 
both in this; We busse our Wanton’s, but our Wives we kisse.’—[I am not altogether 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS B00 


Aétion is eloquence, and the eyes of th’ignorant 95 

More learned then the eares, wauing thy head, 

Which often thus correcting thy ftout heart, 97 
96. head] hand Warb. Han. While often Sta. conj.  whiles-often 
97. Which...thus] —W hich, often; thus Nicholson ap. Cam. 

Wh. Often thus, which Ktly. 97. often thus] Ff, Rowe i. soften 


Which often] And often Cap. thus Warb. Han. Cap. often; thus Wh. 
With often Johns. conj. Varr. Ran. often, thus, Rowe ii. et cet. 


sure that there may not have been a like distinction even in Shakespeare’s time. 
Wright’s apposite quotation from Tyo. & Cress. indicates that there was a differ- 
ence between the words, and the word ‘buss’ closely following ‘wanton’ is cor- 
roboration of its use in a vulgar sense, whereas ‘kiss’ in the next line is used in a 
more dignified sense. Even the passage from King John may be intended to 
indicate a certain amount of wantonness on the part of Constance as the bride 
of Death—Eb.] 
95, 96. Action is eloquence... then the eares] Compare: Horace, De Arte 

Poetica: ‘Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem, 

Quam quz sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus et que 

Ipse sibi tradit spectator.’—180, 181. 


Thomas Drant issued a translation of ‘Horace his arte of Poetrie, pistles, and 
Satyrs’ in 1567.—Eb. 

96, 97. wauing thy head, Which... thy stout heart] WARBURTON: But do 
any of the ancient or modern masters of elocution prescribe the ‘waving the head’ 
when they treat of action? Or how does the waving the head correct the stout- 
ness of the heart, or evidence humility? Or, lastly, where is the sense or grammar 
of these words, ‘Which often thus,’ &c.? These questions are sufficient to show that 
the lines are corrupt. I would read, therefore, ‘—waving thy hand, Which soften 
thus, correcting thy stout heart.’ This is a very proper precept of action suiting 
the occasion: Wave thy hand, says she, and soften the action of it thus—then strike 
upon thy breast, and by that action show the people thou hast corrected thy stout 
heart. All here is fine and proper.—JOHNSON: The correction is ingenious, yet 
I think it not right. Head or hand is indifferent. The hand is waved to gain 
attention; the head is shaken in token of sorrow. The word wave suits better to 
the hand, but in considering the author’s language too much stress must not be 
laid on propriety, against the copies. I would read thus, ‘—waving thy head 
With often, thus, correcting thy stout heart.’ That is, shaking thy head, and striking 
thy breast. The alteration is slight, and the gesture recommended not improper.— 
CareEtt (vol. I, pt i, p. 92): This most admirable speech has been misinterpreted, 

mangl’d, and (by dint of false pointing) render’d scarcely intelligible; the only 

verbal corruption it had lay in ‘Which,’ ]. 97, a word we see often mistaken, 
from being written contractedly, for that very word [And] which has now taken 
its place-—STEEVENS: Shakespeare uses the same expression in Hamlet, ‘And 
thrice his head thus waving up and down,’ II, i, 93.—Tyrwuitt: I have sometimes 
thought this passage might originally have stood thus: 


‘____ waving thy head 
(Which humble thus;) correcting thy stout heart, 
Now soften’d as the ripest mulberry.’— 


356 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. il. 


[96, 97. wauing thy head, Which . . . thy stout heart] 

[BapHam (Text of Sh., p. 272), in reference to this arrangement, says: The simplest 
correction is to transpose the two first words of each line, and insert the s.]— 
M. Mason (Comments, etc., p. 256): As there is no verb in this passage as it stands, 
some amendment must be made to make it intelligible; and that which I now 
propose is to read bow instead of ‘now,’ which is clearly the right reading.— 
MatoneE: I am persuaded these lines are printed exactly as the author wrote them, 
a similar kind of phraseology being found in his other plays. Which, &c., is the 
absolute case, and is to be understood as if he had written, Jt often, &c. [‘An 
exegesis,’ remarks R. G. White, ‘which Malone might well revisit the earth to 
explain.’] So in Winter’s Tale: 


‘ 


This your son-in-law 
And son unto the king, (whom heavens directing), 
Is troth-plight to your daughter,’ [V, iii, 151]. 


Again in King John: 


‘Who having no external thing to lose 
But the word maid,—cheats the poor maid of that,? 


(II, i, 571]. In the former of these passages, ‘whom heavens directing,’ is to be 
understood as if Shakespeare had written, him heavens directing (illum deo ducente); 
and in the latter, ‘who having,’ has the import of They having. Nihil quod amittere 
possint, practer nomen virginis, possidentibus. This mode of speech, though not 
such as we should now use, having been used by Shakespeare, any emendation of 
this contested passage becomes unnecessary. Mason says that there is no verb 
in the sentence, and therefore it must be corrupt. The verb is go, and the sentence 
not more abrupt than many in these plays. Go to the people, says Volumnia, 
and appear before them in a supplicating attitude,—with thy bonnet in thy hand, 
thy knees on the ground (for in such cases action is eloquence, &c.), waving thy 
head; it, by its frequent bendings (such as those that I now make), subduing thy 
stout heart, which now should be as humble as the ripest mulberry; or, if these 
silent gestures of supplication do not move them, add words, and say to them, &c. 
Whoever has seen a player supplicating to be heard by the audience when a tumult, 
for whatever cause, has arisen in a theatre will perfectly feel the force of the 
words ‘waving thy head.’ No emendation whatever appears to me to be neces- 
sary in these lines.—STEEVENS: All I shall observe respecting the validity of the 
instances adduced by Mr Malone in support of his position is that as ancient 
press-work seldom received any correction, the errors of one printer may frequently 
serve to countenance those of another without affording any legitimate decision 
in matters of phraseology.—Knicur: This passage has been a stumbling-block 
to the commentators; and they want to know how the waving of the head corrects 
the stout heart. They have forgotten the maxim which Volumnia has just 
uttered, ‘Action is eloquence.’ She is explaining her meaning by her action: 
waving thy head, which often wave—thus—(and she then waves her head several 
times). She adds, ‘correcting thy stout heart,’ be ‘humble as the ripest mulberry.’ 
We owe this interpretation to a pamphlet printed at Edinburgh in 1814: ‘Ex- 
planations and Emendations of Some Passages in the Text of Shakespeare,’ [by 
R. Morehead, who wrote under the pseudonym Martinus Scriblerus—Ep.].— 
Bavuam (Criticism Applied to Sh., etc., p. 14): That there is a screw loose in the 


“ACT I, sc. ii] CORIOLANUS 307 


[96, 97. wauing thy head, Which . . . thy stout heart] 

words ‘which often thus’ is, we suppose, if not admitted, at all events not strenu- 
ously denied, by any commentator. . . . It is not unlikely that careless readers 
have often satisfied themselves with the interpretation ‘here stoop as low as they’ 
{for the expression, ‘here be with them]. And then observe how revolting to the 
ear is that unmusical line, ‘Thy knee bussing the stones, for in such bus’ness,’ 
where to get any harmony at all we must transpose the tonic accent, as it is called, 
from the former to the latter syllable of the word ‘bussing,’ and so make the 
trochee into an iambus. We propose to read the whole passage thus: 


‘I prythee now, my son, 

Go to them with thy bonnet in thy hand 
And thus far having stretch’d it, with thy knee 
Bussing the stones; for in such business 
Action is eloquence, and the’ eyes of the’ ignorant 

(a perfectly harmonious Alexandrine.) 
More learned than the ears; vailing thy head 
Now humble—thus;—correcting thy stout heart 
Which soften as the ripest mulberry,’ &c. 


It is to be remarked that, except in the parenthesis [l. 93], the sense and con- 
struction of the sentence are kept suspended by participles until the word ‘say,’ 
which renders our removal of the phrase ‘here be with them’ still more probable; 
perhaps Shakespeare had written ‘here bends,’ describing the action of Volumnia. 
Vailing is to be understood as in the passage ‘Then vail your impotence,’ where 
all the editions we have seen absurdly retain ‘ignorance.’ Nothing can be more 
easy or simple than the transposition of the initial words, ‘Now humble’ and 
‘Which often.’ In the introduction of the letter s we find that Warburton has 
anticipated us, but, as he did not see the necessity of the transposition, his emenda- 
tion is worse than useless, as it makes Volumnia recommend her son to soften his 
head, or perhaps his hand (for that is another reading), instead of his heart.— 
R. G. Waite: ‘Which, often,’ z. e., which do often; by this repeated act of courtesy 
correcting thy stout heart. The difficulty seems to have resulted from a failure 
to perceive the elision in ‘which often,’ and that ‘thus’ belongs to ‘correcting.’ 
The whole passage is difficult—Hunson (ed. i.): That is, ‘which often doa—thus— 
correcting thy stout heart.’ Of course at the word thus she waves her head several 
times, acting out the verb while omitting it in her speech, and so making a practical 
illustration of what she would have him do. Commentators have stumbled much 
at the passage from not knowing what to do with ‘which.’ All becomes clear 
enough when we thus make ‘which’ to be governed not by the verbal sign of the 
action, but by the action itself —Kr1cutLey (Expositor, p. 367) proposes and adopts 
in his text, ‘Often thus; which correcting thy stout heart,’ and the omission of 
‘or,’ 1. 99, remarking: ‘By these slight corrections this place gains sense—a thing 
it never had before. All through the speech, it may be observed, Volumnia acts 
the part she would have her son perform. The transposition he had made in the 
first line—where the folio has ‘‘Which often thus,’—having perplexed the printer, 
he took “humble” for a verb, and so introduced ‘‘or” to try to make sense.’— 
W. A. Wricut: The two lines describe two different gestures—one indicated by 
‘thus’ and the other by ‘Now.’ While uttering the former Volumnia raises her 
head to a position of command, in which ‘the kingly crowned head,’ where the 


358 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ii. 


Now humble as the ripeft Mulberry, 98 


98, 99. Now...That] That...Now Var. ’03, ’21. Now”s...That Coll. MS. Bovw,... 
That Mason conj. Words. Huds. ii. 


reason is enthroned, corrects and controls the passions which are seated in the 
heart. Having curbed his pride he is to lower his head to the people in token of 
humility, as if it were the ripest mulberry just ready to fall. As regards the 
construction, ‘Which’ is used loosely, as the relative often is in Shakespeare, 
and is either redundant or equivalent to the personal pronoun. Compare V, 
vi, 26 and The Tempest, I, ii, 162, where the reading of the folios is: 


‘Some food we had and some fresh water that 
A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo, 

Out of his charity, who being then appointed 
Master of this design, did give us,’ &c.— 


Kinnear (p. 320), without reference to Warburton, proposes the reading, ‘waving 
thy hand,’ and in corroboration of this change quotes Lucrece: ‘There pleading 
might you see great Nestor stand Making such sober action with his hand That 
it beguil’d attention,’ 1. 1403. Kinnear interprets the next line, ‘Which often 
thus,—correcting,” &c., 7. e., often pressing thy hand on thy breast, thus—indicat- 
ing truth and devotion,—so Lucrece: ‘This said, he struck his hand upon his breast, 
And kiss’d the fatal knife, to end his vow,” 1. 1844. So King John, III, i, 21, 
Constance asks of Salisbury, 


“What means that hand upon that breast of thine? 
Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words.” 


The folio has “waving thy head,” but Ophelia, [Hamlet, II, i, 93], considered the 
action to indicate madness. The folio has ‘‘or say to them”—evidently a mis- 
print; so naturally follows, ‘‘And thus far having stretch’d it, &c.””’—PERRING 
(p. 301): When expositors make such a fluster about the government of the 
relative ‘which,’ are they oblivious of the verb ‘do’ and of its occasional ellipse, 
specially in conversation, supplemented by gesticulation? Ican only suppose that 
they shrink from this explanation because of the simplicity of it; but the simplicity 
of an explanation, if common sense go along with it, should recommend it rather 
than otherwise. 

98. Now humble] Drtrus: ‘Humble’ is here not an adjective, as the editors 
appear to take it, but rather the imperative of the verb to humble, and governs the 
foregoing ‘which.’ Those editors who do not understand the construction reverse 
the positions of the words ‘Now’ and ‘That’ at the beginning of this and the 
following line. [See Text. Notes. To this interpretation Scumipt gives unqualified 
assent.—Ep.]—Brrcuinec (Falcon Sh.): Many emendations of this passage have 
been proposed. The best are Johnson’s with for ‘which’ or Mason’s bow for 
‘now.’ If the text remain unaltered, ‘humble’ must be taken as a verb in the 
imperative. But in that case ‘now’ has no force—E. K. Cuampers (Warwick 
Sh.): The reading of the Folio is not very satisfactory, as the only possible way of 
explaining it seems to be to take ‘humble’ as an imperative. None of the emenda- 
tions proposed are quite good enough to adopt. I rather incline to two—Johnson’s 
with for ‘which’ and Hanmer’s omission of ‘or.’ The ‘thus’ means ‘by these 
gestures of submission.’ In any case the grammar of Volumnia’s speech is loose, 


ACT II, SC. ii.] CORIOLA NUS 359 


That will not hold the handling : or fay to them, 99 
99. or] Om. Han. Mitford, Ktly, Wh. Leo, Dyce ii, Schmidt, Words. Huds. ii. 


but if ‘or’ is retained the sense is wrong. She is not suggesting two alternative 
modes of procedure, but one only. Which (written wch) and with are easily 
confused in MS.—HErrorp (Eversley Sh.): If the text is right, ‘humble’ must be 
an imperative. ‘Humble (your-head), correcting thy pride with submissive ges- 
tures, like these.’ The passage barely yields sense; but of the many alterations 
proposed (such as Johnson’s with for ‘which’) none can be called convincing. 
Professor Littledale proposes instead of ‘often,’ offer (as if for decapitation).— 
Verity (Siudent’s Sh.): If the text is uncorrupt we must either (1) take ‘humble’ 
as a verb governing ‘which’—a very awkward arrangement—or (2) leave ‘which’ 
without any verb and suppose that Shakespeare intended an anacoluthon, perhaps to 
indicate the speaker’s emotion. The latter interpretation is, however, not very 
appropriate to a masterful, self-contained character like Volumnia. It seems more 
likely that some corruption of the text has occurred in 1. 98 or after. None of the 
emendations is satisfactory. A simple word like ‘Which’ at the beginning of a 
line could not be mistaken easily.—Casr (Arden Sh.): It is simplest to take ‘Which 
often’ as elliptical for ‘And do it often’ or ‘Which do often.’ If Volumnia acts 
her advice, the words ‘Which often, thus’ could be mistaken for nothing else than 
‘And wave it often in this way.’ The dilemma of the commentators between 
supposing an anacoluthon and making ‘humble’ an imperative verb with ‘Which’ 
as its object seems needless. 

98. humble as the ripest Mulberry] StrEvens: This fruit, when thoroughly 
ripe, drops from the tree——Muscrave (Variorum, 1778): Aeschylus (as appears 
from a fragment of his SPYTEL 7 EKTOPOZ AYTPA, preserved by Athenzus, 
[Epit.], lib. ii.) says of Hector that he was softer than mulberries. 

?Avnp 6 ’exelvos Hv weTairepos udpwv.— 

Bapuam (Criticism Applied to Sh., p. 14): It is most surprising that none of the 
commentators, as far as we are aware, has taken any offense at the monstrous 
comparison—As humble as a mulberry—zemairepos uopwr is a very different 
expression, for rérwy is naturally opposed to dyés, as in Latin you have mitis and 
crudus.—CaskE (Arden Sh.): The ripeness of the mulberry has always been used 
to illustrate similar human characteristics. See the Adages of Erasmus under 
‘Proclivitas’: ‘Maturior moro. Ueratrepos wopov. Dici potest vel in hominem 
miti ingenio preditum, vel in mollem, vel in vehementer propensum ad aliquid, 
velut in virginem nupturientem.’—[Case concludes his note with the foregoing 
comparison from A%schylus, given by Musgrave, as a further illustration of the 
prevalence of this similitude. To me, at least, Musgrave’s note seems quite 
worthless; merely a pedantic desire to show a certain amount of classical knowl- 
edge; whatever bearing it may have on the present passage is of the slightest. 
See Appendix: Date of Composition, where Malone uses this reference to the mul- 
berry as a piece of internal evidence to determine the year of the writing of Corio- 
lanus.—ED.] 

99. or say to them] R. G. Wuire: As the superfluous syllable [‘or’] is just in 
that part of the verse in which such superfluity is absolutely inadmissible, and 
as it is as fatal to sense as it is to rhythm, I do not hesitate to excise it, although 
it has been hitherto retained [see Text. Notes—Enp.]. The sentence is one of the 
involved kind which Shakespeare often wrote in his later years (see, for instance, 


360 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


Thou art their Souldier,and being bred in broyles, 100 

Haft not the foft way, which thou do’ft confeffe 

Were fit for thee to vfe,as they to clayme, 

In asking their good loues, but thou wilt frame 

Thy felfe (forfooth) hereafter theirs fo farre, 

As thou haft power and perfon. 105 
Menen. This but done, 

Euen as fhe {peakes, why their hearts were yours : 

For they haue Pardons, being ask’d, as free, 

As words to little purpofe. 109 


102. they] them Han. 107. their] all their Pope,+, Steev. 
107. /peakes] speaks it Cap. Dyce ii, Var. ’o03, 713, Ktly. 
Words. Huds. ii. 


Meas. for Meas. and Winter’s Tale, passim), and all between ‘stretch’d it’ and 
‘say to them’ is parenthetical, parenthesis between parenthesis; the direct con- 
struction being ‘Go to them with this bonnet in thy hand, and, thus far having 
stretched it (z. e., your disposition), say to them, &c. The introduction of ‘or’ 
may be safely attributed to the incapacity of the compositor to keep up to the 
strain of the sentence. He thought there must be a place for a rest and a fresh 
start. 

Ioo, 101. bred in broyles...the soft way] MALONE: So in Othello, ‘Rude 
am I in my speech And little bless’d with the soft phrase of speech... . And 
little of this great world can I speak More than pertains to feats of broil and 
battle,’ [I, iii, 82]. 

102. tovse...toclayme] ABsorrt (§ 216): After a conjunction and before an 
infinitive we often find I, thou, &c., where in Latin we should have me, te, &c. The 
conjunction seems to be regarded as introducing a new sentence instead of con- 
necting one clause with another. Hence the pronoun is put in the nominative, 
and a verb is, perhaps, to be supplied from the context. ‘What he is indeed More 
suits you to conceive than I (find it suitable) to speak of.—As You Like It, I, ii, 
279. [See also ll. 151, 152 below.] 

103-105. thou wilt frame Thy selfe ... As thou hast power] G. WirxEs (p. 
313): Here is a repetition of the same royal principle of perfidy practised by Prince 
John of Lancaster (with the approbation of our author) against the army of the 
Archbishop of York, Mowbray, and Hastings, in 2 Henry IV.; the Prince putting 
the forces of these leaders mercilessly to the sword after having persuaded them 
to lay down their arms upon terms, and a full pardon, secured by his princely 
honor—a like perfidy to that perpetrated against the forces of Jack Cade and Wat 
Tyler (also with the approbation of the poet) after they had been induced to dis- 
band on the most solemn promises of amnesty from the king. 

107. their hearts] SrEEvENS: The word all was supplied by Sir Thomas Hanmer 
to remedy the apparent defect in this line. Iam not sure, however, that we might 
not better read, as Mr Ritson proposes, ‘Even as she speaks zt,’ &c. [The Text. 
Notes will reveal the fact that Steevens has here neglected to verify his references. 
The suppression of any mention of Capell either as regards text or commentary 
is, however, unfortunately in accord with Steevens’s custom.—Ep.] 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 361 


Volum. Prythee now, IIo 
Goe,and be rul’d : although I know thou hadft rather 
Follow thine Enemie in a fierie Gulfe, 
Then flatter him in a Bower. Enter Cominius. 
Here is Cominius. 

Com. I haue beene i’th’ Market place : and Sir ’tis fit 115 
You make ftrong partie, or defend your felfe 
By calmeneffe, or by abfence : all’s in anger. 

Menen. Onely faire fpeech. 

Com. I thinke ’twill ferue,if he can thereto frame his 


{pirit. 120 
110-113. Volum....Bower] Om. Bell. 115. I haue] I’ve Theob. Warb. 
111. thou had/t] thou’dst Pope, Theob. Johns. Dyce ii, Words. Huds. ii. 

Han. Warb. Johns. Vth] Fi, Rowe,+, Wh.i. ithe 
112, 113. Mnemonic Warb. Cap. et cet. 

112. in] to Rowei. 116. make] have Rowe,+. 
jierie] firy Mal. Var. ’21. 118-121. Lines end: ferwe...will. Sta. 
113, 114. Then...Cominius] As one Lines end: he...will Rowe ii. et cet. 


line Cap. et seq. 


112. in a fierie Gulfe] SrrrveNs: That is, into. So in Richard ITI, ‘But 
first, ’ll turn yon fellow in his grave,’ [I, ii, 262] -W. A. WricuT: Perhaps in the 
present passage the preposition is not so closely connected with the verb, and is 
used in the ordinary sense both in this and the following line. See also III, i, 
120. 

112. a fierie Gulfe] BrapiEy (VN. E. D., s. v. Gulf. 4.): A yawning chasm or 
abyss; an opening in the earth produced by an earthquake or volcanic action; a 
vast ravine or gorge. A fiery gulf, gulf of fire: an abyss of flame. [The present 
line quoted.] 

113. a Bower] Murray (VN. £. D., s. v. 2): An inner apartment, especially as 
distinguished from the ‘hall,’ or large public room, in ancient mansions; hence, a 
chamber, a bed-room. Still in north. dial.; in literature only archaic and poetic. 
1596 Spenser, Astrophel, 28, ‘Merily masking both in bowre and hall.’—Veriry 
(Student’s Sh.) says that though ‘bower’ originally meant any room, it more 
particularly meant the ladies’ private chamber or boudoir; ‘hence it is easy to see 
how “ bower’ came to connote effeminacy, as it does here in Coriolanus.’ 

119, 120. if he can thereto frame his spirit] MAacCattum (p. 609): That is 
just the point; and one wonders how anyone who knew Coriolanus could expect 
of him so impossible a feat. There remains the expedient of absence, which 
Cominius, from the third place he assigns to it, himself seems to prefer. And in 
the circumstances it is obviously the best. If only the accused had withdrawn 
for a time, he would soon have been recalled. It is inconceivable that when the 
new expedition of the Volscians, which he alone foresaw, broke into Roman terri- 
tory, the state would not at once have had recourse to the great commander. Nor 
would there have been much difficulty in doing so, since he would merely have 
betaken himself to voluntary retirement; and even had he been exiled in default, 
the mutual exasperation on both sides, which the last collision was to produce, 


362 THE TRAGEDIE OF — [AcT mm, Sc. ii. 


Volum. He mutt, and will : 121 
Prythee now fay you will, and goe about it. 
Corio. Muft I goe fhew them my vnbarb’d Sconce ? 123 


123, 124. Mujt I...Muft I] As one Words. Neils. 
line Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. 123. unbarb’d| wunbarbed Rowe,+, 
Sing. Knt, Dyce, Hal. Ktly, Cam. Coll. Del. Wh. Huds. Glo. Craig. 


would have been avoided. But again it is Volumnia’s overbearing self-will that 
imposes on him the pernicious choice. And though, as I have said, this proposal 
is ideally the best, for in such cases management and compromise are legitimate 
enough and may be laudable, it is not only the worst in the present instance, but 
she gives it a turn that must have made it peculiarly revolting to her son. In her 
covetousness for the consular dignity she recommends such hypocrisy, trickery, 
and base cringing as the self-respect of no honest man, much less of a Coriolanus, 
could tolerate. 

123. vnbarb’d Sconce] Hawxtns: ‘Unbarbed’ is bare, uncovered. In the 
times of chivalry, when a horse was fully armed and accoutred for the encounter, 
he was said to be barbed; probably from the old word barbe which Chaucer uses for 
a veil or covering.—STEEVENS: The suppliants of the people used to present them- 
selves to them in sordid and neglected dresses. ‘Unbarbed sconce’ is untrimmed 
or unshaven head. To barb a man was to shave him. [True to form, Steevens 
follows up this interpretation with an apt quotation from Promos and Cassandra, 
1578, wherein ‘barbe’ is used in this sense. He also remarks that ‘to barbe the 
field was to cut the corn,’ giving as an example of this, ‘The labring hunter tufts 
the thick unbarbed grounds,’ Drayton, Polyolbion, Song xiii. Steevens quotes 
an objection by Dean Milles’ in his comment on the Pseudo-Rowley, p. 215, ‘But 
would that appearance have been particular at Rome in the time of Coriolanus?’ 
The Puck of Commentators was for once caught napping; he answered that 
‘Every one but the Dean understands that Shakespeare gives to all countries the 
fashions of his own,’ apparently forgetting that he had begun his note with the 
remark that this custom was peculiar to Rome. He concludes his note with a 
grudging admission that the signification given by Hawkins may be, perhaps, 
correct. All of which seems to justify the comment of W. A. Wright that ‘it is 
doubtful whether Steevens is serious in this interpretation’ of ‘unbarbed’ as 
untrimmed.—Ep.]—Professor T. S. BAYNES, in an article in the Edinburgh Review 
for October, 1872 (p. 369), gives so clear an exposition of the matter in dispute as 
between these two interpretations that I gratefully avail myself of his remarks: 
‘Curiously enough, of the two explanations [of unbarbed], that by Hawkins, the 
more correct, has been almost unanimously rejected by modern editors and critics. 
Thus Mr Dyce explains unbarbed, “unshorn, untrimmed,”’ [Glossary, s. v.]; the 
Cambridge Editors give the same meaning in the Globe Edition; while Todd in his 
edition of Johnson, Richardson in his Dictionary, and Nares in his Glossary give 
“unbarbed” as unshorn, each quoting this passage in Coriolanus as the example. 
Mr Staunton, it is true, adopts Hawkins’ more correct interpretation, but he does this 
without a word of explanation or defence. Now, with an erroneous rendering in 
almost undisputed possession of the ground, this is hardly sufficient. It is neces- 
sary to indicate at least the reasons that make the one interpretation right, and 
the other wrong. It may be stated at the outset that the words “barbed” and 


ACT II, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 363 


[123. vnbarb’d Sconce] 
“unbarbed” are used both literally and figuratively for shaven and unshorn. 
But in this speech of Coriolanus the term cannot be interpreted in this sense, as 
it would then have no real meaUing or relevancy at all. So far as mere personal 
appearance is concerned, Coriolanus had just presented himself in the most public 
and official manner, both in the Capitol and the Forum before the senate and the 
citizens, with the confidence of a proud nature, and the indifference to mere 
pouncet-boxes and curling-irons proper to a soldier and a hero. There could 
thus be no possible reason against his returning, on the ground of mere personal 
appearance. If he really were somewhat rough and unkempt, he would surely, 
under the circumstances, be the better pleased. Least of all would he think of 
calling in the barber before presenting himself to the greasy multitude. The speech 
obviously refers not to mere personal appearance, but to the accredited signs of 
deference, humility, and respect. One of these—and that the most eloquently 
submissive—was uncovering, standing bareheaded, and bowing in a lowly manner 
to the assembled citizens. This the proud spirit of Coriolanus could not stomach, 
and he had the greatest difficulty in forcing his stubborn will into even momentary 
and simulated acquiescence. This was the bitterest element in the partial and 
mocking ceremony he had just gone through. When urged by his friends to speak 
to the citizens and ask their suffrages, according to established usage, he replies, 


“T cannot 
Put on the gown, stand naked, and entreat them.” 


Here “‘stand naked” cannot, of course, be taken literally, though it might be sup- 
posed to refer indirectly to showing his wounds. This, however, Coriolanus did 
not do, and the phrase must be understood as referring primarily to the fact that 
he was obliged to stand uncovered, bare-headed, before the ‘‘bisson multitude.” 
But his gall so rises at the degradation, that while going through the form he cannot 
help flouting the citizens to their face, “since the wisdom of their choice is rather 
to have my hat than my heart, I will practise the insinuating nod.” Again, Volumnia, 
well knowing what the chief difficulty was, addresses herself most earnestly to this 
point, detailing to her son in eager gestures the submissive actions by which he 
must at once seek to regain the popular favour. In her excited and intensely 
dramatic address [ll. 91-105] we see Volumnia pointing to her son’s bonnet, and 
showing by her own action the way in which he should use it in addressing the 
citizens. At last, in reply to the reiterated and united entreaties of mother and 
friends, Coriolanus impatiently exclaims, ‘“Must I go show them my unbarb’d 
sconce?” It may be easily shown that ‘unbarbed” has the meaning which the 
context thus requires. A war-horse protected by head- and chest-pieces of de- 
fensive armour was technically said to be barbed, barded, or bard, these being all 
different forms of the same word derived from the French bardé, which Cotgrave 
renders, ‘‘barbed or trapped as a great horse.” . . . To show an unbarbed sconce 
is thus to show an uncovered, unprotected sconce; in other words, to appear bare- 
headed. That the word in this connection cannot possibly refer to shaving is 
evident from the fact that sconce means head, and is never applied to the face by 
Shakespeare or his contemporaries.’ [This article appears also in Baynes’s 
volume, Shakespeare Studies, and Other Essays, p. 301. Since this exposition by 
Baynes modern editors uniformly adopt this explanation of the word ‘unbarbed’; 
Steevens’s explanation, though frequently mentioned, has been discarded.—En.] 


364 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ii. 


Mutt I with my bafe Tongue giue to my Noble Heart 


A Lye, that it muft beare well ? I will doo’t : 125 
Yet were there but this fingle Plot,to loofe 
This Mould of Martius, they to duft fhould grinde it, 127 
124. I with] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 125. beare well?| bear? well Pope, 
Warb. Johns. Theob. Han. Warb. bear? Well Johns. 
with my...to my] with..my Ktly et seq. 
conj. Glo. Wh. ii, Cholmeley, Herford, 126. Plot, to loofe] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
Dtn. pelt to lose Han. plot to lose, Theob. 
Noble] Om. Huds. ii. et cet. 


127. grinde] bring Rowe. 


123. Sconce] W. A. Wricut: ‘Sconce’ is a half-comic word for head, used with 
intentional contempt by Coriolanus. See Cotgrave: ‘Teste: f. A head, pate, 
skonce, nole, costard, noddle. [The original meaning of ‘sconce’ is a small fort 
or bulwark, thence applied to a helmet, and thus to the head itself —Eb.] 

124, 125. Must I... that it must beare] F. C. SHarp (p. 70): In the entire range 
of Shakespeare’s plays there is but a single record of a genuine conflict between 
the impulse to speak the truth, at whatever cost, and the desire to dissemble for 
what, apart from the deception, would be recognised as a worthy purpose. Corio- 
lanus, having ruined his cause with the people by his plainness of speech, is urged 
by his friends to return to the Forum and disown his insulting epithets. At 
first he cannot bring himself to consent. But the ground of his refusal is no more 
an objection to deceit as such than it is a regard for social veracity. It is solely 
the aversion of the proud patrician to the humiliation of bending his uncovered 
head before the despised mob, of admitting to himself and to them that he dare 
not say what he pleases. His mother understands him perfectly. Determined 
that he shall yield, her last move is to appeal to his love for her, the appeal that 
had never failed. Coriolanus has within him the spirit of the Spartan prisoners 
who, rather than bear the name of slaves, took their lives. Like the medieval 
knight, the lie was disgraceful in his eyes primarily, if not solely, because the sign 
of a cowardly spirit. 

126. this single Plot] WarBurToN: That is, piece, portion; applied to a piece 
of earth, and here elegantly transferred to the body, carcase—DeEttus: Coriolanus 
means the spot of ground upon which he is directly standing, and from that proceeds 
to the consideration of his own body. ‘They to dust should grind it’ refers to 
‘this mould’ alone.-—Scumipt (Coriolanus): By ‘this single plot’ Coriolanus 
certainly does not mean the spot of ground upon which he is standing, but rather 
his own person. This same mode of expression appears in the Sonmets: ‘Why 
should my heart think that a several plot? Which my heart knows the wide 
world’s common place,’ [Sonnet cxxxvii, 1. 9]. The elucidating apposition in the 
next line—‘this mould of Marcius’—precludes any other interpretation —W. A. 
Wricut: Coriolanus speaks of his own person, not of the ground upon which he 
stands, as Delius interprets. The words which follow, ‘This mould of Marcius,’ 
make this clear. 

126, 127. Plot, to loose This Mould] THeosatp: The pointing of all the im- 
pressions shows the editors did not understand this passage. What Plot is this, 
they are dreaming of, to lose the mould of Marcius? But plot and mould are but 
one and the same thing; and mean no more than the flesh and substance of Marcius’s 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLA NUS 365 


And throw’t againft the Winde. Toth’ Market place : 128 
You haue put me now to fuch a part, which neuer 
I fhall difcharge toth’ Life. 130 


Com. Come, come, wee’le prompt you. 

Volum. I prythee now {weet Son, as thou haft faid 
My praifes made thee firft a Souldier ; fo 
To haue my praife for this, performe a part 


Thou haft not done before. 135 
128. throw’t] throw it Varr. Ran. Mal. 132. I prythee] Ay, pr’yihee Rowe,+. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. Ktly. I pr’ythee Cap. et cet. 


129. You haue] you've Pope,+. 


body. ‘Were there no other consequences annex’d,’ says he, ‘than the destruction 
of my body, they should grind it to powder,’ &c. 

I29, 130. You haue put me... toth’ Life] E. K. CoamBers (Warwick Sh.): 
As Coriolanus’s fate becomes too much for him, our sympathies swing to his side, 
and his position, at least when he is not angry, becomes charged with pathos— 
MacCattvum (p. 603): He was justified in objecting to methods of dissimulation 
and flattery, but, if only he had been reasonable, a middle would not have been 
hard to find which should safeguard his self-respect while pacifying the populace. 
It is because his self-respect is of passion, not of reason, that he is so unconciliatory, 
and therefore almost as culpable as if he were guilty of the opposite fault. Plutarch, 
indeed, thinks he is more so. In his comparison between him and Alcibiades he 
is in this matter more lenient to the latter. [See note by MacCallum, II, ii, 22-24, 
where the passage from the comparison is given.—ED.] 

129. such a part, which neuer] MALoneE: So in 3 Henry VI: Il, vi, 66, ‘—he 
would avoid such bitter taunts Which in the time of death he gave our father.’ 
Again, above, Il. 71, 72; also V, iii, 8; also, V, iii, 155. This phraseology was intro- 
duced by Shakespeare in the first of these passages, for the old play on which 
3 Henry VI. was founded reads, ‘As in the time of death,’ &c. The word as 
has been substituted for ‘which’ by the modern editors in the passage before us.— 
‘The words, ‘the passage before us,’ seem to refer to this passage in Coriolanus, 
but Malone means that from 3 Henry VI, where, as a matter of fact, the Folio 
reads, ‘Which,’ and Pope, following the older play, reads As, thus also the editors 
down to Malone, who restores the Folio reading. This ambiguous wording misled 
the meticulous Cambridge Edd., who, in their Note VIII, give this last sentence of 
Malone’s note alone, adding: ‘We have been unable to find it [the reading as for 
which in this line in Coriolanus] in Rowe, Pope, Theobald, Hanmer, Warburton, 
Johnson, Capell, or Steevens. It is probably a printer’s emendation in some of 
the numerous reprints of the play.’ Their own Text. Notes on the passage in 
3 Henry VI. would have settled the point in question.—Ep.] 

130. discharge] W. A. Wricut: That is, perform; a technical word for playing 
a part upon the stage. Compare Mid. N. Dream, I, ii, 95, ‘I will discharge it in 
either your straw-coloured beard,’ &c. And IV, ii, 8, ‘You have not a man in 
all Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.’ 

134. performe a part] Matone: Our author is still thinking of his theatre. 
Cominius has just said, ‘Come, come, we’ll prompt you.’ 


366 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ii. 


Corio. Well, I muft doo’t : 136 
Away my difpofition, and poffeffe me 
Some Harlots f{pirit : My throat of Warre be turn’d, 
Which quier’d with my Drumme into a Pipe, 
Small as an Eunuch, or the Virgin voyce 140 
That Babies lull a-fleepe : The {miles of Knaues 


137-157. Mnemonic Warb. Huds. ii, Neils. 
137-149. Mnemonic Pope. 140. Virgin] virgin’s Warb. Johns. 
139. Drumme...Pipe,| drum,...pipe, Vato 

Rowe. drum...voice Words. drum... 141-143. The...fight] Om. Bell. 

pipe Pope et cet. 141. lull] Ff, Dtn, Neils. lulls 
140. Eunuch| eunuch’s Han. Dyce ii, Rowe et cet. 


139. quier’d] Jounson: That is, which played in concert with my drum.— 
STEEVENS: So in Mer. of Ven., ‘Still quiring to the young-ey’d cherubins,’ 
[V, i, 62. Murray (WN. E. D., s. v. Choired, Quired) marks this past participle of 
the verb as ‘rare.’ The earliest quotation there given is 1796; the present pas- 
sage, therefore, escaped his vigilant corps of readers. Under Choir, Quire: To sing 
as a choir; to sing in chorus, the above line from Mer. of Ven. is quoted.—Ep.] 

140. Small as an Eunuch] W. A. Wricut calls attention to Hanmer’s reading, 
eunuch’s, and compares, for this construction, I, vi, 34; see, therefore, his note 
thereon. 

140. the Virgin voyce] R. G. Wuire: Criticism of Shakespeare’s poetry has 
no place in this work unless as an aid to the settlement of his text; but I may be 
pardoned for remarking that this is the most infelicitous use of epithet that I 
remember to have noticed in all these plays ——Hunson (ed. ii.): White notes ‘vir- 
gin’ here as an ‘infelicitous use of epithet.’ I cannot conceive why, unless on the 
ground that virgins never use their voice in singing lullaby to other people’s chil- 
dren. Do none but mothers lull babies asleep? 

141. That Babies lull a-sleepe] W. A. Wricut: The folios read, and Shake- 
speare probably wrote, ‘lull,’ in accordance with a law which accounts for similar 
inaccuracies, that when a verb is separated from its subject by an intervening 
substantive of a different number it frequently agrees with the latter. See 
Hamlet, I, ii, 38, ‘More than the scope Of these deleted articles allow.’ Again, 
Love’s Labour’s Lost, IV, iii, 345, ‘And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods 
Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.’ Sidney Walker supposed that ‘voice’ 
was plural, but this is unnecessary.—[In assigning this supposition to Walker 
Wright was, I fear, misled by a slight ambiguity in a note on this line by Dyce, 
ed. ii, who says that W. N. Lettsom, Walker’s editor, retains the folio reading on 
the supposition that ‘voice’ is here the plural, giving, as his authorisation for this, 
Walker’s Versification, art. LI, where is recorded a number of examples wherein 
nouns ending in s, ss, ce, etc., take a plural verb; but neither Walker nor 
Lettsom quote the present line as such. In any case the supposition is Lettsom’s, 
not Walker’s.—Ep.]—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): An inversion made 
through the emphasis characteristic of Coriolanus. He always bears on hard, and 
here his point is contempt for the Harlot’s spirit, or the Eunuch or Virgin voice 
that lulls Babies, etc—Dericuton: I retain the reading of the folios because of the 
harshness of so many consecutive sibilants. 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 367 


Tent in my cheekes, and Schoole-boyes Teares take vp 142 
The Glaffes of my fight : A Beggars Tongue 
Make motion through my Lips,and my Arm’d knees 
Who bow’d but in my Stirrop, bend like his 145 
That hath receiu’d an Almes. I will not doo’t, 
Lea{t I furceafe to honor mine owne truth, 
And by my Bodies a¢tion, teach my Minde 
A moft inherent Bafeneffe. 
Volum. At thy choice then : 150 
To begge of thee, it is my more dif-honor, 
Then thou of them. Come all to ruine, let 
Thy Mother rather feele thy Pride, then feare 
Thy dangerous Stoutneffe : for I mocke at death 154 


143. fight] fight Fo. 145. Who] Which Pope,+. 


142-145. Tent... Make... bend] For other examples of this optative use 
of the subjunctive see ABBorr, § 365. 

142. Tent in my cheekes] JoHNson: That is, take up residence—R. G. WHITE: 
Dr Johnson’s explanation has been hitherto accepted, and has given this passage 
in other dictionaries than his own, as illustrative of that verbal signification of 
‘tent.’ But, as applied to ‘smiles,’ this appears to me a strained and very unhappy 
use of the word. I believe that ‘tent’ here is the ‘tent’ of ‘tent-stich,’ a needle- 
woman’s phrase as old as this play, and that ‘tent in my cheeks’ means catch 
in, or draw in, my cheeks. 

145. Who] For other examples wherein who personifies an irrational antecedent 
see ABBorTT, § 264. On the present passage Abbott queries ‘But is who the ante- 
cedent here to “‘me” implied in ‘‘my’’? (see § 218).’ 

146. an Almes] W. A. WricHt: Compare Much Ado, II, iii, 164, ‘An he should 
it were an alms to hang him.’ And Acts, iii, 3, ‘Who seeing Peter and John about 
to go into the temple asked an alms.’ The form of the word in Anglo-Saxon and 
Early English is e@lmesse, elmesse, or almesse, from the Greek éenuocivn. 

147. honor mine owne truth] JoHNSON: Ildvrwy 6& wddus’? aicxtvew catrov. 
Pythagoras, [Golden Verses, No. xii, ‘And above all things, respect thyself.’ The 
precept of Polonius, ‘This above all: to thine ownself be true,’ seems a closer 
parallel than the present passage. There was, moreover, no translation of the 
Carmina Aurea until the middle of the seventeenth century.—Ep.] 

I5I, 152. To begge of thee... Then thou] See |. 102 supra, and note by 
ABBOTT. 

152-154. let Thy Mother... Thy... Stoutnesse] Jonnson: This is obscure. 
Perhaps she means, ‘Go do thy worst; let me rather feel the wtmost extremity that 
thy pride can bring upon us, than live thus in fear of thy dangerous obstinacy.’— 
Hupson, with a slight verbal change, adopts Johnson’s explanation.—ScHMIDT 
(Coriolanus): This passage is only to be understood if we take ‘fear’ as an im- 
perative, and not as an infinitive dependent on ‘let,’ ‘Let thy mother rather feel 
thy pride, than that thou hast or showest fear for the dangerous consequences 
of thy pride.’ The words thus carry out the natural parallel to the foregoing, 


368 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ii. 


With as bigge heart as thou. Do as thou lift, 155 
Thy Valiantneffe was mine, thou fuck’ft it from me : 
156. fuck’/t] suck’dst Rowe ii. et seq. 


‘it is my more dishonor,’ etc.—W. A. WRIcHT, accepting Johnson’s interpretation 
as correct, remarks on Schmidt’s, ‘But Volumnia is quite sincere in her desire 
to induce Coriolanus to yield to the people, and such an argument [as Schmidt’s] 
would be a strange one to employ for the purpose.’—THIERGEN (p. 206): Schmidt’s 
taking of ‘fear’ as the imperative seems to me quite impossible by reason of the 
construction of the passage-—PERRING (p. 302): Let it be observed that almost 
in the same breath that Volumnia avows a feeling of pride of some sort, she dis- 
avows the pride which stiffened Cortolanus (1. 157), as not derived from her, nor 
appertaining to her, but of his own begetting. And secondly, it is evident that 
Coriolanus felt that his mother had chidden him, and had not come round to his 
view of her own free will, but rather because she felt that she could not do other- 
wise. Her surrender to her son, then, was not a cheerful and spontaneous, but a 
half-hearted and compulsory one. Thus much generally; and now to come to 
particulars: in what terms does Volumnia describe her own feelings? Certainly 
not as one who feared the consequences; for (to use her own words) she mocked at 
death with as big a heart as Coriolanus did. How then? As one who felt pride, 
but not exactly the pride which Coriolanus felt; but a rational pride akin to what 
we sometimes call self-respect—a feeling that she had gone as far in entreating her 
son as a mother, or at least as Coriolanus’ mother, should. He would be too proud 
to be continually suing, and continually denied; well then—+that pride of his she 
too felt; she let it be as he willed; she passively permitted it, albeit it was contrary 
to her wish, her counsel, her best and highest judgment. I can almost fancy that 
Shakespeare had in his mind here that famous chapter in Israelitish history, when 
Jehovah, finding his people were determined to have a visible and temporal king 
like all the nations around them, let them have their will; allowing it rather than 
approving of it, conceding what was, in reality, repugnant to his commands and 
his counsel— VERITY (Student’s Sh.) quotes Johnson’s interpretation and adds: 
‘Better, she means apparently, experience the worst in one’s own person than live 
in constant fear of what the future may bring to you and to us. To know, even to 
suffer, the worst is a relief, compared with constant anticipations of evil.’— 
DeicutTon: If, though your mother, I must bow to your pride, that is a thing which 
I can bear; to fear the dangers it may bring upon us is, to one of my nature, an 
impossibility—E. K. Cuampers (Warwick Sh.): Volumnia gives up her cause, 
and resigns herself to the sympathy with Coriolanus’s pride, which has throughout 
been competing with her alarm at his obstinacy.—Caszr, on the foregoing note, 
says: ‘But his pride is just what she cannot sympathise with, and disowns in 
him—“‘owe thy pride thyself.” Johnson’s interpretation, though accepted by 
recent editors, assumes too much, and practically identifies ‘‘pride” with “stout- 
ness,” which more nearly corresponds with “valiantness.’? The fact seems to 
be that Volumnia, in her resentment, exhorts herself, not Coriolanus, saying in 
effect, ‘‘now let the sense of thy pride rather concern thy mother than fear of danger 
of thy valiant obstinacy.””’ 

156. Thy Valiantnesse was mine] W. A. Wricut: So Cassius, in Jul. Cas., 
IV, iii, 120, attributes his hasty temper to his mother, ‘That rash humour which 
my mother gave me.’ And the influence of the mother in the formation of the 


ACT III, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 369 


But owe thy Pride thy felfe. 157 
Corio. Pray be content : 

Mother, I am going to the Market place : 

Chide me no more. Ile Mountebanke their Loues, 160 

Cogge their Hearts from them, and come home belou’d 

Of all the Trades in Rome. Looke, I am going : 

Commend me to my Wife, Ile returne Confull, 

Or neuer truft to what my Tongue can do 

I’th way of Flattery further. 165 
Volum. Do your will. Exit Volumnia 
Com.Away, the Tribunes do attend you: arm your felf 

To anfwer mildely : for they are prepar’d 

With Accufations, as I heare more ftrong 

Then are vpon you yet. 170 
Corio. The word is, Mildely. Pray you let vs go, 

Let them accufe me by inuention : I 

Will anfwer in mine Honor. 
Menen. 1, but mildely. 


Corio. Well mildely be it then, Mildely. Exeunt 175 
157. owe] owne F, oun F;F,, 166. Exit Volumnia.] Exit. Cap. 
Rowe,+, Cap. Var. ’78, Ran. ow’st et seq. 
Coll. iii. (MS.). owest Huds. ii. 167. Away...arm] As one line Pope 
159. I am] I’m Pope,+. et seq. 
165. I’th} Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 167-175. Om. Bell. 
I’the Cap. et cet. 168. they are] they're Pope,+. 
further| farther Coll. Wh. i. 175. Mildely.] mildly be it then! 


Ktly. mildly. Come on. Words. 


child’s character is again referred to in Macbeth, I, vii, 72-74. [See also Richard III: 
IV, iv, 157, 158, ‘Madam, I have a touch of your [his mother’s] condition Which 
cannot brook the accent of reproof.’—Eb.] 

158. Pray be content, etc.] JoHN RUSKIN in a letter to Miss Susan Beever, 
168 March, 1874, says: ‘I had a real cry—with quite wet tears—yesterday morn- 
ing over what, to me, is the prettiest bit in all Shakespeare, [ll. 158-165 here given]. 
And almost next to it comes (to me always, I mean in my own fancy) Virgilia: 
“Yes, certain; there’s a letter for you; I saw it,”’ [Works, ed. Cook & Wedderburn, 
vol. xxxvil, p. 87]. 

161. Cogge] W. A. Wricut: That is, cheat, cozen, obtain by falsehood. See 
Richard IIT; I, iii, 48, ‘Because I cannot flatter and speak fair, Smile in men’s 
faces, smooth, deceive and cog.’ Cotgrave gives: ‘Ioncher. To strew.. . 
also, to gull; cog, or foist with; lie vnto, deciue, giue gudgeons, beare in hand with 
vutruthes; also, to dallie, ieast or toy with.’ 

171. The word is, Mildely] W. A. Wricut: That is, the pass-word, order of 
the day. Compare Jul. Ces., V, v, 4, ‘Slaying is the word.’ 

172, 173. Let them... mine Honor] Casr: Let them invent accusations 
against me, I will answer them in accordance with mine honour. 


24 


370 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ac 111, sc. iii. 


[Scene III.] 


Enter Sicinius and Brutus. I 
Brn. In this point charge him home, that he affects 
Tyrannicall power : If he euade vs there, 3 
ScENE vi. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. et cet. 
ScENE 111. Cap. et seq. 2. Brn.] Fy. 
The Forum. Pope,+, Var. ’78, ’85, 2-32. Om. Bell. 
Ran. The Same. The Market-Place. 3. Tyrannicall] Tyrannic Pope,+. 


Knt. The Same. The Forum. Cap. 


1. Sicinius and Brutus] VERiItTy (Student’s Sh.): The Tribunes are here seen at 
their worst: frankly treating the people as mere tools, exploiting theadvantage which 
Coriolanus’s passionate temperament gives them over him, and showing themselves 
with the self-importance of the demagogue in office (‘us’.. . ‘we’... four’). 

2-6. In this point .. . ne’re distributed] MAcCAtLum (p. 511): The accusa- 
tions brought against Coriolanus in Shakespeare are substantially just. He 
may not seek to wind himself into a power tyrannical if we take tyrant, as Plutarch 
certainly did but as Shakespeare probably did not, in the strict classical sense of 
tyrannus, but with his disregard of aged custom and his avowed opinions of the 
people, there can be no doubt that he would have wielded the consular powers 
tyrannically, in the ordinary acceptation of the word. For there can be as little 
doubt about his ill-will to the masses and his abhorrence of the tribunitian system. 
And it is on these that he is condemned. It is very noticeable that the division 
of the Antiate spoil, which in Plutarch is the most decisive and unwarrantable 
allegation against him, is mentioned by Shakespeare only in advance as a sub- 
ordinate point that may be brought forward, but, as a matter of fact, it is never 
urged. Shakespeare makes no further use of a circumstance to which Plutarch 
attaches so great importance that he dwells on it twice over and gives it the prom- 
inent place in the narrative of the trial. This piece of sharp practice becomes quite 
negligible in the play, and the only chicanery of which the tribunes are guilty in 
the whole transaction is that, as in the Life, but more explicitly, they goad Corio- 
lanus to a fit of rage in which he avows his real sentiments—a tactical expedient 
that many politicians would consider perfectly permissible. Shakespeare, as has 
often been pointed out, in some ways shows even less appreciation than Plutarch of 
the merits of the people; so it is all the more significant that, at the crisis of the 
play, he softens down and obliterates the worst traits in their proceedings against 
their enemy. And the second thing we observe is that by all this Shakespeare 
emphasises the insolence and truculence of the hero. It is Coriolanus’s pride that 
turns his candidature, which begins under the happiest auspices, toa snare. It is 
still his pride that plays into the Tribunes’ hands and makes him repeat in mere 
defiance his offensive speech. It is again his pride, not any calumny about his 
misapplying the profits of his raid, that gives the signal for the adverse sentence. 
Just as in this respect the plebs is represented as, on the whole, less ignoble than 
Plutarch makes it, so Coriolanus’s conduct is portrayed as more insensate. And 
this two-fold tendency, to palliate the guilt of Rome and to stress the violence 
that provoked it, appears in the more conspicuous of Shakespeare’s subsequent 
deviations from his authority. [Both Verity and Gordon call attention to the 
unfairness in bringing forward this question of the spoils of the Antiates—Ep.] 

2, 3. he affects Tyrannicall power] Murray (N. E. D.,s. v. Affect. 1.): To aim 


ACT III, SC. iii.] 


CORIOLANUS 371 


Inforce him with his enuy to the people, 
And that the Spoile got on the Antiats 5 
Was ne’re diftributed. What, will he come ? 


Enter an Edile. 


Edile. Hee’s comming. 
Bru. How accompanied ? 
Edtle. 


That alwayes fauour’d him. 
Sicin. 


Haue you a Catalogue 


With old Menenius,and thofe Senators fe) 


Of all the Voices that we haue procur'd, fet downe by’th 


Edile. I haue: ’tis ready. (Pole ? 
Sicin. Haue you colle¢ted them by Tribes? 15 
E€dile. I haue. 


5. Antiats] Ff, Rowe, Ktly. Anti- 
ates Pope et cet. 

6-9. What...accompanied] As one line 
Cap. et seq. (except Sta. Ktly, Neils.). 

7. Enter an Edile.] After di/tributed, 
1. 6 Cap. Mal. et seq. 

13-16. fet downe...I haue] As two 
lines, ending: Haue you and reading ]. 


16 I haue; ’tis ready Cap. 
“13, 14. As two lines, the first ending 
procur’d Pope et seq. ° 
13. Pole?] poll? Rowe et seq. 
14. ready.| ready, here Pope,+, 
Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Hal. 
16. I haue.| I have; tis ready Fi, 
Rowe, Cap. 


at, aspire to, or make for; to seek to obtain or attain, 2 Henry VI: IV, vii, 104, 
‘Have I affected wealth or honour?’ [Compare also IV, vi, 41 below.] 

4. Inforce him with his enuy to the people] That is, urge upon him his malice 
toward the people. North, in his marginal summary of a paragraph, p. 251, has, 
‘The first occasion of the Volsces envy to Coriolanus.’ As the present passage 
is the only one wherein Shakespeare uses this expression North’s summary per- 
haps led him to it. Schmidt (Lex., s. v. envy, sb. 2) gives many examples of this 
word in the sense of malice, hatred —En. 

5. And that] Apporr (§ 382): As in Latin a verb of speaking can be omitted 
where it is implied by some other word, ‘And (say) that the spoil,’ etc. 

5. got on the Antiats] WHITELAW compares ‘I will get me honour upon Pharaoh 
and all his host,’ [Exodus, xiv, 17]—Scumupt (Coriolanus) remarks on this that 
a nearer parallelism is to be found in Ant. & Cleo.: ‘My queen and Eros Have by 
their brave instructions got upon me A nobleness in record,’ IV, xiv, 98. ‘But 
the figure,’ says W. A. Wright, ‘is different, and ‘‘got upon” is equivalent to 
“begotten upon,” and so, obtained by means of. I would rather refer to I, i, 
235, “win upon,” and As You Like It, I, i, 156, “If he do not mightily grace him- 
self on thee,” for an instance of this use of ‘‘on.””’ 

13-15. by’th Pole... by Tribes] Brercurnc (Henry Irving Sh.): The point 
of this arrangement is lost upon the reader unacquainted with the passage in 
North’s Plutarch, on which it is based: ‘The Tribunes would in any case (what- 
soeuer came of it) that the people should proceed to giue their voyces by Tribes 
and not by hundreds; for by this means the poore needie people (and all such rabble 
as had nothing to lose and had lesse regard of honesty before their eyes) came to 


372 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iii. 


Sicin. Affemble prefently the people hither : 17 
And when they heare me fay, it fhall be fo, 
I’th’right and ftrength a’th’Commons : be it either 
For death, for fine,or Banifhment, then let them 20 
If I fay Fine,cry Fine; if Death, cry Death, 
Infifting on the olde prerogatiue 
And power i’th Truth a’th Caufe. 


Edile. I fhall informe them. 24 
19. I’th’] ?the Cap. et seq. 22. the] their Coll. MS. 
ath] oth’ F,, Rowe,+.  o’the 23. Vth] i’the Cap. et seq. 
Cap. et seq. Vth Truth) vthe trial Kinnear. 
20. or Banifhment| or for Banifhment 24. shall) will Rowe,+. 


F, . 


be of greater force (because their voyces were numbered by the polle) then the noble 
honest citizens whose persons and purse did dutifully serue the common wealth 
in their warres’ (p. 231). The sentence ‘because . . . polle’ is not in the Greek, 
and it is not a correct explanation of the Tribunes’ preference for voting by tribes. 
In the case of both centuries and tribes voting was by poll, till the vote of a century 
or tribe was arrived at, and then the vote of century or tribe was given as a single 
one. Without going into questions of Roman constitutional history, it will be 
sufficient to say that in the assembly by centuries (comitia centuriata) the pre- 
ponderance was given to property. It is more important to notice how carefully 
Shakespeare follows North, taking from him any details which may give life to 
the narrative—E. K. CHamBers (Warwick Sh.) likewise notes that the sentence 
in regard to voting by the poll is an addition of the translator from the Greek. 
He gives substantially the same explanation of the methods of voting by tribes 
and by centuries as that by Beeching, and concludes his note thus: ‘Probably 
Shakespeare has not quite understood the point, even if North did.’ [The paren- 
thetical explanation is perhaps due to Amyot and not North, who translated the 
French of Amyot, not the original Greek. Langhorne’s translation of this incident 
is: ‘But the first thing they did, after the people were assembled, was to compel 
them to give their voices by tribes, and not by centuries; thus contriving that the 
meanest and most seditious part of the populace, and those who had no regard 
to justice or honour, might out-vote such as had borne arms, or were of some for- 
tune and character.’ A foot-note adds: ‘From the reign of Servius Tullius the 
voices had been always gathered by centuries. The Consuls were for keeping 
up the ancient custom, being well apprised, that they could save Coriolanus if 
the voices were reckoned by centuries, of which the knights and the wealthiest 
of the citizens made up the majority, being pretty sure of ninety-eight out of a 
hundred and seventy-three. But the artful tribunes, alleging that, in an affair 
relating to the rights of the people, every citizen’s vote ought to have its due 
weight, they would not by any means consent to let the voices be collected other- 
wise than by tribes.’ (vol. ii, p. 190.) —Epb.] 

23. i’th Truth a’th Cause] JoHNSON: This is not very easily understood. We 
might read, ‘o’er the truth o’the cause. —M. Mason (Comments, etc., p. 257): 
As I cannot understand this passage as it is pointed, I should suppose that the 
speeches should be thus divided, and then it will require no explanation: 


ACT III, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 373 


Bru. And when fuch time they haue begun to cry, 25 
Let them not ceafe, but with a dinne confus’d 
Inforce the prefent Execution 
Of what we chance to Sentence. 

€d1. Very well. 

Sicin. Make them be ftrong,and ready for this hint 30 
When we fhall hap to giu’t them. 

Bru. Go about it, 
Put him to Choller ftraite, he hath bene vs’d 
Euer to conquer, and to haue his worth 


Of contradiction. Being once chaft, he cannot 35 
32. [Exit Aédile. Pope et seq. 34. worth] word Rowe,+, Sing. ii, 
33-35. he hath...contradiction] Om. Huds. mouth Coll. ii, iii. (MS.). 

Words. wreak Ktly. will Lettsom (ap. Dyce 
34. Euer] Even Var. ’21. ii.). worth free Kinnear. 

his| no Han. Bell. 35. Of] Off Warb. 


‘Sic. Insisting on the old prerogative 
And power. 

42d. In the truth of the cause 
I shall inform them.’ 


That is, I will explain the matter to them fully. [Rann adopts Mason’s division 
and explanation of this passage, but makes a single line of the two short lines given 
to the Atdile—Ep.]—Bapuam (Criticism Applied to Sh., p. 6): What is the 
meaning of ‘in the truth of the cause’? In this place it would mean because 
their cause is true, and assuredly that is not to be the ground of their determination; 
but, on the contrary, Sicinius wishes to hound them on to his cry of the right and 
strength of the Commons; the obvious correction is, ‘Insisting on the old preroga- 
tive And pow’r i’ th’ teeth o’ th’ cause.’ Johnson, as we afterwards found, had so 
far anticipated this that he saw the meaning required by the context, for he reads 
‘o’er the truth o’ th’ cause,’ which, however, neither signifies what he wishes to 
express by it nor suits the metre—Inp. (Text of Sh., p. 289): The conjecture which 
I offered many years ago I again repeat, with the most perfect conviction of its 
truth—W. A. Wricut: That is, the power which the rightfulness of their cause 
gave them.—Veritvy (Siudent’s Sh.): An obscure phrase; perhaps ‘according to the 
justice of their case.’-—Casr (Arden Sh.): That is, the authority residing in a true 
cause.—Gorpon: I suppose this may mean, ‘the power which they have in the 
justice of their cause.’ It sounds like the jargon of an overworked politician. 

25. when such time] For other examples of this omission of the preposition in 
adverbial expressions of time see ABBOTT, § 202. 

34, 35. to haue his worth Of contradiction] WARBURTON: The sense here 
falls miserably. He hath been used, says the speaker, ever to conquer—And what 
then?—and to contradict. We should read and point it thus, And to have his word, 
Off contradiction.—i. e., to have his opinion carry it without contradiction. Here 
the sense rises elegantly. He used ever to conquer; nay, to conquer without oppost- 
tion.— HEATH (p. 422): When we say a man is used to have his word [see Text. 


374 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iii. 


[34, 35. to haue his worth Of contradiction] 

Notes] we mean that he will still have something proper or improper to say on 
every occasion that offers. What strange English too is Of contradiction? Yet, 
in spite of the genius of our language, Mr Warburton will have it that these words 
signify, ‘He has been used to have his opinion carry it without contradiction; nay, 
to conquer without opposition.’ Surely the tribunes knew better, as well from 
what had just before passed, as from the other transactions mentioned in the play, 
the establishment of the tribunitial magistracy, and the distribution of the corn, 
both which Coriolanus had violently opposed and had been overruled in his 
opposition. The latter part of Mr Warburton’s interpretation, though he under- 
stands it as a compliment to Coriolanus out of the mouth of his enemies, is such a 
one as Coriolanus himself would undoubtedly have interpreted to be an affront. 
The common reading gives us a very just and a very natural sense. [It is to be 
remembered that by this Heath means the reading of Rowe, Pope, Theobald, 
etc., and not the Folio text—Ep.]: ‘He hath been ever used in war to conquer, 
and in peace to lay hold of every opportunity to contradict the desires of the people. 
The first circumstance hath blown up his pride, and the second is so habitual to 
him that he cannot get the better of it; there is therefore no doubt but, if we can 
once put him in passion, and off his guard, both those principles of action will 
display themselves with their usual extravagance.’ The source of Mr Warburton’s 
mistake is evident; he must needs be searching for a climax where none was intended. 
—CAPELL, whose text reads, ‘to have his ’worth,’ says: ‘Thus the folios, and 
rightly; for though ’wortkh be an uncommon contraction (a singular one, if you 
will, for no example is met with), the word so understood fits the place and the 
speaker; and that very contraction has fitted it, for pennyworth had not been toler- 
able. The sense is, ‘““He hath been us’d to have his full swing of it.””’—[In his 
Glossary Capell cites the present passage, s. v. Worth: Pennyworth.]|—MAtone’s 
note on this passage does not contain any reference to Capell; but he likewise 
declares in favour of the Folio reading, and interprets ‘worth’ in the sense of 
pennyworth, quoting in illustration Rom. & Jul., ‘You take your pennyworth [of 
sleep] now,’ IV, v, 4.—CoLiiER (Notes & Emendations, etc., p. 358): The following 
must be allowed to be a valuable emendation of a passage which is thus given in 
every edition, ancient or recent, ‘—to have his worth Of contradiction.’ Malone 
gravely says that ‘to have his worth of contradiction’ means to have his penny- 
worth of it; but the whole figure here is taken from horsemanship. When a restive 
animal obtains his own way he is said to have his mouth given to him; to give a 
horse his mouth is to free him from restraint; therefore Brutus, speaking of 
Coriolanus and of his irritable spirit, remarks: 


‘He hath been us’d 
Ever to conquer, and to have his mouth 
Of contradiction,’ etc. 


The old printer confounded m and w, and read mouth ‘worth.’ The necessary 
letters are written in the margin of the folio, 1632, and struck through in the 
text. —SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, p. 221): Think of Shakespeare writing ‘his mouth 
of contradiction’!! It does not tend to confirm Mr Collier’s presumption that 
these correctors had access to better authority than we possess, or give a very 
high idea of their acuteness to propose sucha change. The error lies only in a single 
letter; we should read, ‘to have his word Of contradiction,’ &c. [From Collier’s 


ACH AIM “SC. 117, CORIOLANUS STD 


[34, 35. to haue his worth Of contradiction] 

remark that all editions ancient and recent read ‘worth,’ and this proposal by 
Singer to read word, it would seem that neither of them had examined the earlier 
texts. In spite of the sting intended by Singer’s two exclamation points, he 
has, I think, been more lenient than is his wont. ‘To have his mouth of contra- 
diction’ is an ill phrase, a vile phrase; how can it, moreover, be made to yield the 
meaning Collier gives it? It should be: To be given his mouth, if it refer to horse- 
manship. If it mean anything at all it must be as we speak of a face of woe, an 
eye of pity, and thus, a mouth full of contradiction —Ep.]—J. WETHERELL 
(Notes & Queries, 1 Aug., 1868, p. 103) directs us to read this passage: 


‘he hath been us’d 
Ever to conquer and to heave his wroth 
On contradiction’; 


but, unfortunately, does not vouchsafe to elucidate. It must, therefore, be left to 
the patience of the reader to unravel. For his guidance it may be said that 
Shakespeare uses /eave in the sense of lift wp, and also to give vent to, as a sigh or 
moan. The word wroth occurs but once in Shakespeare (Mer. of Ven., II, ix, 78), 
where it can mean only sorrow, unhappiness. ’Tis too hard a knot for me to 
untie.—Ep.—Bapuam (Text of Sh., p. 288): A mere change in the punctuation 
will supersede the necessity of any further conjecture in this passage. Here some 
defend ‘worth,’ and others attempt corrections of it, among which the most ridic- 
ulous is the MS. corrector’s ‘mouth.’ We ought to read: 


“He hath been us’d 
Ever to Conquer, and (to have his worth) 
Of contradiction being once chaf’d, he cannot 
Be reined,’ etc.— 


P. A. Dantet (p. 62) proposes ‘and to heat his wrath On contradiction.’— 
WHITELAW: Not to have the worst of the quarrel; to give as good as he gets.— 
Scuuipt (Coriolanus): The interpretation of Steevens [Malone?] is not in accord 
with the context. Literally: He is accustomed to have his worthiness, his repute, 
by means of contradiction; contradiction carries him as far as he intends; that is, 
he always carries his point—W. A. Wricut: His full quota or proportion as 
Malone explains it. Coriolanus in opposition has always been accustomed to 
get the best of the bargain. [As regards Schmidt’s interpretation] the point is 
not that Coriolanus has acquired this character, but that he has always had his 
own way and cannot brook opposition—ButtocH (p. 184): ‘Conquer,’ I con- 
jecture, should be canker, a very expressive term for one so given as Coriolanus was 
to the various qualities of temper and conduct which the speaker attributes to 
him. ‘Canker’ and ‘cankered’ occur in Shakespeare above a score of times as noun 
and adjective; in the passage before us it would seem to be a verb. At all events 
it appears a suitable expression for the tribunes to heap upon the man they hated.— 
Hupson (ed. ii.): ‘Worth’ seems to me absolutely meaningless here. On the 
other hand, word seems rather tame for the occasion. Collier’s MS. correction is 
dreadful. Daniel’s proposal, though something bold, seems to me well worth 
considering. —ORGER (p. 64): If we change ‘Of contradiction’ to ‘’bove contra- 
diction’ the sense is clear. He has always been accustomed to have his worth 
regarded so highly, such deference paid him, that he has never been contradicted.— 


376 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iii. 


Be rein’d againe to Temperance, then he fpeakes 36 
What’s in his heart,and that is there which lookes 
With vs to breake his necke. 
Enter Coriolanus, Menenius,and Comi- 
nius ,with others. 40 

Sicin. Well,heere he comes. 

Mene. Calmely, I do befeech you. 

Corio. I, as an Hoftler, that fourth pooreft peece 
Will beare the Knaue by’th Volume : 


Th’honor’d Goddes 45 
36-38. then...his necke] Om. Words. tricians. Cap. Mal. et seq. 
37. lookes] works Han. 43. fourth] for th F.. for the F3F,. 
39, 40. Enter...others.] After 1. 41 44, 45. As one line Pope et seq. 
Dyce, Cam.+. 44. the Knaue] ‘thou Knave’ Anon. 
40. with others.] Senators and Pa- ap. Cam. 


Verity (Student’s Sh.): Can this mean ‘to get the better of opposition’? [Malone’s 
interpretation] surely would imply that Coriolanus was used to and could put up 
with contradiction, whereas Brutus means the exact opposite. [Malone’s interpre- 
tation, since it does not involve any change in the original text, is now accepted 
by the majority of modern editors.—Ep.] 

36. Be rein’d ...to Temperance] TottetT: Our poet seems to have taken 
several of his images from the old pageants. In the new edition of Leland’s 
Collectanea, vol. iv, p. 190, the virtue Temperance is represented ‘holding in hyr 
haund a bitt of an horse. —HENLEy: Mr Tollet might have added that both in 
painting and sculpture the bit is the established symbol of this virtue. 

37, 38. which lookes ... his necke] JoHNSON: To ‘look’ is to watt or expect. 
The sense I believe is, ‘What he has in heart is waiting there to help us to break 
his neck.’—STEEVENS: The tribune rather seems to mean, ‘The sentiments of 
Coriolanus’s heart are our coadjutors, and look to have their share in promoting 
his destruction.’ [This note, with even a slight hint of criticism of Johnson, did 
not appear until Steevens’s own edition in 1793, nearly ten years after the death 
of his great partner in editorship.—Ep.]—WnuirTELAw: There is that in his heart— 
the ungovernable disposition of the man—which means (goes about, makes as 
if) to combine with us for his destruction. ‘To break his neck.’ Hurl him from 
the Tarpeian Rock.—Scumipt (Coriolanus): That is, is likely, as ‘to look’ is 
used elsewhere with adjectival and adverbial expressions, but would certainly not be 
used with an infinitive. Whitelaw is quite mistaken. ‘With us’ is by us, if expressed 
in present day speech. There is no need to refer directly to the downfall from the 
Tarpeian Rock as does Whitelaw.—Case (Arden Sh.): The N. E. D. places 
this passage under Jook 86, To tend to, promise fo, as sole example, following upon 
8[a]. To show a tendency; to tend, point (in a particular direction), illustrated 
by several examples, beginning with ‘1647, Power of Kings, iv, 84, The context 
looketh wholly that way.’ Both Johnson and Steevens obviously connect ‘With 
us’ with ‘to break,’ etc., but if it is connected with ‘looks,’ the sentiments are not 
coadjutors, but merely coincide in expectation or tendency. 

43, 44. an Hostler ... by’th Volume] STrEVENS: That is, would bear being 
called a knave as often as would fill out a volume.—W. A. Wricut: As Niel Blane 


ACT III, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 377 


Keepe Rome in fafety, and the Chaires of Iuftice 46 
Supplied with worthy men, plant loue amongs 
Through our large Temples with y fhewes of peace 
And not our ftreets with Warre. 
1 Sen. Amen, Amen. 50 
<Mene. A Noble with. 
Enter the Edile with the Plebeians. 
Sicin. Draw neere ye people. 
Edile. Lift to your Tribunes. Audience : 


Peace I fay. 55 
45-49. Given to Com. Anon. ap. 48. Through] Throng Theob. et 
Cam. seq. 
47. Supplied] Supply Pope,+. 52. Enter...Plebeians.] Ff, Rowe,+. 
amongs] amongft you, Ff, Rowe Re-enter...Plebeians. Varr. Ran. Re- 
(amongst you Pope). amongst us Var. enter Atdile with Citizens. Cap. et cet. 
73. among’s! Dyce, Sta. Cam.+, 53. neere] near to us, Words. 
Words. Huds. ii, Neils. among us! 54,55. Lift...I fay] As one line Johns. 
Cap. et cet. et seq. 


says in Old Mortality (ch. iii.), ‘Folk in the hostler line maun put up wi’ muckle.’ 
The folios spell the word ‘Hostler’ here, but elsewhere ‘Ostler..—Miss C. PorTER, 
in a laudable attempt to wrest a meaning from the Folio reading ‘that fourth 
poorest peece,’ says: ‘Coriolanus is referring to the requisite reining in of Tem- 
perence belonging to an Hostler of the lowliest fourth estate, which will enable him 
to stand being submissive, to beare to any extent; “by the Volume,” the Knave 
about to ride him.’ The word ‘him’ refers not to the metaphorical hostler here, 
but to Coriolanus himself, who sees through the scheme of Brutus, ‘the Knave’ 
who is about to ride him to his ruin.—Epb. 

48. Through our large Temples] THEOBALD: Though this be the reading of 
all the copies, it is flat nonsense. There is no verb, either expressed or under- 
stood, that can govern the latter part of the sentence. I have no doubt of my 
emendation [see Text. Notes] restoring the text rightly, because Mr Warburton 
started the same conjecture, unknowing that I had meddled with the passage. 
[Warburton was not so magnanimous. He pronounced the Folio text ‘rank non- 
sense,’ but made no mention of his ‘very dear friend’ having proposed the same 
reading.—Ep.] 

48. shewes of peace] MALONE: The ‘shows of peace’ are multitudes of people 
peaceably assembled either to hear the determination of causes or for other 
purposes of civil government.—STEEVENS: The real ‘shows of peace’ among the 
Romans were the olive branch and the caduceous; but I question if our author, on 
the present occasion, had any determinate idea annexed to his words. Mr 
Malone’s supposition, however, can hardly be right; because the ‘temples’ (i. e., 
those of the gods) were never used for the determination of civil causes, &c. To 
such purposes the Senate and the Forum were appropriated. The temples indeed 
might be thronged with people who met to thank the gods for a return of peace.— 
W. A. Wricut: Shakespeare may have had in his mind some occasion like that of 
Nov. 24, 1588, when Queen Elizabeth went to St Paul’s to return thanks for the 
victory over the Spanish Armada. See Stow’s Annals, p. 1260 (ed. 1601). 


378 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IIf, SC. iii. 


Corio. Firft heare me fpeake. 56 
Both Tri. Well,fay : Peace hoe. 
Corio. Shall I be charg’d no further then this prefent? 
Mutt all determine heere? 
Sicin. Ido demand, 60 
If you fubmit you to the peoples voices, 
Allow their Officers, and are content 
To fuffer lawfull Cenfure for fuch faults 
As fhall be prou’d vpon you. 
Corto. I am Content. 65 
Mene. Lo Citizens, he fayes he is Content. 
The warlike Seruice he ha’s done, confider : Thinke 
Vpon the wounds his body beares, which fhew 


Like Graues i’th holy Church-yard. 69 
57. Well, fay) Well, sir; say on.— 67, 68. Thinke...fhew] As one line 

Steev. conj., Words. Pope,+, Cap. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
58. further] farther Pope ii, Theob. Knt, Coll. Hal. Ktly, Huds. i. 

Warb. Johns. Varr. Ran. Coll. Wh. i. 68. Vpon] on Pope,+, Steev. Varr. 
65. I am] I’m Dyce ii, Words. Sing. i, Knt, Hal. Huds. i. 

Huds. ii. 69-72. As two lines, ending: Brzars... 


further: Cap. et seq. 


58. this present] Scummt (Coriolanus): Either to be taken with a reference to 
time—now, today—so that no later repetition of the complaint is to be feared; or 
with reference to the case now under discussion, so that there remains in reserve 
other points of complaint. Grammatically the first is the more simple explana- 
tion, and seems more consistent with the question ‘must all determine here?’— 
Case (Arden Sh.): At this present time. Some take it as meaning the present 
charge, referring to the events in III, i, and the attempt to attach him ‘as a trait- 
orous innovator, A foe to th’ public weal’ (ll. 207, 208). On the whole, however, 
time or occasion seems to be intended. Coriolanus had been prepared by Cominius 
for new and stronger accusations, and had agreed to answer ‘mildly,’ although, in 
fact, his patience breaks down as soon as he hears the old charge repeated. As 
Sicinius says there was no need to ‘put new matter to his charge’ (1. ror post). 

61. the peoples voices] E. J. Wurre (p. 413): The different departments of 
government, now recognised, were not separated at this period of the world’s 
history; it was a fundamental principle of Roman Government that the supreme 
power was inherent in the people, though it might be delegated by them to elected 
or hereditary magistrates. All important matters, however, had to be brought 
before the sovereign people, who could ratify or reject the proposals made to them 
without discussion. The power of the people, swayed as they were by improper 
appeals and motives, led to a period of moral and political corruption which was 
followed by the military despotism of the Cesars. 

69. holy Church-yard] Bapuam (Criticism Applied to Sh., p. 11): Why holy 
churchyard? The printer having holy yard (campo santo, Gottes Acker) before 
him, and not understanding its propriety, supposed that church had been acci- 
dentally omitted, and intruded it into the text. It would be an endless task to 


ACT III, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 379 


Corto. Scratches with Briars, fcarres to moue 70 
Laughter onely. 

Mene. Confider further : 
That when he f{peakes not like a Citizen, 
You finde him like a Soldier : do not take 
His rougher Actions for malicious founds : 75 
But as I fay, fuch as become a Soldier, 
Rather then enuy you. 


Com. Well,well,no more. 78 
70-77. Om: Bell. 75. Actions] accents Theob. Pope ii. 
70, 71. As one line Theob.+, Varr. et seq. 

Ran. Mal. 77. you.) you— Pope, Theob. Warb. 
72. further] farther Coll. Sing. ii, Wh. Johns. Var. ’73. to you Ktly. 

i, Ktly. 78. Com. Corio. Bell. 


enumerate the lines where the omission or intrusion of letters or monosyllables 
has dislocated the verse. [That the present line is an instance is, I think, more than 
doubtful. The word ‘yard,’ except in composition as above, is not used by Shake- 
speare in the sense of an open space; when the word occurs by itself its meaning is, 
in nearly every case, the linear measure——Ep.]—Ro.re: English rather than 
Roman, of course. Could Bacon have written that?—Casr (Arden Sh.): An 
anachronism, as has been pointed out. Weare left at liberty to think of the size, or 
the number of the wounds, or of the sanctity of the hero’s person in the comparison. 

75. His rougher Actions] THEOBALD (Sh. Restored, p. 181): I have no manner 
of apprehension how a man’s actions can be mistaken for words. If I were to do 
a sawcy thing in company to any one, I should think it very extraordinary if he 
told me, Sir, you give me very impudent language. There seems to me a manifest 
corruption in the text, thro’ all the copies; and that for the sake of common sense 
it ought to be corrected thus, ‘His rougher Accents,’ etc. [Theobald’s note in 
his edition is substantially as here given. The Text. Notes show the universai 
acceptance of his correction. Walker (ii, 274) gives several examples wherein 
c and ¢ are confounded, which are vindications of this change-—Ep.]—CapeLt, 
while accepting Theobald’s as an emendatio certissima, adds that ‘the maker of it 
knew not its sense, for he interprets it, the tone of the voice; whereas ‘“‘accents” 
and ‘‘sounds” both stand for words in this place. —Matone: His rougher accents 
are the harsh terms that he uses. 

77. Rather than enuy you] JoHNSON: ‘Envy’ is here taken at large for malig- 
nity or ill intention—M. Mason (Comments, etc., p. 257): According to the con- 
struction of the sentence, ‘envy’ is evidently used as a verb, and signifies to injivre. 
In this sense it is used by Julietta in The Pilgrim, ‘If I make a lie To gain your 
love, and envy my best mistress Pin me against a wall,’ etc. [II, i, p. 23, ed. Dyce. 
Mason is, I think, undoubtedly right that ‘envy’ is here to be taken as a verb.— 
Murray (NV. E. D.,s. v. vb, 2. b.) quotes the foregoing passage from The Pilgrim 
as the sole example of ‘envy’ in the sense to injure.|—Matone: That is, rather than 
import ill will to you—Wruicut: Rather than express envy or hatred against you. 

78. Com. Well, well, no more] BrEcHING (Falcon Sh.): Cominius perhaps sees 
that if old Menenius goes on much longer apologising, Coriolanus will burst out 
in a fury. 


380 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iii. 


Corio. What is the matter, 
That being paft for Confull with full voyce : 80 
I am fo difhonour’d, that the very houre 
You take it off againe. 

Sicin. Anfwer to vs. 

Corio. Say then :’tis true, I ought fo. 

Sicin. We charge you, that you haue contriu’d to take 85 
From Rome all feafon’d Office, and to winde 


79. What] I will:—What Cap. 81. fo] Om. Rowe ii. 
81. I am] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, the] 7’ the Ktly. 
Words. Huds. ii. 


84. I ought so] Apporr (§ 63): ‘So’ (original meaning ‘in that way’) is fre- 
quently inserted in replies where we should omit it. See II, iii, 272, 273 supra. 

86. all season’d Office] JoHNson: All office established and settled by time, and 
made familiar to the people by long use.—W. A. Wricut: That is, all office well 
ripened or matured and rendered palatable to the people by time. For the two 
senses of ‘season,’ which appear to be combined in this passage, compare Hamlet, 
III, iii, 86, ‘When he is fit and season’d for his passage’; and I, ii, 192, ‘Season 
your admiration for a while With an attent ear.’ Mer. of Ven., IV, i, 197, ‘And 
earthly power doth then show likest God’s When mercy seasons justice.’—ROLFE: 
Schmidt (Lex.) makes ‘season’d’ = ‘qualified, tempered,’ which seems to us 
favoured by the context. Such limited power is the natural antithesis to power 
tyrannical. Besides, the office of the tribunes, against which the opposition of 
Coriolanus was specially directed, was not a long-established one. ([Sicinius is 
not here referring directly to the office of the Tribunes, but rather to the office 
which the people held in the government; this it was which Coriolanus had always 
opposed. The words ‘all season’d office’ shows this, I think; had he meant the 
office of the Tribunes, he would more likely have said ‘a season’d office.—Ep.]— 
KINNEAR (p. 323): That is, wholesome, that keeps the public weal in healthy life. 
Compare I, i, 84, ‘they nere car’d for us yet . . . repeale daily any wholesome 
Act established against the rich, and provide more piercing Statutes daily, to 
chain up and restrain the poor.’ —E. K. CHampBers (Warwick Sh.): I prefer John- 
son’s explanation to Schmidt’s. It is true that, although certain popular rights, 
such as a say in the choice of consul, were of old standing, yet the tribunate was 
quite an-innovation. But the tribunes themselves were the last people to make 
this distinction Verity (Student's Sh.): ‘Season’d’ is, perhaps, ‘established and 
mature’ from season, ‘to ripen, mature’ (the metaphor of fruit), as in Hamlet, 
III, iii, 86. One of the main notions of season as defined in the Century Dictionary 
is ‘to fit for any use by time or habit; habituate; accustom; mature; inure; accli- 
matise.’ No doubt Sicinius refers primarily to Coriolanus’s attitude towards the 
tribuneship, and it seems in keeping with the Tribune’s conceit that he should 
audaciously apply such a term to his recently-created office. Some take season’d 
= ‘qualified, tempered’; the force of which I do not see, unless it means that 
Coriolanus grudges any delegation, however moderate, of the patricians’ power to 
the representatives of the people——Casr (Arden Sh.): The fact that the office of 
Tribune was not season’d [in the sense given by Johnson] would not hinder Sicinius 
from so describing jt; it is true that by far the majority of the cases in which the 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CORIOLA NUS 381 


Your felfe into a power tyrannicall, 87 
For which you are a Traitor to the people. 
Corio. How? Traytor? 
Mene. Nay temperately : your promife. go 
Corio. The fires i’th’loweft hell. Fould in the people : 
Call me their Traitor, thou iniurious Tribune. 
Within thine eyes fate twenty thoufand deaths 


In thy hands clutcht : as many Millions in 94 
87. into] unto F,, Rowe,+. hell fold in Pope et cet. 
gl. fires] fire’s Warb. (misprint). 94. clutcht:...Millions]  clutcht...Mil- 


hell. Fould in] hell, fould in Ff. lions, F3F4.  clutch’d...millions, Rowe 
hell, fold in Rowe. hell fold-in Dyce, et seq. 
Cam.+, Words. Huds. ii, Craig. 


verb season occurs arise unmistakably from the idea of flavouring and the related 
ideas of preserving and of qualifying or tempering [as given by Schmidt], while 
the few which are usually put down under ‘mature,’ ‘ripen’ may quite well have 
the same origin. The strongest case for ‘mature,’ ‘ripen’ is Hamlet, I, iii, 81, 
where Polonius says, ‘my blessing season this in thee!’ but even here it is possible 
to regard the blessing as the preservative, or as the ingredient making all palatable. 
In the same play, III, ii, 219, as ripening or preparing takes time, ‘And who in 
want a hollow friend doth try Directly seasons him his enemy,’ is better explained 
by flavours, qualifies; and similarly in III, iii, 86, ‘When he is fit and season’d 
for his passage,’ there can be no question of maturing and ripening, but only of 
being tempered and qualified at a particular time by the seasoning of repentance. 
In Timon, IV, iii, 85, the context, with salt and tubs, the concomitants of pickling, 
not of ripening, surely fix the metaphor. The WV. EL. D., however, places the present 
passage under the figurative use of seasoned in sense, ‘fitted for use, matured, 
brought to a state of perfection,’ etc. 

gt. i’th’lowest hell] W. A. Wricut: See Deuteronomy, xxxii, 22, ‘For a fire 
is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell.’ [This is the reading 
of the Authorised Version, 1611, two or three years later than Cortolanus; the 
Bishop’s Bible, 1572, and Genevan or Breeches Bible, 1584, read, ‘For fire is kindled 
in my wrath, and shall burne unto the bottome of hell.’-—Ep.] 

or. hell. Fould in, etc.] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): The re-punctuation 
due to Pope and still followed in the modernized version is doubtful. Coriolanus 
addresses Sicinius personally, whom his intuition singles out as his malicious 
enemy. First he growls, ‘The fires i’ th’ lowest hell.’ Then blazes into fury and 
contempt at Sicinius as an unworthy Tribune, false shepherd of the people, using 
them for his own private malice against their real good. ‘You fold in the people 
(i. e., guard and shield them). Call me their Traitor, thou injurious (¢. e., injury- 
dealing and harmful Tribune,’ etc.). 

94. clutcht] This was one of the uncouth words which Jonson, in The Poetaster, 
singled out from the writings of Marston, and which he represented as violently 
cast up by Crispinus (Marston) under the action of the pill administered by the 
poet Horace: 

‘Cris. O—O—O! 
Virg. Help hin, it sticks strangely whatever it is. 


382 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Ill, SC. iii. 


Thy lying tongue, both numbers. I would fay 95 
Thou lyeft vnto thee, with a voice as free, 
As I do pray the Gods. 

Sicin. Marke you this people ? 

All. To’th’Rocke, to’th’Rocke with him. 

Sicin. Peace: 100 
We neede not put new matter to his charge : 
What you haue feene him do, and heard him fpeake : 
Beating your Officers, curfing your felues, 


Oppofing Lawes with f{troakes, and heere defying 104 
95. numbers.] numbers; Pope,+. with him; to the rock... Cap. Var. 778, 
numbers, F3F, et cet. 8c, Ran. Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Hal. 
96. lyefi] ly’st Cap. Words. 
98. this] this, F, et seq. tor. put] lay Warb. Johns. Varr. 
99. To’th’ Rocke, to’th’Rocke...] To his] this Ktly. 


th’ Rock... Fi, Rowe,+. To the rock 


Cris. O—clutcht. 

Hor. Now it is come; clutcht. 

Ces. Clutcht! it is well that is come up; it had but a narrow passage.’ 
(V, i; ed. Gifford, p. 529). ‘Clutch’ in the sense to grasp was somewhat unusual, 
its more common meaning was to clutch the fist, where we now use clench. Gifford, 
in a note on this latter expression (Ibid., p. 519), says: ‘Steevens, with his cus- 
tomary disregard of truth in everything which relates to our author [Ben Jonson], 
declares, in his final remarks on Hamlet, that Jonson has more than once in the 
Poetaster pointed his ridicule at some of Shakespeare’s descriptions and characters, 
and frequently sneered at his choice of words, of which he instances clutch. I will 
take upon me to affirm that the play does not contain a single allusion to any 
character that Shakespeare ever drew, nor an expression that can, by any inge- 
nuity, however malicious, be tortured into a sneer at hislanguage. Clutch, indeed, 
is used by him (as well as others), and with strict propriety; which can scarcely 
be said of it as employed by Marston; let the reader judge: 


“Tis yet dead night, yet all the earth is clutch’d 
In the dull leaden hand of snoring sleepe,’”’ Antonio’s Revenge, I, i’— 


Murray (WV. E. D., s. v. Clutch, II, 5.) quotes the above passage from Marston as 
the earliest use of the verb in the sense ‘To hold tightly in the bent or closed hand.’ 
Its novelty, as well as its offensive sound to his poetical ear, evidently caused 
Jonson to hold this particular word up to ridicule. Steevens thought it might 
not be generally understood, since in his own edition, 1793, he defines the word as 
in the present passage, ‘grasp’d. So Macbeth, in his address to the ‘“air-drawn 
dagger,” ‘Come let me clutch thee.”’’—II, i, 34.— Ep. 

96. Thou lyest vnto thee] Scammpt (Coriolanus): It is almost universally 
understood that ‘unto thee’ is dependent on ‘say,’ and so it may well be; but it 
may not be impossible that it is connected with ‘liest’: ‘Thou liest before thine 
own self, thou speakest this with the clearest consciousness of the lie.’ 


ACT Ill, Sc. iii] CORIOLANUS 383 


Thofe whofe great power mutt try him. 105 
Euen this fo criminall, and in fuch capitall kinde 
Deferues th’extreameft death. 
Bru. But fince he hath feru’d well for Rome. 
Corto. What do you prate of Seruice. 
Brut. I talke of that, that know it. 110 
Cora, You? 
Mene. Is this the promife that you made your mother. 
Com. Know, I pray you. 
Corio. Ile know no further : 
Let them pronounce the fteepe Tarpeian death, 115 
Vagabond exile, Fleaing, pent to linger 
But with a graine a day, I would not buy 
Their mercie, at the price of one faire word, 
Nor checke my Courage for what they can giue, 


To haue’t with faying, Good morrow. 120 
105, 106. Thofe...Euen this] As one’ < Hal. Ktly, Wh. i. 

line Pope et seq. 11. You?] You? out on you! Words. 
107-109. Lines end: hath...Seruice. 114. further] farther F;F,, Rowe, 


Pope,+, Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’73, 
Varr. Sing. Coll. Del. Dyce, Hal. Ktly, Coll. Wh. i. 


Wh. Cam.+. 116. Fleaing,| fleaing. Johns. flay- 
108. Rome.] Rome— F;F, et seq. ing, Mal. et seq. 
110-114. Linesend: Is this...Know... 119. Courage] carriage Coll. ii, iii. 


further: Cap. Steev. Varr. Sing. Coll. (MS.), Huds. i. 


rrr. You] Gorpon: Brutus was better at talking than soldiering. ‘The trib- 
unes,’ says Aufidius (IV, vii, 33), ‘are no soldiers.’ In any case his post was a 
home-keeping one. It did not permit him to leave Rome. 

116. pent to linger] W. A. Wricut: The meaning is clear, though the gram- 
matical construction is loose. We may either take ‘pent,’ like ‘clutched’ in 1. 94, 
as equivalent to ‘were I pent,’ or as connected with ‘pronounce’; let them pro- 
nounce the sentence of being pent to linger, &c. Compare I, x, 23. 

119. Nor checke my Courage] Cotter (Notes & Emendations, etc., p. 359): 
It is most inconsistent with the noble character of the hero to represent him in this 
way applauding and vaunting his own ‘courage’; the old corrector writes carriage 
for ‘courage,’ an easy mistake, the setting right of which is an evident improve- 
ment. The very same misprint has been pointed out and remedied in the same 
way in 3 Henry VI: [II, ii, 57, ‘And this soft courage makes your followers 
faint,’ where the MS. correction is ‘soft carriage.’]—MommMsEN (Der Perkins Folio, 
p. 270): Although carriage is assuredly the better word, and the change natural for 
the ear, it is at the same time to be considered that ‘courage’ anciently bore a 
double sense, that is, boldness and character of mind, e. g., Chaucer, Cant. Tales, 
near the beginning, ‘So pricketh hem nature in hir corages,’ i. e., minds, hearts. 
Nevertheless in this particular passage in Coriolanus it would have been a rightly 
conceived and a finer insertion of the MS. Corrector, to guard the hero from mis- 
understanding, than had he spoken of his bravery, since his pride is customarily 


384. THE TRAGEDIE OF [acr mn, sc. iii. 


Sicin. For that he ha’s 121 
(As much as in him lies) from time to time 


represented as quite free from vanity—SincER (Sh. Vindicated, p. 221): The 
substitution of ‘courage’ for carriage [sic] in this passage is a good and probable 
correction, which is countenanced by the same alteration in my copy of the Second 
Folio, where ou is struck out and ari interlined.—CoL.ier (ed. ii.) remarks on the 
‘indisputable substitution’ of carriage for ‘courage,’ and adds: ‘On the other hand, 
in Beaumont and Fletcher’s Island Princess, II, vii. (ed. Dyce, vii, 448), the opposite 
error found its way into the text, and has never been removed; it is where the 
Governor of Ternata speaks of 


“A coward past recovery, a confirm’d coward, 
One without courage, or common sense.” 


Here, strange as it may seem considering the context, carriage has always kept 
possession of the place where “‘courage” ought to have stood.’.—Dyce (Strictures, 
etc., p. 157): The MS. Corrector, whose knowledge of the meaning of words 
seems to have been as limited as that of Mr Collier, corrupts this passage in 
Coriolanus just as he has previously corrupted the passage in 3 Henry VI: II, ii. 
In both places the old lection is the true one; here ‘my courage’ is equivalent to 
‘my spirit, mettle’; in Henry VI. ‘this soft courage’ is equivalent to ‘this soft 
spirit, this soft-heartedness.’ Besides, here the substitution of carriage for ‘cour- 
age’ introduces an impropriety of expression; for, though a man may talk of 
‘checking his courage,’ he would hardly talk of ‘checking his carriage’ (unless, per- 
haps, he were speaking of some ‘vehicular conveyance’ which he was rich enough 
to keep). As the MS. Corrector has corrupted the passage of Coriolanus and the 
passage of Henry VI. by changing ‘courage’ to carriage, so Mr Collier corrupts the 
passage of The Island Princess by changing ‘carriage’ to courage: 


‘Count me a heavy sleepy fool, a coward, 
A coward past recovery, a confirm’d coward, 
One without carriage or common sense.’ 


Would the Governor of Ternata, after three times proclaiming himself @ coward, 
immediately add that he was one without courage? Nobody, I believe, except 
Mr Collier would suppose so, or would fail to see that ‘one without carriage’ 
means ‘one without conduct, management.’—Hunson (ed. i.): There is no appar- 
ent reason why Coriolanus should speak of his cowrage in this connection; nor is 
his courage made any ground of objection against him by the people. We there- 
fore accept the correction found in Mr Collier’s second folio. [Hudson, in his 
ed. ii, influenced by Dyce, returns to the original text, explaining ‘courage’ here 
as meaning spirit or resolution, but adding that the MS. correction ‘seems not 
unlikely to be the true reading. —Ep.]—Ro tre: From the context ‘courage’ here 
seems to be = fearless utterance. Collier considers it ‘inconsistent with the noble 
character of the hero to represent him vaunting his own courage,’ but he simply 
says ‘I will not restrain my boldness of speech,’ just as he has said above that he 
will fearlessly tell the tribune that he lies, even at the risk of twenty thousand 
deaths. 

121. For that] That is, because he has; for other examples see, if needful, ABBorT, 
§ 151, or Shakespeare passim. 


ACT Ill, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 385 


Enui’d againft the people ; feeking meanes 123 
To plucke away their power: as now at laft, 

123. Enui’d| Inveigh’'d Huds. ii. 124. as now] has now Johns. conj., 
(Becket). ' Cap. Var. ’73, Sta. Bell. 


123. Enui’d against the people] STEEVENS: That is, behaved with signs of 
hatred to the people.—ANDREW BECKET, whose name has long since been excluded 
from this edition, proposed, as far back as 1815, that we should here read, ‘In- 
veigh’d against the people.’ The sole reason for resuscitating Becket is, that to 
him rightfully belongs, through priority, the credit for this change. In 1856 
BapuaM, in his article The Text of Shakespeare, p. 289, says: ‘For envyed against 
read enveyed against, or, as Holinshed writes it (I have unfortunately mislaid the 
reference), invaied, which in our modern orthography would be “inveigh’d.” To 
envy against a person or thing is foreign to the language, and there was nothing to 
induce Shakespeare to adopt such a license of construction. Lyly plays upon the 
resemblance of the two words (Euphues, p. 47): “Although I have been bolde to 
invay against many, yet am I not so brutish as to envy them all.””’ As will be 
seen, Badham has no doubts as to the originality of his conjectural reading.— 
STAUNTON in 1860, likewise with no hint as to having been anticipated, notes: 
““Envied” here is, perhaps, only a misprint of Inveighed; so in North’s Plutarch 
(Life of Solon), “But Solon going up into the pulpit for orations, stoutly inveyed 
against it.”’—BAILEy, writing in 1866, is perhaps the most culpable as regards a 
lack of research in the matter; he says: ‘There is an expression in this tragedy that 
I do not find has struck any critic as corrupt,’ and then quotes this present line, 
adding (ii, 60): ‘Surely we ought to read inveigh’d ‘“‘against the people.” The 
verb inveigh, it is true, does not occur elsewhere in these plays, although the noun 
invective is found once. But the verb seems to have been familiarly employed 
by several writers of the age, such as Drayton and Holland, and the objection of 
its non-appearance in Shakespeare’s writings may be equally adduced against the 
actual reading. I cannot, in any of them, discover the phrase “envied against,” 
which, even if it were genuine, must be deemed harsh and unusual, if not un- 
precedented.’ 

124. as now at last] JoHNson: Read rather ‘kas now at last.—STEEVENS: 
I am not certain but that ‘as’ in this instance has the power of as well as. The 
same mode of expression I have met with among our ancient writers.—ABBOTT 
(§ 113) for this passage refers to examples wherein ‘as’ is frequently used (without 
such) to signify ‘namely.’ Since there is, however, a hint as to time here, the 
phrase may, perhaps, more fitly be explained by Axnsort’s following section: ‘As 
is apparently used redundantly with detinitions of time (as as is used in Greek with 
respect to motion). It is said by Halliwell to be an Eastern Counties phrase: 


“This is my birthday, as this very day 
Was Cassius born,” Jul. C@s., V, i, 72. 
“One Lucio as then the messenger,’ Meas. for Meas., V, i, 74. 


The as in the first example may be intended to qualify the statement that Cassius 
was born ‘‘on this very day,” which is not literally true, as meaning “‘as I may say.” 
Here, and in our Collect for Christmas Day, “‘as at this time to be born,” as seems 
appropriate to an anniversary. In the second example the meaning of “‘as then” 
is not so clear; perhaps it means “‘as far as regards that occasion.” Compare: 


25 


386 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iii. 


Giuen Hoftile ftrokes, and that not in the prefence 125 
Of dreaded Iuftice, but on the Minifters 

That doth diftribute it. In the name a’th’people, 

And in the power of vs the Tribunes, wee 

(Eu’n from this inftant) banifh him our Citie 


In perill of precipitation 130 
125. not in the] not only in Han. Bell. Theob. et seq. 
not only in the Ktly conj. 127. ath’) o’th’ Fy, Rowe,+. o’the 
prefence] presence only Ktly. Cap. et seq. 
127. doth] doe F.F;. do F, et seq. 128. the] their Daniel. 
it.) it, Rowe ii, Pope. id; 130. In| On Daniel. 


“Vet God at last 
To Satan, first in sin, his doom applied, 
Though in mysterious terms, judg’d as then best,” Milton, Par. Lost, x, 173, 


where “as then” seems to mean “‘for the present.”” So ‘‘as yet” means “as far 
as regards time, up to the present time.’”’ So in German “als dann” means 
“then,” and ‘‘als” is applied to other temporal adverbs. As in Early English 
was often prefixed to dates, ‘As in the year of grace,” &c. ‘As now” is often 
used in Chaucer and earlier writers for ‘‘as regards now,” “for the present”: 


“But al that thing I must as now forbere,”’ Chaucer, Knightes Tale, 1. 27. 
In “Meantime I writ to Romeo 
That he should hither come as this dire night,” Rom. & Jul., V, iii, 247, 


as perhaps means “as (he did come).’””’ In the present passage ‘as now’ may be 
taken as in Abbott’s example and explanation of its use in Chaucer.—Eb. 

125. and that not] JoHnson: ‘Not’ stands again for not only.—STEEVENS: 
It is thus used in 7 Thess., iv, 8, ‘He therefore that despiseth, despiseth not man, 
but God,’ &.—M. Mason (Comments, etc., p. 257): Johnson says that the word 
‘not’ here means not only, which it must do to make sense of the passage as it 
stands; but as I think it will not bear that meaning, and cannot recollect a single 
instance of its being used in that sense, I should rather suppose the passage to be 
corrupt, than agree to this unnatural explanation of it; and should amend it by 
inserting the word only [after ‘justice’ in the following line. See III, ii, 80, 
where ‘not’ is apparently also used in this sense, mot only. Abbott (§ 54) quotes 
these two passages as the only examples of this use of ‘not.’—Ep.] 

127. doth] Scumipt (Coriolanus): This is altered by all modern editors to do, 
but the numerous relics of the Anglo-Saxon Flexion ending ad or ath in the 34 
person plural, present tense found in Shakespeare make their rejection not so 
much a correction as an unallowable modernisation. Examples wherein the 
thyme shows that we are not confronted by a misprint are: ‘Whiles I threat he 
lives: Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives,’ Macbeth, II, i, 60; ‘And 
Phcebus ’gins arise His steeds to water at those springs On chaliced flowers that 
lies,’ Cymbeline, II, iii, 23. 

129. Eu’n] BayFIELp (p. 199): The abbreviation, though always gratuitous, 
is very common in the plays, usually in the form e’ene. In this play this is the 
only instance, and even, making a resolution, is given five times: I, vi, 38; III, i, 
123; LIL 1 87 UN dO 


ACT III, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 387 


From off the Rocke Tarpeian, neuer more 131 
- To enter our Rome gates. I’th’Peoples name, 
I fay it fhall bee fo. 
All. It fhall be fo, it fhall be fo : let him away : 
Hee’s banifh’d, and it fhall be fo. 135 
Com. Weare me my Mafters,and my common friends. 
Sicin. He’s fentenc’d : No more hearing. 
Com. Let me fpeake : 


I haue bene Confull, and can fhew from Rome 139 
132. Rome] Rome’s Rowe,+. 135. it...fo.] As sep. line and reading: 
DPth’| the Cap. et seq. so tt shall be. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13. 
133-135. I fay...banifh'd,) As two 137-139. Om. Bell. 
lines, ending: /fo,...bani/h’d, Steev. Var. 139. from] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Cap. 
503,13. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, 


134. All.] Cit. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knot, Coll. i. to Ktly conj. for Theob. 
Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Citizens. Dyce, et cet. 
Sta. Hal. Wh. Cam.+, Craig, Neils. 


135. and it shall be so] Knicut: If we turn to the beginning of the scene we 
shall find the directions of the Tribunes very precise as to the echo which the 
people were to raise of their words. When, therefore, Sicinius here pronounces 
the sentence of banishment, he terminates, as he said he should, with, ‘It shall 
be so’; and the people, true to the instruction, vociferate, ‘It shall be so.’ They 
afterwards repeat the cry intheexact words. Perhaps, upon the whole, the common 
text here presents one of Steevens’s most atrocious alterations. [See Text. Notes, 
ers] 

139. from Rome] THEOBALD: How from Rome? Did he receive hostile marks 
from his own Country? Nosuchthing. He received them in the service of Rome. 
So, twice in the beginning of the next Act, it is said of Coriolanus: 


‘To banish him that struck more blows for Rome.’ 


And again, ‘Good man! the wounds that he does bear for Rome!’ [To these exam- 
ples Dyce (Remarks, p. 162) adds |. 108 above.-—Ep.]—Capr tt (vol. I, pti, p. 93): 
That ‘from Rome’ is ambiguous is granted; but if it may be taken in the sense of in 
Rome’s behalf (and why should it not? for blows receiv’d in the behalf of any per- 
son or thing are, as it were, receiv’d from them), that very ambiguity is a recommen- 
dation of it, as conveying an idea of modesty; a quality that is given this speaker, 
to set off and make more glaring certain contrary gifts in his friend—M. Mason 
(Comments, etc., p. 257), without reference to Theobald, proposes the same reading. 
Collier’s MS. corrector likewise so reads——MALoneE: He either means that his 
wounds were got out of Rome, in the cause of his country, or that they mediately 
were derived from Rome by his acting in conformity to the orders of the state.— 
[In the Text. Notes of the Cam. Ep. ii. is recorded the reading ’fore for ‘from’ ac- 
credited to Anon., Fraser’s Mag., 1853; Drttus in his ed. i, 1855, makes the same 
conjecture, and so also KericHTLEy in his Expositor, 1867.—Ep.]—ScHMIDT 
(Coriolanus): ‘From Rome her enemies’ is here for ‘from Rome’s enemies,’ an 
archaism, which indeed not with her, but with his, is quite commonly found in 
Shakespeare: the king his son, the count his galleys. For her Abbott [§ 217] furnishes 


388 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iii. 


Her Enemies markes vpon me. I do loue 140 

My Countries good, with a refpect more tender, 

More holy, and profound, then mine owne life, 

My deere Wiues eftimate, her wombes encreafe, 

And treafure of my Loynes: then if I would 

Speake that. 145 
Sicin. We know your drift Speake what? 
Bru. There’s no more to be faid, but he is banifh’d 

As Enemy to the people,and his Countrey. 

It fhall bee fo. 
All. It fhall be fo, it fhall be fo. 150 
Corio. You common cry of Curs, whofe breath I hate, 


140-146. I do loue...what?| Om. Bell. 145. that.| that I know. Cap. that— 
141. Countries| country’s Rowe et seq. F;F, et cet. 

143-146. Om. Words. 151-164. Vou...blowes,| Mnemonic 
143. Wiues] wife’s Rowe et seq. Warb. 


one example from Bacon, ‘Pallas her glass,’ [Adv. of Learning, 278].—LxEo (Jahrbuch, 
XV, p. 55): 1 am quite in accord with Schmidt in his opposition to the editors, but 
not because I accept his explanation, but rather because the word for is not needed; 
‘from’ means here: I have received wounds from (through) Rome because I 
fought for Rome. Instead of the examples given by Schmidt, I should much 
rather have found one which in form somehow bore out that wherein he clothes 
his explanation, I can show marks from Rome her enemies upon mel! 

140, 141. I do loue My Countries good, etc.) MacCattum (p. 605): To 
Volumnia, despite all her maternal preference and patrician prejudice, Rome is 
the grand consideration, as her deeds unequivocally prove. Nor is she singular; 
she is only the most conspicuous example among others of her caste. Cominius, 
too, postpones the family to the state. And this is more or less the attitude of the 
rest. But Coriolanus reverses the sequence, and gives his chief homage precisely 
to the most restricted and elementary, the most primitive and instinctive prin- 
ciple of the three [family, State, nobility]. He loves Rome, indeed, fights for her, 
grieves for her shames, and glories in her triumphs; but he loves the nobility more, 
and would by wholesale massacre secure their supremacy. He loves the nobility 
indeed, but when they, no doubt for the common good, suffer him to be expelled 
from Rome, they become to him the ‘dastard nobles’; and he makes hardly any 
account of his old henchman and intimate, Menenius, and none at all of his old 
comrade and general, Cominius. But he loves his family as himself, and though he 
strives to root out its claims from his heart, the attempt is vain. 

143. My deere Wiues estimate] Jonson: I love my country beyond the rate 
at which I value my dear wife. 

151. You common cry of Curs] Horn (iv, p. 17, foot-note): The beginning of 
this speech is quite in Coriolanus’s old style; thus that which directly follows, ‘Let 
every feeble rumour shake your hearts,’ is the more remarkable, and is a fine 
preparative to the deeply moving words, ‘TI shall be loved when I am lack’d’ 
(IV, i, 20). 

151. cry] W. A. Wricut: That is, pack. Cotgrave gives: ‘Meute: f. A ken- 


ACT III, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 389 


As reeke a’th’rotten Fennes : whofe Loues I prize, 152 
As the dead Carkaffes of vnburied men, 

That do corrupt my Ayre :I banifh you, 

And heere remaine with your vncertaintie. 155 
Let euery feeble Rumor fhake your hearts : 

Your Enemies, with nodding of their Plumes 

Fan you into difpaire : Haue the power {till 

To banifh your Defenders, till at length 


Your ignorance ( which findes not till it feeles, 160 
152. a’th’] o’th’ Fy, Rowe,+.  o’the 155. wncertaintie.| Ff, Rowe, Coll. 
Cap. et seq. Del. Sing. ii. wacertainty, Pope. un- 
155. And heere remaine] Remain ye certainty; Theob. Warb. Johns. wun- 
here Words. certainty! Han. et cet. 


nell, or crie of hounds.’ The word is, of course, derived from the ‘cry’ or note of 
the hounds. Compare Mid. N. Dream, IV, i, 129, ‘A cry more tuneable Was never 
hollaed to, nor cheer’d withhorn.’ In this passage it is difficult to say whether 
the word ‘cry’ is used literally or figuratively. 

152. As reeke a’th’rotten Fennes] STeEEvENS: So in The Tempest: ‘Seb. As 
if it had lungs and rotten ones. Ant. Or, as it were perfum’d by a fen,’ [II, i, 47].— 
Mitrorp (Gentleman’s Maga., Nov., 1844, p. 164): Compare Marlowe, Lust’s 
Dominion, III, vi, ‘This heap of fools, who, crowding in huge swarms, Stood at 
our court gates like a heap of dung, Reeking, and shouting out contagious breath,’ 
[ed. Dodsley, p. 148. This play is, however, not by Marlowe, as has long since 
been decided.—Ed.] 

153. Carkasses] W. S. WALKER (Vers., p. 245): The plurals of Substantives 
ending in s in certain instances; in se, ss, ce, and sometimes ge; occasionally too, 
but very rarely, in sh and ze, are found without the usual addition of s or es, in 
pronunciation at least, although in many instances the plural affix is added in print- 
ing, where the metre shows that it is not to be pronounced. [The present line 
quoted among other examples. See also, to the same effect, ABBorr, § 471.—Ep.] 

154. I banish you] Matone: So, in Lyly, Anatomie of Wit, 1580, ‘When it was 
cast in Diogenes’ teeth that the Sinopenetes had banished him Pontus, yea, said 
he, I them.’ Our poet has again the same thought in Richard II: ‘Think not the 
king did banish thee But thou the king,’ [I, iii, 279. The above quotation from 
Lyly is not in the Anatomy of Wit, but from The Letters of Euphues, ed. Bond, 
p- 314, |. 20. Malone omits the concluding words of the reply of Diogenes, which 
should be, ‘yea, said he, I them of Diogenes.’ For the correction of this error 
I gladly acknowledge my indebtedness to Verity (Reader’s Sh., p. 206).—Ep.]— 
W. A. Wricut: [After ‘banish you’] probably a line has dropped out. 

158-160. Haue the power ... till it feeles] Jonson: Still retain the power of 
banishing your defenders till your undiscerning folly, which can foresee no con- 
sequences, leave none in the city but yourselves, who are always labouring your 
own destruction. It is remarkable that, among the political maxims of the spec- 
ulative Harrington, there is one which he might have borrowed from this speech. 
‘The people’ (says he) ‘cannot see, but they can feel,’ [No. 5: Political A phor- 
isms.—Ep.]. It is not much to the honour of the people that they have the 


390 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IIT, SC. iii. 


Making but referuation of your felues, 161 


161. but] not Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. Del. Sing. ii, Wh. 
Cam.+, Cholm. Verity, Sherman, Dtn. 


same character of stupidity from their enemy and their friend. Such was the 
power of our author’s mind that he looked through life in all its relations, private 
and civil—Herats (p. 423): I apprehend the sense of this obscure passage is: 
Till at last your ignorance (which can see no consequences till it actually feels 
them), reserving yourselves only from banishment, who will still continue to do, 
as you now do, your enemy’s work for him, by helping him to destroy you, deliver 
you, &c.—MatoneE: ‘The people’ (to use the comment of my friend Dr Kearney, 
in his ingenious Lectures on History, quarto 1776) ‘cannot nicely scrutinise errors 
in government, but they are roused by galling oppression.’ Coriolanus, however, 
means to speak still more contemptuously of their judgment. Your ignorance 
is such that you cannot see the mischiefs likely to result from your actions till 
you actually experience the ill effects of them, 

161. Making but reseruation, etc.] MALONE: Instead of ‘Making but reservation 
of yourselves,’ which is the reading of the old copy, and which Dr Johnson very 
rightly explains, I have no doubt that we should read, as I have printed, ‘Making 
not reservation,’ etc., which agrees with the subsequent words, ‘still your own foes,’ 
and with the general purport of the speech; which is, to show that the folly of the 
people was such as was likely to destroy the whole of the republic without any 
reservation, not only others, but even themselves, and to subjugate them as abated 
captives to some hostile nation. If, according to the old copy, the people have the 
prudence to make reservation of themselves, while they are destroying their 
country, they cannot with any propriety be said to be in that respect ‘still their 
own foes.’ These words therefore decisively support the emendation now made. 
How often not and but have been confounded in these plays has already been fre- 
quently observed. In this very play but has been printed, in a former scene, instead 
of not, and the latter word substituted in all modern editions. See II, iii, 73. [If 
Malone were not aware that in this emendation he was anticipated by Capell, 
he should have been. Steevens is more than usually just and properly assigns 
it—Ep.]—Co ier (ed. ii.): That Capell was right we have the authority of the 
old Corrector.—Staunton: This, since Capell’s edition, has been invariably 
printed, ‘Making not reservation,’ &c., to the complete destruction of the sense, 
which manifestly is, Banish all your defenders as you do me, till at last, your 
ignorance, having reserved only your impotent selves, always your own foes, 
deliver you the humbled captives to some nation, &c.—Hunson (ed. i.): Coriolanus 
imprecates upon the base plebeians that they may still retain the power of banish- 
ing their defenders, till their undiscerning folly, which can foresee no consequences, 
leave none in the city but themselves; so that for want of those capable of con- 
ducting their defence they may fall an easy prey to some nation who may conquer 
them without a struggle. If we were to read as Malone would have us—‘ Making 
not reservation of yourselves’—it would imply that the people banished themselves 
after having banished their defenders.—C. & M. Cowpen CiarkeE (Shakespeare): 
Capell’s change appears to us to destroy the intended meaning of the passage, 
which is: ‘Have the power still to banish your defenders; till at length your 
ignorance (which cannot discern until it is made to feel), reserving none but your- 
selves unbanished (still, your own foes), deliver you as most subdued captives, to 


ACT III, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 391 


{161. Making but reseruation of your selues] 


some nation that shall have won you without striking a blow.’ By thus telling 
them that in banishing their defenders and keeping only themselves unbanished 
they do but the more securely provide for their own ultimate departure from Rome 
as miserable captives, we think that Coriolanus’s sneer at their ‘ignorance’ is 
made extra pointed.—WaiTELaw: Banishing your defenders, the nobles, one by 
one, till you yourselves remain alone. [With Capell’s alteration the meaning is] 
‘not sparing even yourselves.’ But Coriolanus says that the mischief is just this, 
that they spare none but themselves, their own worst enemies—ScummptT (Corio- 
Janus): Preserving only yourselves, alone remaining, having banished those who 
would be your defenders. ‘Reservation’ with Shakespeare always has the meaning 
of preserving, holding for one’s self, in contradistinction to releasing or setting 
free. The alteration of ‘but’ to not is a complete perversion of the sense.— 
W. A. Wricut: Johnson explains the reading of the Folios. But Capell’s is 
more in accordance with what follows, ‘still your own foes.’ That of the Folios 
would have suited very well had it followed ‘To banish your defenders’; but Corio- 
lanus goes on with ‘till at length’ to describe the final catastrophe in which the 
people would be involved when their ignorance, after making them defenceless, could 
not keep them, but handed them over to the enemy.—E. K. CHAMBERS (Warwick 
Sh.): With the reading of the Folios Coriolanus says, ‘Banish your defenders, and, 
in your ignorance, which sees no danger till it actually feels it, keep only your- 
selves, your own worst foes, in the city.—Verrry (Student’s Sh.): ‘Not sparing 
even yourselves.’ Their ignorance, he says, will destroy the State without any 
reservation, even of themselves, since they are always their own worst enemies. 
The Folio’s reading has been retained by some editors and variously explained. 
. . . Each interpretation seems to me forced and inconsistent with the general 
tenour of the passage and the particular description that follows. [Verity quotes, 
with approval, Malone’s reason for accepting the change of ‘but’ to not.—Ep.]— 
Gorpon: The effect of the change of ‘but’ to not is to spoil both lines. For the 
point is, not that they do not spare themselves and no others, and being left to 
themselves, fall a prey to the first attack. Here is the whole force of ‘Still your 
own foes,’ that they are so without knowing it. They think in their ignorance 
that when they have saved themselves they have saved everything. If not be 
read all this is lost, and ‘Still your own foes’ becomes superfluous. If they do not 
spare even themselves, it is idle repetition to add that they are their own foes.— 
Case (Arden Sh.): Retaining ‘but’ the sense of the whole passage is: keep the 
power to banish those who would defend you, until your ignorant policy (which 
never perceives consequences till it undergoes them), reserving only yourselves 
from banishment, and in so doing making you still your own enemies, hand you 
over, etc. Malone argues inconsistency with the purport of the speech, ‘which is 
to show that the folly of the people was such as was likely to destroy the whole of 
the republic without amy reservation, not only others, but themselves.’ But the 
reservation in this case is from banishment, not from destruction, a distinction 
which also puts out of court his further argument. ‘This being so, the Folio text 
is here retained, but if Capell’s reading had been substituted, it must have appealed 
for support not to Malone’s argument, but to its giving a sense supposed simplest 
and most readily perceptible, v7z., Not even safeguarding yourselves (for you are 
always your own enemies), deliver you, etc—PERRING (p. 304): There is not the 
least reason for substituting mot for ‘but’ in this line. Coriolanus declares that 


392 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Still your owne Foes) deliuer you 


[ACT III, SC. iii. 


162 


As moft abated Captiues, to fome Nation 
That wonne you without blowes, defpifing 
For you the City. Thus I turne my backe; 165 


There is a world elfewhere. 


Exeunt Coriolanus, Cominius, with Cumalys. 
They all fhout, and throw vp their Caps. 


Edile. 


The peoples Enemy is gone,is gone. 


All. Our enemy is banifh’d, he is gone: Hoo, oo. 170 


162, 163. Still...As mofi] As one line 
Cap. et seq. (except Knt, Del.). 

162. Foes] enemies Pope,+ (—Var. 
> 

3) 

163. abated] abased Walker (Crit. ii, 
34). 
164, 165. blowes, defpijfing...City.] 
blows. Despising then...city Pope,+, 
Dyce ii, iii. blows! Despising...city, 
Cap. et cet. blows! Despising therefore 
...city, Steev. conj. blows, despising 
you, for you, the city, Jackson, Perring. 

165. backe] back upon it Ktly. 

167. Exeunt...with Cumalijs.] Ex- 


others. Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Varr. Ran. Exeunt...and Sen- 
ators. Han. Exit Coriolanus: Men- 
enius, Cominius, Sen. and Pat. follow. 
Cap. Exeunt...Menenius, Senators 
and Patricians. Mal. et seq. 

168. They all...Caps.] Ff, Cam.+. 
Shouting and throwing...caps. Dyce, 
Sta. Wh. Words. Huds. ii. (after].170). 
The people...caps. Rowe et cet. 

They...Caps.] After 1. 170 Cap. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. 
Hal. Ktly, Cam.+, Craig. 


170. enemy is] enemy’s Sing. 


eunt...Cumaliis. F;F,. Exeunt...and Hoo, 00] Om. Cap. 

the end and aim of the plebeian party is to drive from the city every one who is 
not of their way of thinking, reserving none but themselves—a suicidal policy; for 
the time would come when their enemies would attack them, and then, having 
none among them who were possessed of military capacity—for, to use the words 
of Aufidius, ‘their tribunes were no soldiers’-—they would have to succumb 
without striking a blow, and would be carried away into a mean and miserable 
captivity. 

163. abated] Murray (NV. E. D.,s. v. 1): Beaten, subdued, cast down. 1548. in 
Strype: Eccl. Mem., vi, 351: The weakness of his often abated enemies. [The 
present line also quoted.] 

164. without] Apportr (§ 4572): With in ‘without’ seems accented here. [See 
also Ibid., § 510.] 

166. There is a world elsewhere] E. K. CoampBers (Warwick Sh.): It will be 
the object of the next act to bring out the full meaning of this. The veiled threats 
of Coriolanus’s speech show that he has already half-formed a plan what to do. 

170. Our enemy is banish’d] S. BROOKE (p. 232): So ends the contest between 
Coriolanus and the Tribunes. ‘They and the people are the victors. And we 
may fairly conclude that Shakespeare did not despise the cause of the people or 
its leaders when we find that the leaders are represented throughout as men who 
have kept their heads; cool, temperate, prudent, but resolute to attain their end; 
and using steadily and ruthlessly the best means for this end. Having won, they 
are quite sober and quiet. They indulge in no boasting, but go about their busi- 
ness, congratulating themselves on the quiet of Rome. Their just mastership of 


ACT III, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 393 


Sicin. Go fee him out at Gates,and follow him 171 
As he hath follow’d you, with all defpight 
Giue him deferu’d vexation. Let a guard 
Attend vs through the City. 

All. Come,come, lets fee him out at gates, come: 175 
The Gods preferue our Noble Tribunes, come. Exeunt. 


175. at gates] at the gates Ff, Rowe,+. 175. come:] come, come. Ktly, Dyce 
ii, Words. Huds. ii. 


the stormy elements of the people keeps down the anger of the partisans of Corio- 
lanus. Every day of quiet makes Coriolanus less missed by his friends, who 
‘blush that without him the world goes well.’ Menenius has grown kind to the 
Tribunes, and talks to them as if they were nobles. He even criticises Corio- 
lanus. Shakespeare has taken pains to lift the struggle of the people into our 
approval. 

173. vexation] W. A. Wricut: That is, mortification. Both ‘vex’ and ‘vexa- 
tion’ had a stronger meaning in Shakespeare’s time. In the Authorised Version 
‘vex’ is frequently used in the sense of ‘torment.’ See, for instance, Matthew, xv, 
22, ‘My daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.’ And in The Tempest, IV, i, 
5, we find ‘vexation’ in the sense of torment: 


“All thy vexations 
Were but my trials of thy love.’ 


Compare Deuteronomy, xxviii, 20, ‘The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexa- 
tion, and rebuke,’ where the word rendered ‘vexation’ is elsewhere rendered ‘de- 
struction,’ as Deuteronomy, vii, 23, and ‘discomfiture,’ as r Samuel, xiv, 20. 

173,174. Let a guard Attend vs] E. K. Caampers (Warwick Sh.): This shows 
the essential meanness of the Tribunes’ natures. Insults for their defeated foe; a 
guard to enhance their own dignity. [The guard was, perhaps, not so much to 
enhance their dignity, as a necessary precaution against attack from the party 
of the Patricians and soldiers; the Tribunes have directed their own partisans, the 
people, to follow Coriolanus; they are thus left unguarded.—Eb.] 


304 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT Iv, SC. i. 


Aclus Quartus. 


[Scene I.] 


Enter Coriolanus , Volumnia, Virgilia, Menenius, Cominius, 2 
with the yong Nobility of Rome. 
Corio.Come leaue your teares:a brief farwel:the beaft 4 


x. Actus Quartus.] ACT IV, SCENE I. 
Rowe et seq. 

Without the Walls of Rome. Rowe. 
The Gates of Rome. Pope. Before the 
Gates of Rome. Theob.+, Varr. Ran. 
The Same. The City Gate. Cap. 
The Same. Before a Gate of the City. 
Mal. et seq. ' 


3. with...of Rome.] Ff, Rowe,+, 
Varr. Ran. Cam.+. Senators and 
Patricians. Cap. and several young 
Patricians. Mal. et cet. 

4. farwel] farewel F3F,, Rowe,+, 
Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. farewell Steev. 
et seq. 


1. Actus Quartus] E. K. CaampBers (Warwick Sh.): Coriolanus’s career in 
Rome has ended in disaster; but he is not a man to put up with disaster content- 
edly. Already a vague scheme, soon to take dreadful shape, has suggested itself 
to him, whereby he may re-establish himself in his own eyes, and once more play 
a brave part in new scenes and under new conditions. The attempt to carry out 
this scheme forms the subject of the Fourth Act; the Fifth is concerned with its 
ultimate failure. In the first three scenes, however, Coriolanus’s designs are not 
directly revealed. For a time our sympathies are allowed to turn towards him in 
his misfortune. His departure is touched with pathos, though beneath there is 
the tragic undertone of an austere and terrible intention. Shakespeare adds a 
dramatic touch in making Coriolanus depart alone, and not ‘with three or four 
of his friends,’ [as in North’s Plutarch]. 

2. Enter Coriolanus, etc.] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Shakespeare’s way 
to represent this on his stage was presumably to represent the group as entering 
from one of the side doors, and bringing Coriolanus out the double doors in the 
rear stage. These could be made to look enough like the gates in a city-wall to 
be so supposed, as already they had been supposed (I, iv, v, vii.), to be the fortified 
gates of Corioli. 

4. Come leaue your teares] ROTSCHER (p. 23): In this parting from mother 
and wife the nobility of Coriolanus’s character is strongly manifested. The tones 
of his heart, which does not want that its innermost quivering be visible, and yet 
cannot conceal the pain of separation, presage wonderfully the hero’s catastrophe 
in the Fifth Act. Wesee the heroic self-command of a great character which knows 
its full worth no less than the loss which he suffers. Such scenes as this are ever 
most difficult in their sensualisation, because they demand at one and the same 
time the full expression of contradictory emotion. Since we wish to see the col- 
lectedness and self-abnegation of an heroic nature shaken to the depths by a 
powerful sorrow, the sorrow should appear without sentimentality, the pride 
without stubbornness. The broken voice should tremble through this manifesta- 
tion of nobility, and thus convey to us the feeling of inner woe. With this tragic 
turning of fate the réle of Coriolanus ends in the Third Act. 

4. leaue your teares] That is, leave off weeping; compare Hamlet, III, iv, 34: 
‘Leave wringing of your hands.’ 


ACT IV, SC. i.] CORIOLA NUS 395 


With many heads butts me away. Nay Mother, 5 
Where is your ancient Courage? You were vs’d 


6-13. You...inuincible] Mnemonic Warb. 


4, 5. the beast With many heads] SrreveNns: Thus also Horace, speaking of 
the Roman mob, ‘Bellua multorum es capitum,’ [Epistole, Bk i, 1, 76].— ANDERS 
(p. 275): ‘The blunt monster with uncounted heads, The still discordant wavering 
multitude,’ 2 Henry IV: Ind. 18. In the Republic (ix, 588) the human soul is 
compared to a multitudinous many-headed monster. The Stoic Ariston of Chios 
calls the people a modvKégadov Ynpiov. Hence Horace’s bellua multorum capitum. 
Stephen Gosson, in his Plays Confuted (1582), writes: ‘the auncient Philosophers 
. .. called them [the people] a monster of many heades’ (Engl. Drama and Stage, 
Roxb. Library, p. 184). Compare also Daniel, Complaint of Rosamond (V. 279), 
‘many-headed beast.’ Again, Hakluyt’s Voyages, 1599, vol. ii, pt 2, p. 142, ‘shall 
the blind opinion of this monster, a beast of many heads (for so hath the generalitie 
of old bene termed), cause me to neglect the profession?’ etc. I refrain from quot- 
ing other instances. [Who so desires may consult Harold Bagley’s Shakespeare 
Symphony, pp. 159 et seg., where many other examples may be seen.—Ep.J— 
Verity (Student’s Sh.): Compare that passage in Weever’s Mirror of Martyrs 
(1601) which, by its evident allusion to Antony’s great speech in Jul. Ces., III, 
ii, helps materially to fix the date of that play: 


‘The many-headed multitude were drawne 

By Brutus’ speech that Cesar was ambitious 
When eloquent Mark Antonie had showne 

His vertues, who but Brutus then was vicious? ’— 


VERPLANCK: I cannot say whether this phrase, so characteristic in the mouth of 
the proud patrician, was original with the poet, and merely an accidental co- 
incidence with a similar epithet of Horace, or was suggested by the Roman satirist’s 
sneer at the Roman populace, Bellua est multorum capitum, which Pope has 
imitated thus: 

‘Well, if a king’s a monster, at the least 

The people is a many-headed beast.’ 


[I cannot say whether this comparison was original with Verplanck. It looks, 
however, as though it were purloined from Steevens without acknowledgement. 
Steevens misquotes the line; it should be the second person singular es, not est, 
since it is addressed to the populace. Unfortunately Verplanck makes the same 
slip. Verity also calls attention to the similarity of phrase in Pope and supplies 
the reference lacking in Verplanck’s note, Satires, iii, 119, 120; as Verity shows, 
the first line of the couplet should read, ‘Well, if a king’s a lion,’ etc., not ‘monster.’ 
He likewise cites lines 304, 305, Bk v. In the tract The Great Frost of January, 
1608, reprinted in Arber’s Eng. Garner, the Countryman, speaking of the people, 
says, ‘Oh, Sir, the wild beast with many heads must needs have as many tongues,’ 
etc. In point of time this is almost contemporaneous with the present play. 
[See note by Hales, I, i, 185.—Ep.] 

6. You were vs’d] For this construction with verbs passive see ABBOTT, § 295. 


396 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. i. 


To fay, Extreamities was the trier of {pirits, 7 


7. Extreamities was] Var. ’21, Del. Ktly. extremities were Mal. extremity was 
Ff et cet. 


7. Extreamities was] STEEVENS: Extremity in the singular number is used by 
our author in Merry Wives, Comedy of Errors, Tro. & Cress—MALONE: However 
often Shakespeare has used extremes [sic, Qu. extremity?—Ep.] in other places, 
we find that he has employed the plural here; what ground, therefore, have we for 
changing a word that affords perfect good sense, and is found in the only ancient 
authentic copy. It is decisively confirmed and supported not only by that copy, 
but by another place in this very play, where we meet with exactly the same 
phraseology, III, ii, 52-54: 

‘You are too absolute, 
Tho’ there you can never be too noble, 
But when extremities speak,’ &c.— 


Deutus: ‘Extremities’ is here collective, equivalent to a myriad or crowd of 
stresses, and has, as a single idea, both verb and predicate in the singular.— 
Dyce: Malone adhered, perhaps too obstinately, to the Folio reading here; to his 
citation from an earlier scene in defence of the plural, we may, however, oppose 
what afterwards occurs, ‘Now this extremity Hath brought me to thy hearth,’ 
IV, v, 83.—KeIcutLey (Expositor, p. 368): The reading of the Second Folio is, 
perhaps, right; yet the First Folio reading is not wrong.—W. A. Wricut: There 
is great looseness with regard to the copula when subject and predicate are of 
different numbers. Compare Psalm, xviii, 11, ‘His pavilion round about him were 
dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.’ And Richard IT: V, v, 55, ‘Now sir 
the sound that tells what hour it is Are clamorous groans.’ But it is most proba- 
ble that ‘extremities’ is a misprint, and one of a kind common in the First Folio.— 
Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): The correction of the plural, ‘Extreamities,’ 
to the singular may be justified as the correction of a misprint, like the obviously 
needed change made in the Second Folio of the period after ‘chances’ [l. 8] into a 
comma; still there is something in the way Coriolanus employs ‘extremities’ here 
that, taken together with the capitalization of the word, suggests a collective 
used here in an abstract sense, a condition of things at the extreme. Notice below 
‘Fortunes blowes . . . craves.’ Wright assumes a misprint and prints ‘extremity.’ 
Since neither the time, the poet, nor the hero represented are formalists, why efface 
the signs of such combined plasticity of speechP—Casr (Arden Sh.): The Second 
Folio néedlessly changed the text to extremity, a reading which some editors adopt; 
but Malone properly insisted on the correctness of the old text. ‘Extremities’ has 
already occurred in III, ii, 54, ante—H. Cunnincuam (Notes & Queries, 16 October, 
1926): Notwithstanding the plural form in the Folio, which is supported by Malone 
and Case, and notwithstanding the plural ‘chances,’ in 1. 8, I am inclined to think 
that other editors (not to speak of the Second Folio) were correct in printing the 
singular—Shakespeare’s spelling, if he wrote the singular, being, of course, ‘Ex- 
tremitie.’ The misprinting of this letter ‘s’ in the old editions is something por- 
tentous; there are nearly a hundred examples in Qq 1, 2, and Folioin Hamlet alone! 
Further, there are nearly thirty examples of the singular ‘Extremity’ in the plays, 
but only some three or four of the plural. ‘Extreme’ and ‘Extremity’ are favourite 
words with Shakespeare, and occur many times in the plays. It would seem, 
on the whole, that the balance is in favour of the singular form here. 


ACT IV, SC. i.] 


That common chances. 


CORIOLANUS 397 


Common men could beare, 8 


That when the Sea was calme, all Boats alike 


Shew’d Mafterfhip in floating. Fortunes blowes, 10 
When moft ftrooke home, being gentle wounded,craues 
A Noble cunning. You were vs’d to load me 12 


8. chances. Common] chances, com- 
mon F.F;. chances common F, et seq. 
10-12. Fortunes...cunning] Om. Bell. 
to. Fortunes blowes) Fortune bows 
Sta. conj. That fortune’s blows Ktly. 
11. ftrooke] ftruck Fy. strook Cap. 
II, 12. home,...Noble] home, then 
most demand a patient And a skillful 
healer, being gentle-wounded craves No 
noble or home, demand a patient and A 


skilful healer...No noble Nicholson ap. 
Cam. 

11. gentle wounded, craues] gently 
warded, craves Pope, Theob. Warb. 


greatly warded, crave Han. gently 
wounded, craves Cap.  gentle-minded 
craves Coll. ii, ii. (MS.), Huds.  gentle- 


wounded, craves Ktly. gentile, wounded, 
craues Words. Neils. gentle welcom’d, 
craves Kinnear. 


12. cunning] calling Leo conj. 


8-10. That common chances... Mastership in floating] StEEVENS: The 
general thought of this passage has already occurred in Tro. & Cress.: 


‘In the reproof of chance 
Lies the true proof of men: the sea being smooth, 
How many shallow bauble boats dare sail 
Upon her patient breast, making their way 
With those of nobler bulk!’ [I, iii, 33-37]. 


10-12. Fortunes blowes ... A Noble cunning] JoHNsSoN: The modern editors 
have, for ‘gentle wounded,’ silently substituted gently warded, and Dr Warburton 
has explained gently by nobly. It is good to be sure of our author’s words before 
we go to explain their meaning. The sense is: ‘When Fortune strikes her hardest 
blows, to be wounded, and yet continue calm, requires a generous policy.’ He calls 
this calmness cunning, because it is the effect of reflection and philosophy. Per- 
haps the first emotions of nature are nearly uniform, and one man differs from 
another in the power of endurance, as he is better regulated by precept and instruc- 
tion. ‘They bore as heroes, but they felt as man,’ [Pope, Homer’s Iliad, Bk 
xxiv, 1. 646.—In the Variorum of 1773 and subsequent repetitions of this note 
by Johnson the line is incorrectly given, ‘Felt as men.’ It is actually an addition 
to Homer by Pope; the original has merely, ‘and their moan went up throughout 
the house,’ 1. 512. This line quoted by Johnson, without either title or author, 
is not given in any of the many collections of quotations and, though repeated 
by subsequent editors, has not, as far as I know, been identified. Its locating, 
therefore, involved a thorough search through the poetic works of Addison, Dryden, 
Cowley, and Pope (the Concordance to the latter’s Works does not include the trans- 
lations of either the J/zad or the Odyssey); permit me then to say, in the words of 
Johnson himself in his Preface, ‘Let us hear no more of the dull duty of an editor.’— 
Ep.]—Carett (vol. I, pt i, p. 97): ‘Gently’ is a very proper correction of the sec- 
ond modern’s [Pope]; but why he and the gentlemen after him should put warded 
for ‘wounded’ they have not told us, nor can the most sagacious discover a reason 
for it: The apothegm is just and a fit one, and the expression of it no ways ob- 
scure; that must be implied at the head of it, and then the meaning will be that, 


398 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. i. 


[10-12. Fortunes blowes . . . A Noble cunning] 

when fortune strikes her most home blows, to come off with but small or slight 
wounds, requires skill and address——Detius: ‘Fortunes blows’ stands here in the 
form of anacoluthon without an attendant verb, and can only be connected with 
‘when most struck home’: If the blows of fortune strike hardest at last, being 
gentler when one is wounded, calls then for a noble bearing or cunning, a talent 
which is peculiar to the noble—Co tur (ed. ii.): This is a passage that, not hav- 
ing been correctly printed, has always presented an obstacle. For ‘gentle 
wounded’ read gentle-minded, of the corr. fo., 1632, and nothing more is wanted. 
The sense is, that it requires a noble cunning to be gentle-minded when the 
blows of fortune are most struck home.—SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, p. 222): The 
corrector’s substitution of gentle-minded for ‘gentle wounded’ has some show of 
plausibility, but the old reading will bear this construction: Coriolanus, after 
enumerating his mother’s other precepts, adds, ‘to be gentle (i. e., mild and patient), 
when wounded by Fortune’s hardest blows, requires a noble skill (jd. e., of self- 
government).’ Mr Collier has told us that it is not rational to alter the old reading 
when sense can be extracted from it, and I quite agree with him.—Awon. (Black- 
wood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p. 323): Although the construction of these lines is 
somewhat involved, it is far more after the manner of Shakespeare than the cor- 
rection which the margins propose. Gentle-minded is quite uncalled for. The 
meaning is: You were used to say that when Fortune’s blows were most struck 
home, to be gentle, though wounded, craves a noble cunning—that is, a high 
degree of self-command.—Staunton: Every endeavor to elicit sense from this 
perplexing sentence has failed; Pope’s, Hanmer’s, and Collier’s are alike dis- 
putable. At one time it struck us that the right lection was possibly ‘Fortune 
bows When most struck home,’ etc. But we are now persuaded the sentiment 
intended is akin to that of two lines by Taylor, the Water-poet: 


‘For when base peasants shrink at Fortune’s blows 
Then magnanimity most richly shows,’ 


[Funerall Elegie upon the Death of the Earle of Nottingham, Spenser Soc. Reprint 
of Folio of 1630, p. 328, col. b—Ep.]—R. G. WuirTe: An elliptical—or rather, 
interrupted—sentence. The continuity of thought is suddenly broken at ‘struck 
home,’ and ‘being gentle wounded’ (z. e., gentle when wounded) is the nominative 
to ‘craves’; the sense, of course, being, When Fortune’s blows are most struck home, 
to be gentle when wounded craves a noble policy—Hunson: The words ‘being 
gentle wounded’ have caused a good deal of perplexity and discussion. Certainly 
the language is most awkward and obscure. The change of ‘gentle wounded’ to 
gentle-minded, from Collier’s second folio, relieves the passage of awkwardness 
and obscurity, and also of the tautology in ‘blows struck home’ and ‘wounded,’ 
both which, as the misprint was easy, are strong reasons for thinking it right. 
That is, ‘when Fortune’s blows are most struck home, to bear them with a sweet 
and quiet mind requires a noble wisdom,’ ‘cunning’ being often used for wisdom 
or skill—VERPLANCK: That is, When Fortune strikes her hardest blows, to be 
wounded, and yet continue calm, requires a noble wisdom.—KEIGHTLEY (Expositor, 
p. 368): Though this may seem devoid of sense, it is, I think, what the poet wrote. 
If so, we must take ‘wounded’ actively, like ‘Under my burden groan’d’ (Tempest, 
I, ii.). ‘It is twice blessed’ (Mer. of Ven., V, i, 186); and then ‘gentle’ will denote 
that the blows were open and honorable ones. If this should not satisfy, we might, 


ACT IV, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 399 


[ro-12. Fortunes blowes . . . A Noble cunning] 
perhaps, read in the gentle-minded. ‘Cunning’ here is skill taken in a good sense, 
as in ‘May my right hand forget her cunning’ (Psalm cxxxvii.) —BULLocH (p. 186): 
The first half of the clause refers to the sea, its boats, and to mastership in floating. 
I am now convinced that the second half, beginning with ‘Fortune’s blows,’ is a 
following out of the same idea. The passage with the necessary emendation is 
as follows: 
‘Fortune blows— 
Then most strike home, being gentle, wounded, crave 
A noble cunning.’ 


The chief features in this are punctuation and the italicized words; the whole re- 
ferring to the great voyagers of the time and some of their compatriots —ScumipT 
(Coriolanus): That is, To be gentle under wounds, demands, etc. The sentence 
is then anacoluthon, and so expressed as though the preceding were, When For- 
tune’s blows are most struck home. It would be altogether impossible to take 
‘being gentle wounded’ as an apposition of ‘Fortune’s blows’ and ‘wounded’ as an 
adjective as in I,i, 286. ‘Gentle’ as an apposition of wounds should not be more 
unusual than ‘gentle bath’ in I, vi, 78.—Assorr (§ 333): It is probable that Shake- 
speare intended to make ‘blows’ the subject of ‘craves’; he afterwards introduced 
a new subject, ‘being gentle,’ and, therefore, ‘blows’ must be considered nomina- 
tive absolute and ‘when’ redundant: ‘Fortune’s blows being struck home, to be 
gentle then requires a noble wisdom.—W. A. Wricut: This passage sets at 
defiance all rules of grammer. The sense is ‘When fortune’s blows are most struck 
home, to be gentle under the smart of the wounds craves a noble cunning.’ A 
similar instance of what grammarians call anacoluthon is to be found in Henry V: 
IV, i, 197, ‘’Tis certain, every man that dies, the ill upon his own head.’—Rev. 
JouN Hunter: That when Fortune’s blows strike with most direct force, to be 
gentle (2. e., of noble bearing) when thus wounded, demands a noble skill. We give 
here the best interpretation we can devise for a very difficult passage.—BEECHING 
(Falcon Sh.): ‘To bear fortune’s home thrusts gently, being wounded by them, 
craves,’ &c. The verb ‘craves’ has two subjects: ‘fortune’s blows’ and ‘to be gen- 
tle when wounded.’—E. K. CuamBers (Warwick Sh.): It looks as if Shakespeare 
originally meant ‘blows’ to be the subject, and then introduced a new subject 
in ‘being wounded.’ But the sense is clear enough; it is governed by the antithesis 
of ‘common’ and ‘gentle.’ ‘Being gentle wounded’ =‘to bear your wounds as a 
gentleman.’ It is not necessary to alter the text, and the emendations proposed 
are unconyincing.—CHOLMELEY: When fortune strikes her hardest, it takes a 
noble wisdom to bear the wound gently. The last half of the sentence has no 
grammatical connection with the first, which has no principal verb.—VERITY 
(Student’s Sh.): It is the same notion of the calm unruffled mind, as in Horace’s 


‘aequam memento rebus in arduis 
servare mentem,’ [Carm., II, Ode iii, 1, 2]. 


The verb ‘craves’ is singular through attraction to the sense-subject, not the 
grammatical subject; it is not the ‘blows,’ but bearing the blows gently, that 
‘craves’ wisdom; and the idea of bearing them is implied by the qualifying clause 
“being gentle wounded.’ The interposition of 1. 11 between the strict grammatical 
subject and its verb facilitates the attraction of the verb to the general sense. 


400 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. i. 


[ro-12. Fortunes blowes . . . A Noble cunning] 


(This is not a case for considering the possible influence of the ‘northern’ plural 
in es or s.) ‘Cunning’ is a good instance of the tendency of words to deteriorate 
in sense. The quality itself being so often misapplied, the word got a correspond- 
ingly bad notion. (Perhaps with a strongly classical writer like Milton we should 
take ‘noble cunning’ differently, as an oxymoron.)—Gorpon: The construction 
of the sentence (it has no grammar) is this: when fortune’s blows are most struck 
home, to be gentle under one’s wounds craves a noble cunning. ‘Craves,’ therefore, 
is rightly singular. Its subject is not ‘blows,’ but ‘being gentle wounded,’ 7. e., 
gentleness under one’s wounds.—Miss C. PorTER (First Folio Sh.): An example 
of the molten heat of Coriolanus’s words that must be understood by following 
the thought rather than the form. He means, ‘Fortune’s blows when most struck 
home crave a noble cunning in one, wounded, being gentle, 7. ¢., in one wounded 
by them who is gentle.’ The capitalization of Noble suggests that the nobleness 
is that demanded of a Noble. Coriolanus’s definition of a Noble is not external; 
it is a matter of spirit and fortitude, not mere rank.—ANon. (Times Literary Supple- 
ment, 27 July, 1922, p. 482): Apart from the intolerably awkward syntax, the 
use of ‘gentle’ is unparalleled; and, after the straightforward lines that precede, 
the sudden tangle brings us up with an unpleasant jar. When Shakespeare over- 
rides syntax he usually makes his sense quite clear. Moreover, Coriolanus is 
quoting his mother’s proverbs; this one is a riddle. We cannot believe that 
Shakespeare wrote the lines as they stand. The natural sense in the context is, 
‘Fortune’s blows when most struck home, being . . . crave a noble cunning.’ 
The three words beginning with ‘being’ represent a phrase in apposition to, and 
explanatory of, ‘Fortune’s blows when most struck home.’ We suggest, diffidently, 
that behind the meaningless ‘gentle’ is concealed the adjective ‘tentles’ (tentless, 
i. e., impossible to probe) and that the line originally read, ‘When most struck, 
being tentless wounds, do crave A noble cunning.” They are wounds beyond the 
skill of the ordinary surgeon. Shakespeare in this martial play was particularly 
fond of using the word ‘to tent’ metaphorically, see I, ix, 40, and in particular, 
III, i, 285, ‘’Tis a sore upon us you cannot tent yourself.’ [In a letter to the 
Editor of The Times Literary Supplement for August 17, 1922, Henry Cunningham 
says, ‘Sir: The writer of the admirable leading article on Coriolanus, in the issue 
of July 27, advances some interesting points on the textual interpretation of the 
play. His diffident suggestion on the famous crux “being gentle wounded” is 
extremely ingenious. But, although making excellent sense, it introduces in 
“tentless” a dat \eyouevoyv which is rather daring, besides bringing more letters 
into the printed line of the Folio than could ordinarily have been included therein. 


In turn I suggest: , 
‘Fortune’s blows, 


When most struck home, being tender wounds, do crave 
A noble cunning,” 


z. é€., when Fortune’s blows are shrewdest, the wounds she makes are raw and 
tender, and require skilful surgery. The meaning of this is plain and unexception- 
able; and it will be observed that the trace and number of the letters (viz., 19) in 
the above italicized words exactly correspond with those of the ‘‘gentle wounded, 
craves” in the Folio reading. This is a matter of the utmost importance in the 
criticism of a doubtful word or passage in the Folio.’ Four years later Cunningham 
returns to this same passage in a communication to Notes & Queries (October 16, 


ACT IV, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 401 


With Precepts that would make inuincible 13 
The heart that conn’d them. 
Virg. Oh heauens ! O heauens / 15 


Corio. Nay, I prythee woman. 
Vol.Now the Red Peftilence ftrike al Trades in Rome, 
And Occupations perifh. 18 


15. heauens...heauens] heav’ns... 16. woman.) woman— Rowe et seq. 
heav’ns Pope,+ (—Var. ’73). 


1926, p. 274), where he repeats this suggestion of tender for ‘gentle,’ with sub- 
stantially the same argument for its acceptance. In conclusion he says: ‘But 
I think there is an even more pertinent attribute to be found for “wound(e)s,” 
viz., tentless(e) or tentless or tentles, however it may have appeared in Shake- 
speare’s MS., or however the word may have been apprehended by the printers; 
in any case it is remarkably close in point of the ductus literarum to the word 
“gentle.” Suppose, therefore, we read, ‘‘—fortune’s blows When most strooke 
home, being tentlesse wounds, do crave A noble cunning,” we have sense and 
syntax equally admirable. But why, if ‘“‘tentless” is Shakespeare’s word, should 
he have chosen such an epithet? Surely he meant that Fortune’s blows, not be- 
ing merely physical, would require a nobler philosophy for their endurance, since 
they could not be “tented” after the fashion of mere physical wounds. Finally, 
what reason may we assign for the corruption of the text? A glance at the Folio 
may show. I think it was owing to the attempt of the printers to get the necessarily 
excessive amount of type into the line without carrying over into the next. They 
seldom or never carried the words of a line of MS. on to the next, as modern printers 
commonly do. Hence if Shakespeare’s MS. had the line in the following form, 
“When most strooke home, being tentlesse woundes, do crave,” 
the inference may be justly drawn that the Folio printers found it impossible to 
get his words into the regular lineal space, and (possibly not understanding 
Shakespeare’s meaning or his contractions) corrupted the text as we find it in the 
Folio. ‘‘Tent’’ as a substantive, of course, means lint or other substances used 
to search and cleanse a wound; and, as a verb, to probe it, or apply the “‘tent.” 
See I, ix, 40, and III, i, 285 ante; also Cymbeline, III, iv, 118, “And mine ear 
Therein false struck, can take no greater wound Nor tent to bottom that.” This 
last is especially worthy of notice, since “struck,” ‘“‘tent,” and “wound” are found 
in close collocation. Be it noted also that Coriolanus and Cymbeline are not far 
removed from each other in point of date.’ [At first sight it would seem that 
Cunningham, himself, was the author of the Anonymous article in the Times 
Literary Supplement, and that he is here but amplifying the suggestion con- 
tained therein. It will, however, be seen that in his letter he speaks in high praise 
of the writer and yet objects to this same suggestion, ‘teniless,’ which later he adopts. 
Two facts which militate against Cunningham’s being the writer of the original arti- 
cle—Eb.] 

15. Virg. Oh heauens! O heauens!] C. & M. CowpENn CLARKE (Shakespeare): 
Be it observed that after this one irrepressible burst of anguish, when her hus- 
band has bidden her to check it, Virgilia utters no farther syllable during this 
parting scene. See II, i, 187 and note. 

17. the Red Pestilence] HaLLiwELL (note on Tempest, I, ii, 364, ‘The red 

26 


402 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 4V,.SGA1. 


Corio. What,what,what : 
I fhall be lou’d when I am lack’d. Nay Mother, 20 
Refume that Spirit, when you were wont to fay, 
If you had beene the Wife of Hercules, 
Six of his Labours youl’d haue done, and fau’d 
Your Husband fo much {wet. Cominius, 
Droope not, Adieu: Farewell my Wife,my Mother, 25 
Ile do well yet. Thou old and true Menentus, 
Thy teares are falter then a yonger mans, 
And venomous to thine eyes. My (fometime)Generall, 
I haue feene the Sterne, and thou haft oft beheld 
Heart-hardning {peCtacles. Tell thefe fad women, 30 
’Tis fond to waile ineuitable {trokes, 
As ’tis to laugh at ’em. My Mother, you wot well 
My hazards ftill haue beene your folace,and 


Beleeu’t not lightly, though I go alone 34 
26-28. Thou...eyes] Mnemonic Warb. Ktly, Craig. 
29. I haue) I’ve Pope, + (—Var. ’73). 32. My...wot well] My...wot not well 
the] thee F;F, et seq. Rowe. Mother,...wot Pope,+ (—Var. 
32. As ’tis] Easy Anon. ap. Cam. 73). 
at’em] at them Cap. Var. ’78, 785, 34-36. though... feene] Mnemonic 


Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. Warb. 


? 


plague rid you,’ etc.): In the General Practise of Physicke, 1605, p. 675, three 
different kinds of plague-sore are mentioned: ‘sometimes it is red, otherwhiles 
yellow, and sometimes blacke, which is the very worst and most venimous.’. . . 
An early MS. medical commonplace-book, in my possession, says, ‘the plague 
and pestilence, or red plage, doth moste abounde from Midsomer to Autumne,’ &c. 
The same volume prescribes blood-letting for this disease—MovyEs (p. 21): This 
was doubtless typhus fever. The disease was common at the time, and in France 
the name given to it was La pourpre, from the red eruption which accompanied 
it. Some have made out the reference to be one form of the plague, but the 
resemblance (if not relationship) between the plague and typhus is at times so 
close that a celebrated physician from Egypt, seeing certain typhus fever cases 
in London, said that if seen at home they would have been regarded as the 
plague. 

20. I shall. . . I am lack’d] W. A. Wricut: That is, when I am missed, when 
the city feels the want of me. Compare Much Ado, IV, i, 220-4, and Ant. & 
Cleo., I, iv, 41: 


‘It hath been taught us from the primal state, 

That he which is was wish’d until he were: 

And the ebb’d man, ne’er loved till ne’er worth love, 
Comes dear by being lack’d.’ 


26. Ile do well yet] That is, I intend to do well yet. See Walker, Vers., p. 239, 
or ABBOTT, § 319. 


ACT Iv, sc. i.] CORIOLANUS 403 


Like to a lonely Dragon, that his Fenne 35 
Makes fear’d,'and talk’d of more then feene : your Sonne 

Will or exceed the Common, or be caught 

With cautelous baits and practice. 38 


35. Fenne] den Grey conj., Ktly conj. 37. or...or] nor...nor P. A. Daniel. 
37. Will or| Will or not Ktly. 


35. Like to a lonely Dragon] C. & M. CowpEn CiarxeE (Shakespeare): Here 
the construction allows of two meanings in the sentence—‘Like a lonely dragon, 
that his pestilential fen makes feared and talked of more than seen,’ and ‘like a 
lonely dragon that makes his fenny retreat feared and talk’d of more than seen.’ 
This duplicate meaning applies well to Coriolanus, whose withdrawal to some 
unknown place causes him to be dreaded and talked of during absence, and whose 
known fierce nature causes this intended place of retreat to become a subject of 
fear and wondering conjecture.—Lxo (Coriolanus): He does not compare himself 
with a lonely dragon (for just now there is no reason to suppose that he will be 
feared), but the banishment; he says, ‘though I go alone, as if I were going 
to. ...’ It is to be remembered that banishment was the hardest destiny for a 
Roman. A banished Roman was lost forever, but Coriolanus assures his mother 
that he will—even banished—perform deeds that will ‘exceed the common’: 
‘There is a world elsewhere.’ 

35, 36. Dragon, that his Fenne Makes fear’d] Grey (ii, 167): Spenser, 
Faerie Queene, I, vii, 16, speaking of Orgoglio, has the following lines: 


‘From that day forth, Duessa was his dear 
And highly honour’d in his haughty eye. 
Then for to make her dreaded more of men 
And people’s hearts with awful terror tie 

A monstrous beast, ybred in filthy fen, 

He chose, which he had kept long time in darksome den.’— 


W. A. Wricut: Grey conjectured ‘den’ quite needlessly. In Topsell’s History of 
Serpents (ed. 1658), p. 705, we read: ‘Of the Indian Dragons there are also said 
to be two kindes, one of them fenny, and living in the marishes, which are slow 
of pace and without combes on their heads like females; the other in the Moun- 
tains, which are more sharp and great, and have combes upon their head, their 
backs being somewhat brown, and all their bodies lesse scaly than the other.’ 
Shakespeare was probably thinking of the Hydra of the Lernzan marsh to which 
reference has been made before in this play—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): 
The opposite of the many-headed gregarious beast, the Hydra of the Lernean Marsh, 
which it was one of the labours of Hercules to destroy, and to which he has com- 
pared the people. The Poet shows the loneliness of spirit felt by him amid the 
sense of strength, the consciousness of the ability to be dangerous. Out of that 
rankling sense of loneliness and unbeheld power, brooded over stoically here, 
which the Poet shows as the right soil for what is to come, his revenge will grow. 

38. cautelous baits and practice] JoHNsoNn interprets this: ‘By artful and 
false tricks and treason,’ and STeEvens says that here ‘Cautelous’ signifies in- 
sidious. ‘In the sense of cautious it occurs in Jul. Ces., “Swear priests and 


404 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACTIV "Serr 


Volum. My firft fonne, 


Whether will thou go ? Take good Cominius 40 

With thee awhile : Determine on fome courfe 

More then a wilde expofture, to each chance 42 
39. My firft fonne] First, my son. 40. will thou] will you Ff, Rowe,+. 

Han. Bell, Badham. My dear’st son wilt thou Cap. et cet. 

Cartwright. My fairest son. Ktly. 42. expofture] exposure Rowe,+, 

My fair son. Huds. ii. Cap. Ran. Knt, Del. Coll. ii, iii, Sing. 
40. Whether] Where Pope,+. ii, Southern, Ktly, Wh. i, Dyce ii, 

Whither Rowe et cet. Huds. Words. 


cowards, and men cautelous,”’ [II, i, 129]. —W. A. WricuT gives as the meaning, 
both here and in the passage from Jul Cas., crafty. The N. E. D. does not give 
any example of ‘cautelous’ in the sense assigned it by Steevens here, but has 
only the two senses, crafty and cautious; under the first of these the present line 
is quoted. ‘Practice,’ according to the usage of the time, signifies stratagem, 
artifice —ED. 

39. My first sonne] WARBURTON: That is, noblest and most eminent of men.— 
THEOBALD (Letter to Warburton, Feb. 12, 1729; Nichols, Illustrations of Lit., 
ii, 487): This I had always understood in the sense of a commendation, as optime 
fii, without regard to her having, or not having, other children. Thus primus, 
by some of the Commentators, is said to be used in the beginning of the Zneis. 
And so afterwards Volumnia calls him her GREAT son (V, iii, 152)—HeraTH 
(p. 424): By what construction or analogy this expression can signify as Mr 
Warburton interprets it I must own myself at a loss to comprehend. Volumnia 
had before said that Coriolanus was the only son of her womb when she first sent 
him to a cruel war, and the progress of the story gives no ground for imagining he 
had a brother. I believe, therefore, the poet wrote, ‘My fierce son.—KEIGHTLEY 
(Expositor, p. 369): She had, according to herself, no other son (see I, iii.); and 
again she says of herself (V, iii, 174), ‘When she, poor hen, fond of no second 
brood.’ I have never met with ‘first’ in the sense of noblest, that given it here 
by the critics. I would, therefore, read fairest—Miss C. PorTER (First Folio Sh.): 
Volumnia is perhaps thinking of her remaining son, her grandson, the young 
Martius.—Detius: That Shakespeare thought Volumnia had no other children 
than Martius is indirectly shown by her speech, ‘When he was but yet tender- 
bodied and the only son of my womb,’ I, iii, 7. Instead of ‘first’ we might read 
jiercest.or fierc’st. 

42. exposture] MaLone: I know not whether the word ‘exposture’ be found 
in any other author. If not, I should be inclined to read exposure. We have, 
however, other words of a similar formation in these plays. So in Timon: 


‘The earth’s a thief 
That feeds and breeds by a composture stolen 
From general excrement,’ IV, iii, 444. 


[In answer to the implied question in the foregoing it may be said that the WV. EF. D. 
quotes the present line as the only example of this word—Ep.]—STEEvENS: We 
should certainly read exposure. So in Macbeth: 


“And when we have our naked frailties hid 
That suffer in exposure,’ [II, iii, 134]. 


ACT IV, SC. i.] CORIOLA NUS 405 


That ftart’s i’th’way before thee. 43 
Corio. O the Gods ! 
Com.lle follow thee a Moneth, deuife with thee 45 


Where thou fhalt reft, that thou may’ft heare of vs, 
And we of thee. So if the time thruft forth 
A caufe for thy Repeale, we fhall not fend 
O’re the vaft world, to feeke a fingle man, 
And loofe aduantage, which doth euer coole 50 
Ith’abfence of the needer. 
Corto. Fare ye well : 
Thou haft yeares vpon thee, and thou art too full 
Of the warres furfets, to go roue with one 


That’s yet vnbruis’d : bring me but out at gate. 55 

Come my {weet wife, my deereft Mother, and 

My Friends of Noble touch : when I am forth, 57 
43. Vth’ 1 the Cap. et seq. 53: Thou hafi] Thou’st Pope,+ 
44. Corio.] Vir. Ktly. Com. Anon. (— Var. ’73). 

ap. Cam. Men. Words. 54. warres] warrs F;. wars F,. 
45. Moneth] Month F3F,. war’s Rowe,+, Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. 
51. Ith']vh F2. 7 the Cap. et seq. wars’ Steev. et seq. 


Again in Tro. & Cress., ‘To weaken and discredit our exposure,’ [I, ili, 195]. 
‘Exposture’ is, I believe, no more than a typographical error—WALKER (Cyit., 
iii, 211): I am inclined to read with the Folio, not exposure—W. A. WRIGHT: 
The reading of the Folios is, perhaps, a word of Shakespeare’s coinage. As in 
Timon, IV, iii, 444, we find ‘composture’ in the sense of composition, while ‘com- 
posure’ occurs elsewhere, we may allow ‘exposture’ to stand here as probably 
framed on the analogy of ‘imposture.’ 

44. Corio. O the Gods] KricHTLEY (Expositor, p. 369): I give this speech 
to Vir., to whom it is better suited. Her only other speech in this scene is, 
O Heavens! O heavens!’—E. K. CuampBers (Warwick Sh.): Coriolanus suddenly 
realizes how the revenge, which is already beginning to shape itself in his mind, 
must inevitably bring him into conflict with all that he holds most dear. 

48. Repeale] W. A. Wricut: That is, recall from banishment. Compare 
Jul. Ces., IU, i, 54: 

‘Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may 
Have an immediate freedom of repeal.’ 


51. Ith’absence of the needer] C. & M. CowpEn CrarKE (Shakespeare): 
The employment of the word ‘needer’ in this passage affords an example of 
Shakespeare’s inclusive style, for ‘needer’ as here employed gives the effect of 
the man needing the advantage of which there is a prospect, and of the man 
needed home by his friends who want him to profit by it. Moreover, what golden 
wisdom and practical truth are comprised in a line or two! 

55. at gate] Compare, III, iii, 171, and for other examples see, if needful, 


ABBOTT, § 143. 
57. Friends of Noble touch] WARBURTON: That is, of true metal unalloyed. 


406 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. i. 


Bid me farewell, and fmile. I pray you come: 58 
While I remaine aboue the ground, you fhall 
Heare from me ftill, and neuer of me ought 60 


But what is like me formerly. 
60. ought] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Cap. aught Theob. ii. et cet. 


Metaphor from trying gold on the touchstone.—VERITY (Student’s Sh.): Few words 
in Shakespeare, indeed, in English, have a more varied signification than ‘touch’; 
in the Century Dictionary its meanings are classified under nineteen separate head- 
ings (with subdivisions). Hence there is often, as here, room for different interpre- 
tations. Thus some explain it here =‘trust, quality, characteristic.’ But I think 
that it conveys the stronger idea, ‘tested and found noble.’ Testing has so much 
to do with friendship. Compare Timon, III, iii, 6, 7 (referring to the false friends 
who refuse to help Timon in his trouble): 


‘They have all been touched and found base metal, for 
They have all denied him.’ 


59-61. While I remaine . . . like me formerly] BrEcainc (Falcon Sh.): Corio- 
lanus had probably not yet resolved upon his revenge. But the words have a 
dramatic irony, inasmuch as that revenge was a legitimate birth of character.— 
MacCativm (p. 611): It is sometimes said that defeat and the desire for ven- 
geance teach him the lessons which his mother had inculcated in vain, and that 
henceforth he shows himself a master of dissimulation, flattery, and deception. 
In proof of this it is usual to cite, in the first place, the farewell scene, when he 
breathes no word to Cominius, Menenius, Virgilia, or Volumnia of his intention 
to join the Volscians and return to overthrow Rome. But was any such intention 
as yet in his mind? In Plutarch he has adopted no definite plan before he sets 
out. . . . If we turn to the parting scene in the tragedy, and let it make its own 
impression, without reading into it suggestions from subsequent occurrences, I 
think we feel that he is not so much undecided as that the idea has not entered 
into his head. We seem to hear the very accent of sincerity in his repetition of the 
maxims that erewhile he learned from his mother’s own lips. He seems to hint at 
seeking out new adventures and a new career in new regions beyond the reach of 
Rome. It was not cautelous baits and practice that he would have to fear, but 
the open violence of Aufidius if he already thought of going to Antium, and the 
simile of the lonely dragon more talked of than seen would be abundantly in- 
appropriate if it referred to his re-appearance at the head of the Volscian forces; 
but the expression would be quite apt if he meant to make his name redoubtable 
by his single prowess in strange places amidst the risks of an errant life. It is in 
professed anticipation of this that he rejects the companionship which Cominius 
offers. Are these utterances mere pretence? And have not his last farewells 
the genuine note of cordiality and good-will? If we could imagine that he would 
bring himself to address those whom he afterwards called the ‘dastard nobles’ as 
‘my friends of noble touch,’ it would still be impossible to believe him guilty of 
cold-hearted deceit to Virgilia and Volumnia. It would not be like the former 
champion of Rome to return as its assailant; but we may take it that at this 
moment he is expecting to carve his way to glory in a different world and perhaps 
eventually be recalled to his country, but in any case to proceed merely on the 
old lines insofar as that is possible, and meanwhile to be reported of, as Menenius 


ACT Iv, SC. ii] CORIOLANUS 407 


<Menen. That’s worthily 62 
As any eare can heare. Come, let’s not weepe, 
If I could fhake off but one feuen yeeres 


From thefe old armes and legges, by the good Gods 65 
Tid with thee, euery foot. 
Corio. Giue me thy hand, come. Exeunt 67 
[Scene IT,] 
Enter the two Tribunes, Sicinius,and Brutus, I 


with the Edile. 
Sicin.Bid them all home, he’s gone: & wee’l no further, 
The Nobility are vexed, whom we fee haue fided 


In his behalfe. 5 
66. euery] euere F2. Ran. The same. A Street near the 
67. come.] Om. Pope,+ (—Var. ’73). Gate. Mal. et seq. 

As separate line Steev. et seq. 4. The...vexed,| Vex’d are the nobles, 
Scene continued. Ff, Rowe, Theob. Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. 

SCENE 11. Pope et cet. whom we fee] Ff, Rowe. who we 


The Same: Street leading from the see Rowe ii, Pope, Han. who, we see, 
Gate. Cap. A Street. Var. ’78, ’8s. Theob. et cet. 


continues, ‘Worthily as any ear can hear.’—CasE (Arden Sh.): Has Coriolanus 
at last learnt the lesson of dissimulation so thoroughly as to practise it upon his 
friends? or ‘is his revengeful design of later growth?’ 

62. That’s worthily] Apportt (§ 78): We still say ‘that is well,’ but, perhaps, 
no other adverb (except ‘soon’) is now thus used. Shakespeare, however, has, 
‘That’s verily.’ Tempest, II, i, 321, ‘That’s worthily.’ The verb ‘hear’ may be 
supplied from the context. [VERITY suggests that the verb to be here supplied is 
said.—Ep.J—E. K. CuampBers (Warwick Sh.): There is unconscious irony in 
Menenius’ speech. He has no idea of what is rising in Coriolanus’ mind.— VERITY 
(Student’s Sh.): In studying Shakespearian ‘irony’ one notes how often it is made 
the means of emphasising a crucial moment.—CasrE (Arden Sh.): That’s excel- 
lently (spoken). We read in Ant. & Cleo., II, ii, 102, ‘Worthily spoken.’ This is 
Mr Craig’s interpretation and also Mr Verity’s, but it should at least be observed 
that Coriolanus has just said, ‘and (you shall) never (hear) of me aught But,’ 
etc. It would be natural for Menenius to reply: Then we shall hear of you (or 
from you) as worthy reports as can possibly be. 

64. but one seuen yeeres] For other examples of this construction see 
ABBOTT, § 87. 

67. come] Capett (vol. I, pt i, p. 94): The last word of this scene, ‘come,’ 
should not have been dismiss’d, as it has been, from modern editions [see Text. 
Notes]; without it the emphasis will not fall as it should do, that is, on ‘thy’; and 
upon the proper placing of that depends our proper conception of the manner of 
Coriolanus’s exit, videlicet, with Menenius in one hand, and his mother or wife in 
the other. 

3-5. Bid them all... In his behalfe] Lerrsom (ap. Dyce, ii.): Something 
seems to have dropt out of this speech. Quy.: 


408 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. ii. 


Brut. Now we haue fhewne our power, 6 
Let vs feeme humbler after it is done, 
Then when it was a dooing. 
Sicin. Bid them home: fay their great enemy is gone, 
And they, ftand in their ancient {trength. 10 
Brut. Dif{miffe them home. Here comes his Mother. 
Enter Volumnia, Virgtlia,and Menentus. 
Sicin. Let’s not meet her. 
Brut. Why? 
Sicin. They fay fhe’s mad. 15 
Brut. They haue tane note of vs:keepe on your way. 
Volum. Oh y’are well met : 
Th’hoorded plague a’th’Gods requit your loue. 
Menen. Peace, peace, be not fo loud. 
Volum. If that I could for weeping, vou fhould heare, 20 
Nay,and you fhall heare fome. Will you be gone ? 


8-14. Lines end: home:...they,... Dyce, Wh. Cam.+, Craig, Neils. 
home....Why? Pope et seq. 17. y’are] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Ktly, 
11. home.| home. [Exit Atdile. Cap. Wh. Huds. you are Var. 773.  ye’re 
et seq. Dyce, Sta. Cam.+, Words.  vyow’re 
12. Enter...Menenius.] Ff, Rowe, Cap. et cet: 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Cam. Cla. 18. hoorded| hoarded Johns. et seq. 
Craig, Neils. After way, 1. 16 Dyce, plague] plagues Lettsom, Huds. ii. 
Sta. Wh. Glo. Words. After home, 1. 11 ath] oth Fy Rowe,+. o’the 
Johns. et cet. Cap. et seq. 
15-19. Lines end: vs:...way....Gods... requit| requite FF. 
loud. Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Mal. 20. heare,| hear— Rowe et seq. 
Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Sing. Knt, Sta. 21. Will...gone?] Will...gone? [To 
Hal. Ktly, Huds. Lines end: mad... Virgilia. Han. Wiéiil...gone? [to Brutus. 


way....Gods...loud. Var. ’21, Coll. Del. Johns. et seq. 


‘Bid them all home, and give em thanks; he’s gone, 
And we’ll no further.—The nobility 


Are vexéd, whom we see have vainly sided 
In his behalf.’ 


In the third line the sense as well as the metre demands some such word as vainly, 
for the nobility were not vexed because they had sided with Coriolanus, but be- 
cause they had done so to no purpose. [Is not this almost hypercritical? All 
that Sicinius means is that the nobles who sided with Coriolanus are vexed not 
because they did so in vain, but at the outcome of the whole affair—Ep.] 

4. whom we see] For other examples of this confusion of two constructions with 
‘whom’ see ABBOTT, § 410. 

20. If that] For other examples of ‘that’ as a conjunctional affix see ABBOTT, 
§ 287. 

21. Will you be gone?] C. & M. CowpEN CLarxeE (Shakespeare): This form of 
question, now generally used to express desire to have a person gone, here signifies 


ACT IV, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 409 


Virg. You fhall ftay too : I would I had the power 26 
To fay fo to my Husband.| 

Sicin. Are you mankinde ? 24 

22. Virg.] Om. and lines 22, 23 22, 23. Virg. You...too: I...Husband.] 
given to Volum. Han. Virg. [To Sicin.] You...too. Virg. I...husband. Warb. 
Johns. et seq. 23. my] thy Han. 


a desire to hinder his going; not meaning, ‘Will you go when I bid you?’ but 
‘Are you going, when I say you shall hear me?’ This is explained because, if not 
understood as here intended, it seems to be contradicted by the words that follow, 
“You shall stay too’; whereas they continue the sense of Volumnia’s address to 
the Tribunes who are trying to pass on. 

22. Virg. You shall stay too] Caprtt (vol. I, pt i, p. 94): Speaking to Brutus, 
and stopping him, as Volumnia had done by his partner. This is thought unfit for 
the gentle Virgilia by the Oxford editor [Hanmer]; who, therefore, takes the speech 
from her, and another at I. 36, giving them to Volumnia; but the gentlest are rouz’d 
at some times and upon some occasions; nor was it fit that Virgilia should be brought 
upon the scene to do nothing but cry. 

24. Are you mankinde] JoHNson: The word ‘mankind’ is used maliciously 
by the first speaker and taken perversely by the second. A mankind woman is 
a woman with the roughness of a man, and, in an aggravated sense, a woman 
ferocious, violent, and eager to shed blood. In this sense Sicinius asks Volumnia 
if she be mankind. She takes mankind for a human creature and accordingly cries 
out, ‘Note but this fool—Was not a man my father?’—STEEVENS compares 
Winter’s Tale, ‘—a mankind witch,’ [II, iii, 67]. Also Jonson, Silent Woman, 
‘O mankind generation!’ [V, i, ed. Gifford, p. 488. Whereon the editor has 
the following note: ‘That is, simply masculine, always a term of reproach when 
applied to a female.’ Upton quotes several passages to prove that it means wicked, 
in every one of which it means mannish. That the word, however, is sometimes 
used in an ill sense as an augmentative for violent, outrageous, &c., is certain. 
Cotgrave calls some fierce animal ‘a mankind wild beast’; and Hall (Mass., 
vol. iv, p. 53) speaks of ‘stripes for the correction of a mankind ass.’]—W. A. 
Wricut: Compare Fletcher’s Woman Hater, III, i, ‘Are women grown so man- 
kind, must they be wooing?’ And as it is unnatural for women to be like men, 
‘mankind’ came to mean generally unnatural, monstrous, and so, fierce and cruel.— 
Lro (Coriolanus): There is a malicious and low sense in these words: Volumnia 
says to Brutus, ‘will you be gone?’ Virgilia to Sicinius, ‘you shall stay too,’ 
and continues, ‘I would I had the power to say so to my husband.’ The tribune 
understands quite well the stinging pain of these words, but he prefers to com- 
ment on them in a spiteful sense, as expressing the lady’s kimdness to men, since 
she wants to retain him and Brutus and have her husband too. And, therefore, 
he asks, ‘Are you mankind?’ Volumnia has too much of feminine purity to 
understand the coarse quibble, and answers in the clear sense of the word, calling 
him and his father a fox. [I forbear comment on the foregoing unnecessarily coarse 
interpretation; it may, however, be said in passing that no such meaning of ‘man- 
kind’ is recorded in the V. E. D—Ep.]—Casr (Arden Sh.): The New Eng. Dict. 
treats this word in the sense infuriated, etc., as possibly a perversion of mankeen 
(used chiefly of animals), fierce, savage, keen to attack men, citing for this form 


410 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. ii. 


Volum. I foole,is that a fhame. Note but this Foole, 25 
Was not a man my Father ? Had’ft thou Foxfhip 
To banifh him that ftrooke more blowes for Rome 
Then thou haft fpoken words. 


Sicin. Oh bleffed Heauens ! 29 
25. this Foole,) this, Fool, Sta. 28. words.| words— Rowe, Pope, 
26. my] thy Rowe il. Theob. Warb. Johns. words? Han. 


27. flrooke| F2. ftrook F3, Cap. et cet. 
Schmidt. firuck Fy, et cet. 


(which has not, however, been found as early as mankind), 1568, Hist. Jacob and 
Esau, I, ii, ‘What? are you mankene now?’ Of mankind it gives an example as 
early as 1519, from Horman, Vulgaria, p. 127, ‘He set dogges that were mankynde 
vpon the man,’ etc. As the WV. £. D. points out, mankind = masculine and man- 
kind = fierce, etc. (possibly the same word as mankeen), are sometimes indistin- 
guishable. 

25. Note but this Foole] Rev. Joon Hunter: That is, Only mark what this 
fool says. Some editors erroneously insert a comma after the word ‘this.—W. A. 
Wricut: This must be spoken parenthetically, Volumnia turning to the rest. 
Staunton reads [with comma after ‘this’], and perhaps rightly. 

26. my Father] HerwecH (ap. Ulrici’s Shakespeare, p. 179): I hold that 
‘my’ is here a misprint for thy [see Text. Notes]. Volumnia asks of Sicinius was 
not a man thy father, or was he some species of fox, that you thus have such sly 
cunning as to banish, etc. 

26. Had’st thou Foxship] Jonnson: Hadst thou, fool as thou art, mean cun- 
ning enough to banish CoriolanusP—Scumipt: ‘Foxship’ is perhaps used in con- 
trast to ‘mankind’ just preceding. The fox was the symbol not only for cunning 
but also ingratitude. Lear calls his daughters ‘she-foxes,’ III, vi, 24.—W. A. 
Wricut: Hadst thou cunning and ingratitude combined? Wert thou so little of 
a man, but rather a most ungrateful beast? Compare Lear, III, vii, 28, ‘Ingrate- 
ful fox! ’tis he!’ [‘But in both cases,’ replies Deighton, ‘the ordinary attribute 
of the fox, cunning, is, from the speaker’s point of view, quite applicable..—Ep.]— 
Case (Arden Sh.): There is possibly a twofold contrast here of the natures of 
man (in Volumnia) and fox (in Sicinius, implying baseness and ingratitude as 
well as cunning), and of the fool and fox in Sicinius. [I am inclined to think that 
Esop is largely responsible for endowing the fox with the vice of ingratitude. 
As a character in the Fables he appears more often than any other of the animals 
or personages. In every case it is by some subtle trick that he outwits the others, 
and, in many cases, benefits himself at their expense. In the fable of the Country- 
man and the Fox, where the former deceives the huntsmen in regard to the fox’s 
hiding-place, and thus aids him to escape, the fox departs without a word of 
thanks, and is rebuked for his ingratitude. In justification of this he replies that 
the countryman pointed at his place of concealment while he said that he had 
not seen the fox. Topsell, in his enumeration of the epithets applied to the fox, 
does not give ‘ungrateful’ as one of them. In the many exploits and adventures 
of Reynard the Fox, subtlety and craft are the main characteristics of his be- 
haviour; of the many accusations made against him, ingratitude is not men- 
tioned.—Eb.] 


ACT IV, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 4ilI 


Volum. Moe Noble blowes, then euer y wife words. 30 
And for Romes good, Ile tell thee what : yet goe : 
Nay but thou fhalt ftay too : I would my Sonne 32 


30. Moe] F., Cam.+, Schmidt. Ple Fy. good—I’ll Rowe,+. good. 
More F, et cet. Til Cap. Ktly, Cam. Cla. good.—IIil 
31. good, Ile] good Ile F.F;. good, Var. ’73 et cet. 


30. wise words] Dyce (ed. ii.): Lettsom would here read ‘vile words.’ ‘At 

ol ee he observes, ‘“wise” is preposterous. —Hunson (ed. ii.): The word 
‘wise’ does not seem just right; but I cannot see that vile does much better. I 

suspect we ought to read ‘mere words.’ 

31. yet goe] WHITELAW: She will leave it unsaid; then—once more changing 
her mind—‘Nay, but you shall stay.’ Too—‘after all’=‘and yet I see reasons 
too why you should stay.’ 

32. Nay but thou shalt stay too] Drtrus: These words are not addressed to 
Sicinius, but to Brutus, who turns as though about to leave-—W. A. Wricuzt, in 
reference to the foregoing note by Delius, says: ‘But these words are clearly 
meant for Sicinius, to whom Volumnia had begun to speak her mind, “T’ll tell 
thee what,” then interrupting herself with “yet go,” she resolves that, after 
all, he shall hear something of her scorn, “‘Nay, but thou shalt stay too.’”’’—[Casr 
likewise so interprets this part of Volumnia’s remarks——Ep.|—Wright favors, but 
does not adopt, Hanmer’s assignment of this speech and the next (see Text. Notes), 
since ‘it is certainly not in keeping with the gentle character of Virgilia.? He 
adds: ‘I should be disposed to rearrange the dialogue thus: 


“Vol. What then! 
He’ld make an end of thy posterity, 
Bastards and all. 
Vir. Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!” 


the last line being more appropriate to Virgilia pleading for her husband than to 
the sterner Volumnia.’ [Delius regards ]. 38 as addressed ironically to Sicinius. 
Schmidt also thus takes it, without referring, however, to Delius—Ep.]—Pacr: 
This speech is by some modern editors given to Volumnia on the ground that it 
is not in keeping with the gentle nature of Virgilia. But very strong feeling some- 
times forces strong language even from gentle natures. [Compare, ‘And doves will 
peck in safeguard of their brood,’ 3 Henry VI: II, ii, 18; also Ibid., I, iv, 41, ‘So 
doves do peck the falcon’s piercing talons. —Ep.]—Miss C. PortER (First Folio Sh.): 
Virgilia is moved to burst out to this effect sympathetically, explaining Volumnia’s 
words, when the smug Sicinius is too obtuse to imagine why he ought to be in Arabia. 
Apparently Wright does not see the beauty of showing Virgilia thus keyed up to 
speak; for he approves Hanmer’s assignment of the speech to Volumnia (although 
he does not follow it). Worse still, he proposes giving Volumnia’s last line—her 
final taunt at the unvalorous Sicinius—to Virgilia as her petition to the Tribune for 
Coriolanus. Imagine Virgilia calling the Cat who banished her husband Good 
man! Volumnia calls him so in satire, commenting on his official expression of 
patience under persecution as now acting in all this affair ostensibly for Rome’s 
good. He pretends not to mind these women and to cover his personal annoy- 
ance with forced politeness. Hence Volumnia’s comment: ‘Good man, the wounds 


412 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. ii. 


Were in Arabia,and thy Tribe before him, 33 
His good Sword in his hand. 
Sicin. What then ? 35 


Virg.What then? Hee’ld make an end of thy pofterity 

Volum. Baftards,and all. 
Good man, the Wounds that he does beare for Rome ! 

Menen. Come,come, peace. 

Sicin. I would he had continued to his Country 40 
As he began,and not vnknit himfelfe 
The Noble knot he made. 

Bru. I would he had. 

Volum. I would he had ? ’Twas you incenft the rable. 


Cats, that can iudge as fitly of his worth, 45 
36-38. Virg. What...Rome!] Volum. 37, 38. Baftards...that he] As one line 
What...Rome! Han. Huds. ii. 
36. Hee’ld...pofierity] As separate 37. Baftards, and all] Om. Words. 
line Han. et seq. 42. he| is Rowe ii. 


45. Cats] Curs Coll. iii. (MS.), Words. 


that he does beare for Rome!’ An actor, by start and control of himself, should 
show this. The short line, ‘Bastards, and all,’ affords the pause for this stage 
business. 

41, 42. vnknit ... The Noble knot] STEEvEeNs: So in z Henry IV: ‘will 
you again unknit This churlish knot of all abhorred war,’ [V, i, 25. Also, ‘Unknit 
that sorrow-wreathen knot,’ Tit. And., III, ii, 4—Ep.]|—Scumipr (Coriolanus): 
Not, as usually explained, in reference to the bonds which tied Coriolanus to his 
country, but rather to be taken as a general metaphor for the demolition of par- 
ticular works. ‘He shall not knit a knot in his fortunes with the finger of my 
substance,’ says Page in Merry Wives, [III, ii, 76]—-W. A. Wricut: That is, the 
bond by which he bound Rome to him. Compare r Henry VI: V, i, 16, ‘Beside, 
my lord, the sooner to effect And surer bind this knot of amity.’ [In reference 
to Schmidt’s interpretation Wright remarks: ‘Probably Shakespeare had both 
meanings in view.’]}—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): That is, Himself undo 
the knot of love wherewith by his own heroic services to his country he had tied 
Rome to him. Since this was just what they had themselves manceuyred to 
infuriate him into doing by his outbursts, according to Shakespeare’s way of 
telling the story, their present attitude is hypocritical. It was just before pre- 
determined upon (Il. 6, 7 above), ‘Now we have shewne our power, Let us seeme 
humbler,’ and Volumnia is a woman of insight, undeceived by the pretense. 

41. vnknit] For other examples of omission of the ed in the termination of 
participles of verbs ending in d and ¢ see Anport, § 342. 

45. Cats] CoLtrer (ed. ii.): In the corr. fo. 1632, ‘Cats’ is altered to Curs, 
with such appearance of probability that we are almost tempted to put the latter 
in the text. [Collier yielded to the temptation in his ed. iii Ep.] It seems un- 
likely that Volumnia should call either the Tribunes or the mob ‘Cats,’ and few 
misprints, in the writing of the time, could well be easier than ‘Cats’ for Curs. 
[‘But,’ says Dyce, ed. i, ‘it is quite evident that here Volumnia is speaking not of 


ACT IV, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 413 


As I can of thofe Myfteries which heauen 46 
Will not haue earth to know. 
Brut. Pray let’s go. 
Volum. Now pray fir get you gone. 
You haue done a braue deede *. Ere you go, heare this : 50 
As farre as doth the Capitoll exceede 
The meaneft houfe in Rome; fo farre my Sonne 
This Ladies Husband heere ; this \do you fee) 
Whom you haue banifh’d, does exceed you all. 


Bru. Well, well, wee’l leaue vou. 55 

Sicin. Why ftay we to be baited 

46. heauen] Heav’n Rowe,+ (—Var. 50. You haue] Yowve Pope,+, 
273)s Words. 

48. let’s) Ff, Rowe, Wh. i, Neils. 56. flay we] fiay you Ff, Rowe ii, 
let us Pope et cet. Pope,+. stand you Rowe i. 


the rabble, but of the two tribunes._—MommsEn (Der Perkins Folio, p. 260): Since 
Volumnia, in natural resentment, here upbraids the Tribunes for their lack of 
ability to judge Coriolanus, there seems hardly a more inadmissible word than 
‘Cats,’ whose failing is not stupidity (spirito di sette gatti), while the generally 
hateful word Curs is quite appropriate——SrauNTon: This is an odd epithet, 
whether intended for the Tribunes or the rabble. . . . As Volumnia is here up- 
braiding them for their lack of perception, we surmise the genuine word was Bats, 
for which ‘Cats’ is an easy misprint.—R. G. WuiITE: [The MS. Corrector forgot] 
what Shakespeare did not forget, that a woman and a housewife speaks.— 
RICHARDSON (p. 379): Mighty men may be coarse and offensive; grave senators 
may, like some of those represented by Otway, be contemptibly sensual; and even 
an English Princess, agreeably to the representation of Shakespeare, addressed by 
a deformed and loathsome lover, may spit in his face, and call him ‘hedge-hog.’ 
A Roman matron, disputing with the tribunes of the people, who were persecuting 
her son to death, might, with propriety enough, have called them ‘cats.’-— 
C. & M. CowbEN CLARKE (Shakespeare): We think that ‘cats’ is probably here 
used in reference to the well-known saying, ‘A cat may look at a king,’ Volumnia 
inferring that these tribunes are creatures who gaze upon her king-like son, as 
little capable of appreciating his nature as the animal in the adage is capable of 
comprehending royalty, and ‘can judge as fitly of his worth,’ &c. A passage in 
Rom. & Jul., UII, iii, 30, ‘—every cat and dog And little mouse, every unworthy 
thing . . . may look on her,’ contains apparent allusion to the same proverb; 
and Shakespeare makes mention several times of a ‘cat’ as a repulsive animal, 
as well as a mean and insignificant one. There is also a passage that, although it 
seems to be merely a whimsical non-simile (‘No more eyes to see withal than a 
cat,’ I, ii, 80), may indirectly tend to illustrate the want of perception here in 
the term ‘cats,’ as flung by Volumnia at the tribunes.—Casr (Arden Sh.): So, 
perhaps, because of their sneaking, stealthy ways. Bertram, in All’s Well, IV, 
iii, 267, 295, 307, is cited as using cat as a contemptuous epithet for the treacherous 
Parolles. He, however, has a natural antipathy to the animal, ‘I could endure 
anything before but a cat, and now he’s a cat to me.’ 


414 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. ii. 


With one that wants her Wits. Exit Tribunes. 57 
Volum. Take my Prayers with you. 

I would the Gods had nothing elfe to do, 

But to confirme my Curffes. Could I meete ’em 60 

But once a day, it would vnclogge my heart 

Of what lyes heauy too’t. 
eMene. You haue told them home, 

And by my troth you haue caufe : you’! Sup with me. 


Volum. Angers my Meate : I fuppe vpon my felfe, 65 
And fo fhall fterue with Feeding : Come, let’s go, 
Leaue this faint-puling, and lament as I do, 67 
57. Exit Tribunes] Exeunt Tribunes 63, 64. You haue...you haue] You've 
(after 1. 58) Cap. Exeunt Tribunes have - Pope,-+. Yow’ ve...’ you've 
(after 1. 59) Johns. et cet. Words. 
59. would] wish Rowe,+ (Var. 773). 66. flerue] F., Schmidt, Craig (Arden 
60. ’em] them Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Sh.). flarve F,F, et cet. 
Knt, Hal. Ktly, Huds. 67. faint-puling| faint puling Rowe 
et seq. 


62. Of what lyes heauy too’t] W. A. WricuT: See Macbeth, V, iii, 44, ‘That 
perilous stuff which weighs upon the heart.’—Scumupt (Coriolanus): Similarly, as 
to construction, Hamlet, ‘This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet Sits smiling 
to my heart,’ [I, ii, 124]. 

63. You haue told them home] MALONE (Supplemental Obs., i, p. 221): I be- 
lieve we ought to read, You have foll’d them home, 7. ¢., you have rung such a 
peal of clamorous reproaches in their ears that they are departed home. [As this 
note is not repeated in any subsequent edition it may, I think, be considered as 
withdrawn. Malone, in his own ed., compares ‘I cannot speak him home,’ II, 
li, 111 ante, which doubtless largely influenced this judicious retraction —ED.] 

66. sterue] W. A. WricuT: This spelling remained in Dryden’s time. Compare 
The Hind and the Panther, pt iii, 1. 479 (Clar. Press ed.). 

66. sterue with Feeding] Srrevens: This idea is repeated in Ant. & Cleo., 
II, ii, [242, ‘she makes hungry Where most she satisfies’], and in Pericles, ‘Who 
starves the ears she feeds,’ [V, i, 113].—Casr (Arden Sh.): Supping upon anger, 
Volumnia sups upon herself (for all passions waste the strength) and so will sterve 
with feeding. ‘Sterve’ may or may not be equivalent to die here, for though that 
was the chief sense, the modern one, ‘to suffer extremely from hunger (or cold),’ 
also existed. The thought is not quite the same in Pericles, V, i, 113, 114, but it 
is sufficiently similar to be illustrative. 

67. faint-puling] W. A. Wricut: That is, whining. Elsewhere used by 
Shakespeare as an adverb or adjective. Compare Two Gentlemen, II, i, 26, ‘To 
speak puling like a beggar at Hallowmas.’ And Rom. & Jul., ITI, v, 185, ‘A 
wretched puling fool.’ Cotgrave has: ‘Piauler. To peepe, or cheepe (as a young 
bird); also to pule or howle (as a young whelpe).’ And again: ‘Piuler. To pule, 
or cheepe like a little chicken.’—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): This ineffective, 
inactive lamenting. The verb in the original text is a compound. Taking out 
the hyphen, following Rowe, as all the modernised editions do, is but a slight 


ACT IV, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 415 


In Anger, Iuno-like : Come,come,come. Exeunt 68 
Mene. Fie, fie, fie. Exit. 
[Scene IIT.] 
Enter a Roman, and a Volce. I 
Rom. I know you well fir, and you know mee : your 
name I thinke is Adrian. 3 
68, 69. Come, come, come. Mene. tium. Mal. et seq. 
Fie, fie, fie.) Come, come, fie, fie. Pope, 1-51. Om. Bell. 
Theob. Han. Warb. Come, come. 1. Enter a Roman, and a...] Enter a 
Mene. Fie, fie, fie. Johns. Come, come. Roman and a..., meeting. Cap. et seq. 
Mene. Fie, fie. Words. (Dyce ii. a Roman] Nicanor Sta. (through- 
conj.). out). 
SCENE 1. Pope et seq. SCENE I. Volce] F,, Var. 778, ’85, Ran. 
Rowe. Mal. Steev. Varr. Volcie F;. Volfcie 


Antium. Rowe,-+. Volcian Terri- F,, Rowe. Volscian Pope,+. Volcian 
tories. A Highway. Cap. Between Cap. Adrian Sta. (throughout). 
Rome and Antium. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Volsce Coll. et cet. 

A Highway between Rome and An- 


change, it is true, but inartistic. This seems to be Shakespeare’s one use of ‘puling’ 
as a verb. 

69. Fie, fie, fie] Scam (Coriolanus): This exclamation is here probably not 
addressed to the two women, but rather indicates that Menenius goes out in 
despondent mood and shaking his head. 

Scene III.] Vertry (Student's Sh.): This scene illustrates a very instructive 
feature of Shakespeare’s dramatic method, his side-scenes (if I may so term them). 
Take two other instances: first, Richard IT: III, iv. Coleridge said of that scene: 
‘Shakespeare’s wonderful judgment appears in his historical plays in the introduc- 
tion of some incident or other, though no way connected, yet serving to give an air 
of historic fact. Thus the scene of the Queen and the Gardener realizes the thing, 
makes the occurrence no longer a segment, but gives an individuality, a liveliness 
and presence.’ As the gardener and servants talk about the unhappy state of 
England, and we hear their comments on contemporary events, those events ap- 
pear much nearer to us and more vivid; we slip insensibly into the feelings of an 
onlooker. A somewhat similar scene is Jul. Cas., Il, iv, which depicts Portia, 
wife of Brutus, restlessly waiting to hear how the plot against Cesar has gone. 
Such side-scenes give us the impressions of those who are watching the course of 
events from a little distance, and we seem to join them as spectators; there, for 
instance, we cannot help feeling something of Portia’s anxiety as she waits for 
news and suddenly thinks that she hears a sound from the direction of the Capitol. 
And the same sort of effect is produced by Macbeth, II, iv. The rationale of such 
scenes—always brief scenes—is that they just mark time to estimate and forecast. 
Hitherto we have been, as it were, amid the rush of tragic incidents; now we view 
them retrospectively, some way off, as when one turns to look back on a plain; 
now we see them as they appear to the non-actors. We learn the immediate 
after-effects of the occurrences at which we have been present, and the next stage 
is foreshadowed. Thus this little scene is literally ‘a highway between Rome and 
Antium’; and the end of the way is ‘Antium. Before Aufidius’s house’ (Scene iv.). 

1. Enter a Roman, and a Volce] Dre tius (Die Prosa in Sh’s Dramen, Jahrbuch, 


416 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Volce. 
Rom. 


Volce. Nicanor : no. 
Rom. The fame fir. 
Volce. 


your Fauour is well appear’d by your Tongue. 


4. fir, truly] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Sir. Truly Johns. Var. ’73. Si: 


truly, Theob. et cet. 
5. and] but Pope,-+-. 


6. ’em] them Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 


Knt, Hal. 


[ACT IV, SC. iii. 


It is fo fir, truly I haue forgot you. 
I am a Roman, and my Seruices are as you are, 5 
again{t’em. Know you me yet. 


You had more Beard when I laft faw you, but 


What’s 10 


10. appear’d| affear’d Han. ap- 
peal’d Warb. approv’'d Steev. conj. 
Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), Dyce ii, Huds. i, 
Leo, Glo. Hunter, Words. Craig, 
Chambers, Cholmeley, Gordon. ap- 
pay'd Sing. 


to. is] has Mal. conj. 


v, p. 269): This meeting between a Roman and a Volscian, since it is intended 
merely to localize and afford reference for the action, is conformably given through- 
out in prose. 

ro. your Fauour is well appear’d] WARBURTON: This is strange nonsense. 
We should read, ‘—is well appealed,’ i. e., brought into remembrance.—HEATH 
(Revisal, p. 424): Mr Warburton might with equal propriety have said appeal’d 
signified anything else which first came into his head; for the English language 
knows it not in his signification. Possibly the poet might have written supply’d. 
Then the sense will be, Though I do not recollect your countenance, yet it is so 
well helped out by your voice that I very well remember you.—Jounson: I 
would read, ‘is well affeared.’ That is, strengthened, attested, a word used by our 
author in Macbeth, ‘The title is affeer’d,’ [IV, iii, 34]. To repeal may be to bring 
to remembrance, but appeal has another meaning. [Had Johnson consulted the 
texts of his predecessors he would have seen that in this reading he had been 
anticipated; see Text. Notes—Ep.]—CapE.: ‘Appear’d’ is not easily vindicated, 
for we have no example of that verb’s being ever us’d passively; neither ought 
it to have been by the poet, who might better have given us, had he been so dis- 
pos’d, ‘but your favour appears by your tongue,’ or, I see your face in your speech, 
meaning, he recollected him by it—SrEEvens: I would read, ‘is well approved, 
i. e., your tongue confirms the evidence of your face. So in Hamlet, ‘That if 
again this apparition come He may approve our eyes and speak to it,’ [I, i, 28].— 
Matone: If there be any corruption in the old copy, perhaps it rather is in a 
preceding word. Our author might have written, ‘your favour has well appeared,’ 
etc., but the old text may, in Shakespeare’s licentious dialect, be right. So Chaucer 
uses dispaired: Quod Pandarus, ‘allas! what may this be, That thou dispaired 
art,’ &c., [Troilus and Criseyde, Bk i, 1. 778.—Epb.]. Singer, in support of his read- 
ing appayed, says: ‘No phrase is more common in our elder language than well 
appayed, i. e., satisfied, contented. The Volcian means to say, ‘Your counte- 
nance is altered, but your voice perfectly satisfies me.’ 


“They buy thy help: but sin ne’er gives a fee 
He gratis comes; and thou art well appay’d,” R. of L., 1. 994.’ 


Again, commenting on Collier’s MS. Corrector’s agreement with Steeven’s sug- 


ACT IV, Sc. iii] CORIOLANUS 417 


[10. your Fauour is well appear’d] 
gestion, Singer remarks: ‘The correctors have not done wisely, for the phrase 
should be, “well appaied,” i. e., compensated for, satisfied by. The phrase is 
very common in our older language’ (Sh. Vindicated, etc., p. 222).—R. G. WurrTe: 
Steevens plausibly proposed approv’d; but I believe the old text is right, the more 
so that there seems to me to have been a jingling quibble intended between ‘beard’ 
and ‘appeared.’—KErIGHTLEY (Expositor, p. 369): The poet probably wrote has, 
pronounced as, of which the printer made ‘is. —W. A. Wricut: That is, is well 
shown, made apparent. If ‘appeared’ is the true reading, it must be used in this 
transitive sense, but I have not met with another example—Aszorr (§ 296): 
The predilection for transitive verbs was, perhaps, among other causes why many 
verbs which are now used intransitively were used by Shakespeare reflexively. 
Appear is, perhaps, used reflexively in, ‘No, no; we hold it as a dream till it 
appear itself,’ Much Ado, I, ii, 22. ‘If you could weara mind .. . and but dis- 
guise That which to appear itself must not yet be,’ Cymb., ITI, iv, 148, 7. e., that 
which as regards showing itself must not yet have any existence. Though these 
passages might be, perhaps, explained without the reflexive use of ‘appear,’ yet 
this interpretation is made more probable by, ‘Your favour is well appear’d,’ 
Coriol., IV, ili, 9. [See note on I, ii, 19, 20, Much Ado, this edition —Ep.|— 
Rotre: An explanation so improbable [as that given by Wright and Abbott] 
should be admitted only as a last resort. It is better, with Schmidt (Lex.), to take 
‘appear’d’ as an adjective equivalent to apparent, discernible (cf. dishonour’d = 
dishonourable, in III, i, 78 above) or to take ‘is appear’d’ as=has appeared. 
For this latter, it is true, we have only Dogberry’s authority in Much Ado, IV, ii, 
1, but on the face of it ‘is appear’d’ is quite as allowable as is arrived, is come, etc. 
Abbott (§ 295) calls these ‘passive verbs’; though they are simply active ‘perfects’ 
(or ‘present perfects,’ or whatever the grammars may call them) with the auxiliary 
be instead of have, as in the French est arrivé, the German ist gekommen,etc. Appa- 
raitre, by the way, is conjugated with étre as well as avoir —BEECHING (Henry Irving 
Sh): The sense required is, ‘your identity is made more apparent by your tongue, 
your face is helped by your tongue’; the Volsce combines these into ‘your favour 
is well appeared (or made apparent) by your tongue.’ But as this transitive use 
of ‘appear’ is unsupported, it may be a misprint. Steevens’s approved misses the 
sense.—Hunpson (ed. ii.): It is evident that the authors of the changes in ‘ap- 
pear’d’ did not understand the Poet’s use of to appear. Mr Joseph Crosby has 
satisfied me in the matter by pointing out a good many instances where that word 
is clearly used as a transitive verb, meaning to show, to manifest, to make apparent, 
to present, &c. So in Tro. & Cress., IL, iii, 3, ‘Appear it to your mind that, 
through the sight I bear in things to come.’ See also III, i, 121, 122 above.— 
E. K. Caampers (Warwick Sh.): The Folio reading might possibly mean ‘is made 
apparent,’ but ‘appear’ is not elsewhere used in this transitive sense. The point is: 
my imperfect remembrance of your ‘favour’ or countenance is ‘approved’ or con- 
firmed by my remembrance of your voice. —KINNEAR (p. 325): That is, your person 
has been manifested by your speech—your tongue has told me plainly who you 
are. The Folio has ‘is well appeared,’ evidently a misprint, as no such construc- 
tion is found in Shakespeare, nor has any instance been cited from other writers. 
The correction has is by Malone.—PERRING (p. 305): Is it not possible that, in 
Shakespeare’s day, the participle may have been permitted to occupy the place 
of the adjective? ‘Is entered’—‘is arrived’—‘is approached’—‘is become’ are 


27 


418 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. iii. 


the Newes in Rome : I haue a Note from the Volcean II 
{tate to finde you out there. You haue well faued mee a 
dayes iourney. 
Rom. There hath beene in Rome ftraunge Infurre¢ti- 
ons : The people, againft the Senatours, Patricians, and 15 
Nobles. . 
Vol. Hath bin ; is it ended then? Our State thinks not 
fo, they are in a moft warlike preparation, & hope to com 
vpon them, in the heate of their diuifion 
Rom. The maine blaze of it is paft, but a {mall thing 20 
would make it flame againe. For the Nobles receyue fo 
to heart, the Banifhment of that worthy Coriolanus, that 
they are in a ripe aptneffe, to take al power from the peo- 
ple, and to plucke from them their Tribunes for euer. 
This lyes glowing I can tell you,and is almoft mature for 25 
the violent breaking out. 
Vol. Cortolanus Banifht? 
Rom. Banifh’d fir. 
Vol. You will be welcome with this intelligence Ni- 
canor. 30 
Rom. The day ferues well for them now. I haue heard 
it faide, the fitteft time to corrupt a mans Wife, is when 
fhee’s falne out with her Husband. Your Noble Tullus 
Auffidius well appeare well in thefe Warres, his great 
Oppofer Coriolanus being now in no requeft of his coun- 35 
trey. 
Volce. He cannot choofe : I am moft fortunate, thus 
accidentally to encounter you. You haue ended my Bu- 
fineffe, and I will merrily accompany you home. 39 


11. Volcean] F.F;.  Volcian Cap. Sing. Coll. i, i, Hal. Ktly, Wh. i, 
Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Huds. i, Words. 


Sing. Knt. Volfcian Fy, et cet. 17. ts | ut 1s Var. 773. 
12. there] here Ff, Rowe. 33. falne] fallen Rowe et seq. 
14. hath] have Var. 73. 34. well appeare] will appeare Fi. 
14, 15. Infurrections| imsurrection 35. of his] with his Han. 


Var. 778, ’85, Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. 


all found in Shakespeare, used pretty much, if not exactly, like ‘enters,’ ‘arrives,’ 
‘approaches,’ &c. Similarly, ‘is appeared’ and ‘appears’ may both have been tol- 
erated. There is an old smack about ‘is appeared,’ which, though some may not 
relish it, perhaps they must stomach. I am very much inclined to believe that 
it is the genuine reading, a relic of the English of olden times. 

14, 15. hath beene . . . Insurrections] For other examples of this construction 
see, if needful, ABBorr, §§ 334, 335. 


ACT IV, SC. iv.] CORIOLANUS 419 


Rom, I thall betweene this and Supper, tell you moft 40 
ftrange things from Rome all tending to the good of 
their Aduerfaries. Haue you an Army ready fay you ? 
Vol. A moft Royall one : The Centurions, and their 
charges diftinctly billetted already in th’entertainment, 
and to be on foot at an houres warning. 45 
Rom. 1am ioyfull to heare of their readineffe, and am 
the man I thinke, that fhall fet them in prefent Action.So 
fir, heartily well met,and moft glad of your Company. 
Volce. You take my part from me fir, I haue the moft 
caufe to be glad of yours. 50 
Rom. Well, let vs go together. Exeunt. 


[Scene IV] 


Enter Coriolanus in meane Apparrell, Dif- I 
guifd,and muffled. 


Corio. A goodly City is this Antium. Citty, 
’Tis I that made thy Widdowes : Many an heyre 
Ofthefe faire Edifices fore my Warres 5 
44. thentertainment| the entertain- Antium. Before Aufidius’s House. 
ment Rowe et seq. Cap. et seq. (subs.). 
48. heartily] heartly F,. heart’ly 5. fore] for Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 


FF; Han. Warb. Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 


49. from] for me Warb. 
SCENE Iv. Cap. et seq. Scene con- 
tinued Ff, Rowe-+. 


*fore Johns. Var. ’73, Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Dyce, Sta. Hal. 
Ktly, Wh. Cam. Huds. 


44. distinctly] That is, separately, not blent in one. ABBOTT compares Tempest, 
I, ii, 200. See also III, i, 247 above. 

44. already in th’entertainment] JoHNSON: That is, though not actually en- 
camped, yet already in pay. To entertain an army is to take them into pay. 

4. Many an heyre] Matone: I once thought that ‘heir’ might mean here 
possessor (so Shakespeare uses inherit in the sense of to possess), but ‘heir’ I now 
think is used in its ordinary signification, for presumptive successor. Soin V, vi, 62: 


‘And patient fools, 
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear, 
With giving him glory.’ 
The words of Aufidius in the same scene may support either interpretation: 
‘Though in this city he 
Hath widow’d and unchilded many a one,’ [l. 185]. 
5. fore my Warres] WHITELAW: That is, many a one who before my wars was 


heir.—Scumipt (Coriolanus): Probably the expression is to be understood in a sense 
similar to ‘before’ in V, iv, 19, wherewith other Shakespearian references agree: 


‘the king before the Douglas’ rage 
Stoop’d his anointed head,’ etc, 2 Henry IV: Ind. 31.— 


420 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. iv. 


Haue I heard groane,and drop : Then know me not, 6 
Leaft that thy Wiues with Spits,and Boyes with {tones 
In puny Battell flay me. Saue you fir. 
Enter a Citizen. 
Cit. And you. 10 
Corio. Direct me,if it be your will,where great -4uf- 
fidius lies : Is he in Antium ? 
Cit. He is, and Feafts the Nobles of the State, at his 
houfe this night. 


Corio. Which is his house, befeech you ? 15 
Cit. This heere before you. 
Corio. Thanke you fir, farewell. Exit Citizen 

Oh World, thy flippery turnes ! Friends now faft fworn, 18 
7. and) an F,. 15. befeech] I beseech Rowe,+ (—Var. 


9. Enter...] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 73). ‘beseech Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. 
Han. Warb. After me, 1. 8 Dyce, Sta. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. Ktly, 
Cam.+, Words. After 1. 7 Johns. et Huds. 


cet. 16. This heere] Ff, Rowe,+. This, 
10-15. As verse, ending lines: will... here Coll. Sta. Wh. Glo. Cla. This, 
Antium...Siate...you. Cap. et seq. here, Theob. et cet. 
11-14. As verse, ending lines: great 18-28. Oh World...yffues] Mnemonic 
..Antium...State...night Johns. Warb. 


13. at his] At’s Wh. i. 


W. A. Wricut: ‘’Fore my wars’ is connected with ‘groan and drop.’ Compare 
Twelfth Night, III, i, 140, ‘how much the better to fall before the lion than the 
wolf!’ [This interpretation is generally accepted by modern editors.—Ep.] 

18. Oh World, thy slippery turnes, etc.] WARBURTON: This fine picture of 
common friendship is an artful introduction to the sudden league which the poet 
made him enter into with Aufidius, and no less artful an apology for his commenc- 
ing enemy to Rome.—VeErity (Students Sh.): Coriolanus’s reflections on the 
mutability of friendship and enmity are designed to diminish the shock and un- 
naturalness of his own defection.—BrEcuING (Henry Irving Sh.): Notice in this 
speech how characteristically Coriolanus treats his alliance with Aufidius as noth- 
ing but a private concern. He has left old friends for new, that is all. The state 
is but his birth-place. 

18-21. Friends now . . . in Loue] Matone: Part of this description naturally 
reminds us of the following lines in Mid. N. Dream: 


‘Is all the counsel that we two have shar’d, 

The sister-vows, the hours that we have spent, 
When we have chid the hasty-footed time 

For parting us, O! is it all forgot? 

All school-days’ friendship, childhood innocence? 
We, Hermia, like two artificial gods, 

Have with our neelds created both one flower, 
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion, 
Both warbling of one song, both in one key, 


ACT IV, SC. iv.] CORIOLANUS 421 


Whofe double bofomes feemes to weare one heart, 


Whofe Houres, whofe Bed, whofe Meale and Exercife 20 
1g. feemes to...one] feene...on F>. 20. Houres] house Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), 
Seen...on F;. feem to...one F, et seq. Dyce, Wh. Huds. Glo. Words. Rlfe. 


As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds, 

Had been incorporate. So we grew together, 

Like to a double cherry, seeming parted, 

But yet an union in partition; 

Two lovely berries moulded on one stem; 

So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart,’ &c., [III, ii, 198].— 


W. S. WALKER (Cyit., iii, 211) also compares the foregoing passage with this one; 
and also As You Like It, I, iii, 75: 


‘—we still have slept together 
Rose at an instant, learn’d, play’d, eat together, 
And wheresoe’er we went, like Juno’s swans 
Still we went coupled and inseparable.’ 


Also Two Noble Kinsmen, I, iii, 69>-92—C. Cotttns (p. 64): In this speech we have 
at once an expression and illustration of the remarks of Ajax, ll. 678-684: [‘And 
now shall we not know moderation? Since, for my part, I am even now aware 
that our enemy is so far to be hated by us as though he may yet again be our 
friend; and to my friend I will be willing thus far to be aiding of my service as if 
he were not always to remain so.’—Oxford Translation, p. 261.—Eb.] 

19. seemes] W. A. Wricut: The First Folio has ‘seemes,’ a printer’s error, and 
not an instance of the survival of a plural in s. 

20. Houres] CoLiier (ed. ii.): The corrected folio, 1632, has house for ‘houres’ 
of the old copies, and we may be sufficiently satished that it was the word of the 
poet; the error may have arisen either from mishearing or misprinting. Coriolanus 
is clearly not referring to time.—SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, p. 222): The substitution 
of house for ‘hours’ is most probably right.—Dycr: No one, with the context full 
before him, need attempt to defend the Folio text by the passage in Mid. N. Dream, 
III, ii, 199, ‘—the hours that we have spent When we have chid the hasty-footed 
time For parting us.’ Here the error of the Folio was an easy one, but perhaps it 
may be partly attributed to the occurrence of the word ‘hour’ at the end of 1. 22.— 
R. G. Wuire opines that ‘there appears to be no ground of doubt as to the correct- 
ness of Collier’s MS. correction.—C. & M. CowpENn CLarKE (Shakespeare): We 
think that were there no other ground for retaining the Folio word than the one 
afforded by the passage describing mutual friendship in Two Genilemen, II, iv, 62, 
‘From our infancy We have conversed and spent our hours together,’ it would 
suffice to indicate that ‘hours’ was the word here intended by the author. That 
‘hour’ occurs again in the next line but one, far from offering an objection to the 
retention of ‘hours’ previously, lends support to our belief that the Folio word 
is the author’s word, because it is in accordance with Shakespeare’s style thus 
to repeat a word where it lends force and point to his meaning. His meaning is: 
‘Strange that friends, whose hours have been spent perpetually together, should 
within an hour break out to bitterest enmity.—W. A. Wricut: Dyce follows 
Collier’s MS. correction. But ‘hours’ is used for time generally. See I, v, 7, 


422 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. iv. 


Are ftill together : who Twin (as ’twere)in Loue, 21 
Vnfeparable, fhall within this houre, 

On a diffention of a Doit, breake out 

To bittereft Enmity : So felleft Foes, 

Whofe Paffions, and whofe Plots haue broke their fleep 25 
To take the one the other, by fome chance, 

Some tricke not worth an Egge, fhall grow deere friends 27 


21. Twin] Twine Ff, Rowe,+ (—Var. 73). 


and compare with this whole passage Helena’s speech in Mid. N. Dream, III, 
ii, 199, &c., ‘The sister’s vows, the hours that we have spent.’ [We may, I think, 
almost see the grim smile on Dr Wright’s lips as he thus deliberately accepts 
Dyce’s grandiloquent challenge-—Ep.]—Scumipt (Coriolanus): Many of the mod- 
ern editors here read house, but quite wrongly, since ‘hours’ gives the general 
idea under which fall the special ideas that follow. [As I have before had occasion 
to note, Schmidt seems systematically to ignore the source of the readings due to 
Collier’s MS. Corrector. It is somewhat the more remarkable in the present 
case, as none of those editors who have adopted the correction has failed to give 
the source of his text——Ep.J—Rotre: The Folio reading has been defended by 
comparing Two Gentlemen, II, iv, 62, and the similar passage in Mid. N. Dream, 
III, ii, 199, but the context here is very different and seems to demand house.— 
Case (Arden Sh.): Compare a closely parallel passage in Painter’s Palace of 
Pleasure, 1575 (The Fifty-ninth Nouell), ed. Jacobs, ii, 104: ‘Besides the countrie of 
Perche, there were two Gentlemen, which from the tyme of theyr youth lyued in 
sutche great and perfect amitie, as there was betweene them but one harte, one bed, 
one house, one table, and one purse.’ Aubrey says that Beaumont and Fletcher 
shared not only house and bed, but even clothes, and in The Chances, II, ii, written 
long after Beaumont’s death, this passage occurs: 


‘He’s of a noble strain, my Kinsman, Lady, 
My countryman and fellow-traveller. 

One bed contains us ever, one purse feeds us, 
And one faith free between us,’ etc. 


21. who Twin] Matone: Our author has again used this verb in Othello: 


‘And he that is approved in this offence 
Though he had twinned with me,’ etc. [II, iii, 211]. 


23. dissention of a Doit] W. A. Wricut: That is, a dispute about the merest 
trifle. Or ‘of’ may here denote the price or worth of the quarrel, as in I, v, 9, 
‘Trons of a doit.’ [The value of a doit was half a farthing. See note on I, v, 9.—Ep.] 

24-28. So fellest Foes . . . their yssues] JoHN Crort (p. 18): ‘A variance arose 
betwixt Sir Richard Cholmeley and his lady, they parted beds and did not cohabit 
as man and wife for divers years, till coming to a gentleman’s house, they were 
straitened for lodging, or did not notice they were fitted with one chamber for 
themselves, where coming together, it pleased God that the lady conceived, which 
proved a son, and after they lived kindly together.’—Vide, Memoirs of Sir Hugh 
Cholmeley. 

27. Some tricke not worth an Egge] WHITELAW: Some freak of fortune, some 


ACT IV, SC. iv.] CORIOLANUS 423 


And inter-ioyne their yffues. So with me, 28 
My Birth-place haue I, and my loues vpon 


29. Birth-place] Birth-lace F.F;. lovers left Rowe,+ (—Var. ’73). 
haue I,| hate I, Cap. et seq. love’s Cap. et seq. 
loues| louer F2F3. lover left; Fy. 29. vpon] Om. Pope,-+ (—Var. ’73). 


accident, worthless in itself —Scummpt (Coriolanus): Not ‘some freak of fortune,’ 
but rather, some toy, some trifle, since ‘trick’ had also this meaning in old English. 
‘A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby’s cap,’ in Tam. of Shrew, IV, iii, 68. The egg 
appears elsewhere as the symbol of a worthless article, ‘Will you take eggs for 
money?’ Winter’s Tale, I, ii, 161. 

28. inter-ioyne their yssues] W. A. Wricut: That is, allow their children to 
intermarry. [Rolfe also thus interprets this.—E. K. CaamBers (Warwick Sh.): 
That is, unite their designs, as Coriolanus proposes he and Aufidius shall do.— 
Gornon: Interjoin their destinies, throw in their lot with each other, join fortunes. 
—Case (Arden Sh.): And make their children intermarry. For ‘issues’ compare 
Henry VIII: III, ii, 191, ‘our issues Who, if he live, will scarce be gentlemen.’ 
This illustrates, probably, the commonest sense of ‘issue,’ but besides the obvious 
one of consequence, and the like, the word is used for ‘An action, a deed (in 
relation to the doer)’; see NV. E. D., which cites Jul. Cas., III, i, 204, ‘there 
shall I try . . . how the people take The cruel issue of these bloody men,’ and 
Cymb., II, i, 51. 

28-30. So with me .. . if he slay me] JoHNSON, in reference to Rowe’s modi- 
fication of the reading of F4, says: ‘He who reads this would think he was read- 
ing the lines of Shakespeare, except that Coriolanus, being already in the town, 
says he will enter it. The intermediate line [between ll. 28 and 20] seems to be 
lost, in which, conformably to his former observation, he says that he has lost his 
birthplace and his loves upon a petty dispute, and is trying his chance in this enemy 
town; he then cries, turning to the house of Aufidius, I’/l enter if he slay me. Ihave 
preserved the common reading because it is, though faulty, yet intelligible, and 
the original passage, for want of copies, cannot be restored.’ 

29. My Birth-place haue I] CapELt, with no further comment than calling 
attention to his change of text, reads, ‘hate I’; Steevens calmly appropriates this 
reading, and is unduly credited with it by Malone and all subsequent editors 
except Staunton, until it was restored to its rightful author by the Cambridge 
Edd. Collier, whose MS. Corrector also thus reads, remarks (ed. ii.): ‘Precisely 
the same blunder occurs in Rom. & Jul., III, v, 146, where, in the Folio 1623, 
“hate” is misprinted haue; in the 4tos. it is, correctly, “hate.” In the comedy 
of Patient Grissil, 1603, V, ii, Sir Owen is made to say, ‘“‘And all that have scolds, 
as Sir Owen does,” &c.; but he ought to say, ‘‘And all that hate scolds,” &c. The 
error is in the original edition, but is repeated in the imprint by the Shakespeare 
Society, 1841, p. 90.’—VeErRity (Student’s Sh.): There may be a line lost, but it 
looks as if the original substitution of ‘have’ for hate had caused the introduction 
of Jeft [in F,]. 

29. my loues vpon] Scumipr (Coriolanus): For this use of ‘upon’ with ‘love’ 
compare such phrases as to dote on; also, ‘Can thy right hand seize love upon 
thy left,’ Ven. & Ad., 1. 158; and, ‘You know the goodness I intend upon you,’ 
V, i, 7: 


424 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. v, 


This Enemie Towne : Ile enter, ifhe flay me 30 
He does faire Iuftice : if he giue me way, 
Ile do his Country Seruice. Exit, 32 
[Scene V.| 
Muficke playes, Enter a Seruingman. I 


1 Ser. Wine, Wine, Wine : What feruice is heere ? I 
thinke our Fellowes are afleepe. 
Enter another Seruingman. 
2 Ser. Where’s Cotus:my M.cals for him: Cotus. Exit 5 
Enter Coriolanus. 
Corio. A goodly Houfe : 
The Feaft {mels well : but I appeare not like a Guett. 


Enter the firft Seruingman. 9 
30. Enemie] F.F; Enemy's Fy, 1. playes.] within. Cap. et seq. 
Rowe,+. enemy Cap. et cet. I, 4, 9. Seruingman] Ff, Rowe,+, 
Towne:| Towne Ff, Rowe, Pope, Cam.+. Servant Cap. et cet. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. house Han. 4. another] a second Coll. Del. Dyce. 
town:— Var. °73. town. Var. 778 5. M.] Mafter F,. 
et seq. 7,8. As verse, ending lines: J... 


ScENE v. Cap. et seq. SCENE I. Guefi] Pope et seq. (except Coll. ii, 
Rowe. ScENE Iv. Pope, Han. Warb. Sta.). 


Johns. 8. fmels welll] fmels Fi. smells 
A Hall in Aufidius’s House. Rowe. 

Rowe,+, Cap. Var. ’78, 785, Ran. [Goes towards hearth. Cap. 

The Same. A Hall in Aufidius’s g. Enter...Seruingman.] Re-enter 

House. Mal. et seq. first Servant, with Wine. Cap. 


30. This Enemie Towne] STEEVENS: Here, as in other places, our author is 
indebted to North’s Plutarch, ‘For he disguised himselfe in suche arraye and 
attire, as he thought no man could euer haue knowen him, . . . and as Homer sayed 
of Vlysses, “So dyd he enter into the enemies towne.”’’ Perhaps, therefore, 
instead of ‘enemy’ we should read enemy’s or enemies.’ [See Text. Notes —Ep.|— 
W. A. Wricut: Compare King Lear, v, 3, 220: 


‘Kent, sir, the banish’d Kent; who in disguise 
Follow’d his enemy king.’ 


Similarly ‘neighbour’ is used as an adjective. See As You Like It, IV, iii, 79, 
‘West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom.’ And Love’s Labour’s, V, ii, 94, 
‘I stole into a neighbour thicket by.’ 

5. Cotus] BrEcuinc (Falcon Sh.): This name is not classical—Verrrvy (Student’s 
Sh.): The name (in Roman historians) of several Thracian and Macedonian rulers. 
I suppose that Shakespeare’s classical names came mostly from North’s Plutarch 
and Golding’s translation of Ovid’s Metamorphosis. [In the classical Dictionaries 
the name of the Thracian ruler is given Cotys. As Beeching notes, the spelling in 
the text is not classical.—Ep.] 


ACT IV, SC. v.] 


CORIOLANUS 425 


1 Ser.What would you haue Friend?whence are you? if) 


Here’s no place for you : Pray go to the doore ? 


Exit 


Corio. I haue deferu’d no better entertainment, in be- 
ing Coriolanus. Enter fecond Seruant. 

2 Ser. Whence are you fir ? Ha’s the Porter his eyes in 
his head, that he giues entrance to {uch Companions ? 15 
Pray get you out. 

Corio. Away. 

2 Ser. Away ? Get you away. 

Corio. Now th’art troublefome. 

2 Ser. Are you fo braue : Ile haue you talkt with anon 20 


Enter 3 Seruingman, the 1 meets him. 


3 What Fellowes this? 


1 A {trange one as euer I look’d on): I cannot get him 
out o’th’houfe : Prythee call my Mafter to him. 
3. What haue you to do here fellow? Pray you auoid 25 


the house. 
Corto. 
3. What are you ? 
Corio. A Gentleman. 


10, 11. As verse, ending lines: you 
...doore? Sta. Hal. 

12, 13. As verse, ending lines: en- 
tertainment...Coriolanus. Cap. et seq. 

13. Enter] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 
Re-enter Cap. et cet. 

Seruant] Servingman Cam.+, 
Craig, Neils. 

14. his] no Huds. il. 

15. entrance] enterance F >. 

19. th’art] Coll. Wh. i. th’ F.F;. 
thowrt Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Cap. Dyce, Sta. Cam.+, 
Huds. Neils. thou art Varr. Ran. Mal. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Del. Hal. 
Ktly, Craig. 


Let me but ftand,I will not hurt your Harth. 


29 


21. 3) three F,. a third Roweet seq. 
Seruingman] F,, Cam.+, Craig, 
Neils. Seruingmen F;F,. Servant 
Rowe et cet. 
the...him.] Om. Cap. Dyce ii, 
Words. Huds. ii. Re-enter the first. 
Craig. 
1] F,. second Ktly. firft F,F, 
eticet, 
22. 3]3 Ser. Rowe et seq. (subs.) 
throughout. 
Fellowes] Fellow’s FjF, et seq. 
eee. ia) $2 Sp (Coho, Ph eae, Uae 
Huds. ii. Sec. Serv. Dyce ii, Words. 
24. o’th’| othe Cap. et seq. 
[Retires. Cam.+, Craig, Neils. 


12, 13. in being Coriolanus] STEEVENS: That is, in having derived that sur- 


name from the sack of Corioli. 


15. Companions] MALONE: ‘Companion’ was formerly used in same sense as 


we now use the word fellow. 
Schmidt (Lewx.), s. v. 4.] 


[For other examples of this use of the word see 


27. Let me... your Harth] SreeveNns: Here our author has both followed 
and deserted his original, the old translation of Plutarch. The silence of the 


servants of Aufidius did not suit the purposes of the dramatist. 


Source of the Plot, p. 636.—Ep.] 


[See Appendix: 


426 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. v. 


3 A maru’llous poore one. 30 
Corio. True,fo I am. 
3 Pray you poore Gentleman, take vp fome other {ta- 
tion : Heere’s no place for you, pray you auoid : Come. 
Corio. Follow your Funétion, go, and batten on colde 
bits. Pujfhes him away from him. 35 
3. What you will not? Prythee tell my Maifter what 
a {trange Gueft he ha’s heere. 
2 And I fhall. Exit fecond Seruingman. 
3. Where dwel’ft thou ? 
Corio. Wnder the Canopy. 40 
3, Wnder the Canopy ? 
Corto, A; 
3 Where’s that ? 
Corio. I’th City of Kites and Crowes. 
3 I’th City of Kites and Crowes ? Whatan Affe it is, 45 
then thou dwel’ft with Dawes too ? 
Corio. No, I ferue not thy Mafter. 
3 How fir?Do you meddle with my Mafter ? 
Corio. I, tis an honefter feruice, then to meddle with 49 


34, 35. As two lines, verse, ending: 38. fecond Seruingman.] Om. Cap. 
go,...bits. Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. et seq. 
Varr. Sing. Coll. Del. Dyce, Wh. i. 39, 46. dwel’ ft] dwellest Var. ’03, ’13, 
35- from him.] Ff, Rowe,+, Cam.+, 21, Sing. i, Knt, Dyce, Sta. Hal. Glo. 
Om. Cap. et cet. Words. Huds. ii. 
36. you will] will you Pope,+, Varr. 44, 45. I’th] I the Cap. et seq. 
Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, 47-50. No...Miftris] Om. Words. 


Coll. Del. Sta. Hal. 


32, 33. Pray you poore Gentleman... auoid: Come] CAPELL: It was not 
observ’d in due time that these lines were metrical, and should be broken as 
follows: 

‘Pray you, poor gentleman, 
Take up some other station: here’s no place 
For you; ’pray you, avoid.’ 


The speech following perfects the line; and the five speeches preceding are metrical 
likewise. 

34. batten} SkraT (Dict., s. v. 1): To grow fat; to fatten (Scand.). Shakespeare 
has batten (Intrans.), Hamlet, III, iv, 67, (‘Could you on this fair mountain leave 
to feed And batten on this moor’]; but Milton has ‘battening our flocks,’ Lycidas, 
1. 29. Strictly, it is Intransitive. Icelandic: batna, to grow better, recover; as 
distinguished from beta, trans., to improve, make better. 

40. the Canopy] Compare Hamlet, II, ii, 311, ‘This most excellent canopy, the 
air, look you, this brave o’erhanging firmament.’ 


ACT IV, SC. v.] 


CORIOLANUS 427 


thy Miftris : Thou prat’ft,and prat’ft, ferue with thy tren- 50 


cher : Hence. 


Beats him away 


Enter Auffidius with the Seruingman. 


Auf. Where is this Fellow ? 


2 Here fir, I’de haue beaten him like a dogge, but for 


difturbing the Lords within. 


55 


Auf.Whence com’{t thou? What woldft y?Thy name? 


50, 51. Thou...Hence] As verse Cap. 
Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
Coll. Dyce, Sta. Hal. Ktly, Wh. Cam. 
Huds. 

51. Beats] beating Cap. 

52. with the Seruingman] with a 
Seruingman. F;F,, Rowe,+. with the 
second Servingman. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 


Cam.+. and second Servant. Cap. et 
cet. 

56, 57. As prose Han. Del. Wh. 
Huds. i. 

56. What] And what Cap. 

woldft ¥] F,. wouldest thou Cap. 

Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Huds. ii, 
Chamb. would’ft thou F;F, et cet. 


(subs.). 


51. Beats him away] FRaANg¢ois-Victor Huco (Inirod., p. 30, foot-note): 
Shakespeare here departs from his authority in order that there may be inflicted 
on the fugitive hero the supreme humiliation of a quarrel with lackies —VERPLANCK: 
Shakespeare has, in this rough brawl with the servants, deviated from Plutarch, 
and lessened the grand, simple effect of the original story, which Thomson, in his 
Coriolanus, had the good taste to preserve by making his hero silently and quietly 
place himself muffled up upon 

‘—the sacred hearth, 
Beneath the dread protection of its Lares, 
And sit majestic there,’ [I, iii]. 


In the rest of the scene Shakespeare works up the story of the old Greek biog- 
rapher with equal spirit and fidelity. [The good taste manifested by Thomson in 
the present instance, which, by the way, may be open to question, is not a con- 
spicuous feature of his turgid and undramatic treatment of the story. He was, 
however, influenced by Livy’s version rather than by that in North’s Plutarch.— 
Ep.] 

56-60. Whence com’st thou? ...name my selfe] BayFieLp (p. 200): The 
Folio continues Coriolanus’s speech [after ‘know’st me,’ |. 58] as prose. Editors 
follow it in the first two lines, and then, making ‘If Tullus’ a short line, rightly 
go on in verse. Their arrangement is, however, hardly satisfactory, for a tripody, 
a tetrapody, and a monopody in succession form a sequence that is, I should say, 
without parallel. The fact is, nothing can be done with the lines if the Folio’s 
abbreviations are retained, and I would read and arrange as follows: 

‘Auf. Whence | com’st thou? What | wouldst thou? 
Thy | name? Why | speakest | not? 
Speak, man: | what is thy | name? 
Cor. (Unmuffling]. If, | Tullus, 
Not | yet thou | knowest | me, and | seeing me, dost not 
Think me for the | man I | am, ne | cessi | ty 
Commands me name myself.’ 
Line 59 is now of the common type which has a trochaic beginning immediately 


428 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACTIIV."SCa.We 
Why f{peak’{t not? Speake man : What’s thy name ? 57 
Corio. If Tullus not yet thou know’ft me, and feeing 


57-61. As verse, ending lines: Tul- 
lus...me...neceffitie..name? Cap. Var. 
73, Ending lines: Tullus...doft not... 
necefitie..name? Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing, Coll. Dyce, 
Hal. Cam.+, Words. Craig. Ending 
lines: name?...know’ fi me...am...name? 


ceffitie...name? Ktly. 

57. [peak’ft...What’s] speakest...W hat 
is Ktly. 

58-60. As verse, ending lines: me... 
am...felfe, and reading 1. 58: yet thou 
know’ st me not Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. 


Sta. Ending lines: name?...me...ne- 58. [unmuffling. Cap. et seq. 


followed by a resolution. ‘If’ properly occupies a whole foot because of the pause 
made after it for emphasis. Such a pause must be made in delivering the words 
whatever arrangement be adopted, and since it is important, the poet naturally 
so provided for it. Coriolanus, who speaks in the low and lifeless tones of a broken 
man, begins very slowly and with great solemnity, his manner forming a fine 
dramatic contrast to the impatiently sharp and jerky sentences of Aufidius. It is 
a telling situation if well acted, and Shakespeare, even though he was Shakespeare, 
must have expended some little thought upon it. I cannot forbear drawing at- 
tention to the perfect rhythm of the three lines uttered by Coriolanus. But for 
the trifling inversion ‘not yet thou know’st’ for ‘thou knowest not yet’ the sen- 
tence has the balance of natural and musical prose; indeed, if it were not marked 
off into lines, many would take it for prose, as did the reviser of the Folio. Yet it 
is verse of Shakespeare’s very best for rhythm and balance, and the art shown 
in one point in particular, the quadrisyllabic ‘Think me for the,’ is worth noting. 
He might have written ‘Think me the | man I | am,’ but he does not. With 
that sense of dramatic fitness which never ceases to amaze us, just in order that 
Coriolanus may not too obviously be speaking in verse at such a moment, he 
modifies the ordinary rhythm by the introduction of the single syllable ‘for,’ and 
the disguise is as complete as it need be. It would be difficult to find a better 
illustration of the ideal of blank verse at which he aimed in his mature work— 
prose that is also verse, and verse that is not, and yet might be, prose. 

56. Whence ... Thy name] Aspott (§ 510): Apparent lines of four accents 
can sometimes be explained by giving the full pronunciation to contractions, such 
as s for eth, ’d for ed, Il for will, ’t for it, &c; or they are lines of three accents with 
a detached foot. [Of the present line Abbott remarks, ‘But the pauses between 
the abrupt questions may be a sufficient explanation.’] 

56. What ... Thy name?] CoLirer gives as a corrected reading of his F., 
wouldst thou. Inasmuch as F, reproduces the abbreviated form of ‘thou’ as in 
F,, both in my copy and the Methuen facsimile, it would seem that Collier’s Folio, 
1632, has here an omission of this symbol, and the omission was supplied by the 
MS. Corrector.—Dyce (ed. ii.) queries: ‘and what wouldst thou? say, thy name?’ 
In this he is, however, partly anticipated by Capell. See Text. Notes —Ep. 

58. If Tullus, etc.] This speech and the following fifty lines are taken with 
but few verbal changes from North’s Plutarch. Shakespeare evidently recog- 
nised that it would be difficult to improve upon the virility and the simplicity of 
Sir Thomas’s translation, not from the Greek, be it remembered, but from Amyot’s 
French. On this point Trench (p. 59) has this to say: ‘A word or two on this 
subject of Shakespeare’s obligations to Plutarch. Nowhere, as is abundantly 
clear, does our English poet make any pretence of concealing these, but adopts 


ACT IV, SC. v.] CORIOLANUS 429 


me, doft not thinke me for the man I am, neceffitie com- 59 
mands me name my felfe. 

Auf. What is thy name ? 

Corio. A name vnmuficall to the Volcians eares,| 


And harfh in found to thine. 63 
59. doft] Do Johns. Han. Warb. Johns. 

thinke| take Rowe,+, Cap. 62. Volcians] Volceans F 3.  Vol- 

for] To be Cap. Var. ’73. Om. {cians F,. Volscian Pope, Theob. Han. 

Huds. ii. Warb. Johns. Volces’ Var. ’78, ’85, 

61. [Servants retire. Cap. et seq. Ran. Volscian’s Knt i. Volcians’ 


62. the] Om. Rowe, Pope, Theob. Cap. et cet. 


all, even to the very words of Sir Thomas North, with only such transposition and 
alteration as may be necessary to give them a rhythmical cadence and flow. He 
is too rich, and conscious that he is too rich to fear the charge of endeavoring to 
pass himself off for such by the laying of his hands upon the riches of others. And 
here, indeed, is what properly determines whether an author should be adjudged 
by us as a plagiarist or not. The question is not what he appropriates, but what 
proportion these appropriations bear to that which he has of his own; whether, 
if these were withdrawn and resumed by their rightful owners, they would leave 
him poor. If such would be the result, then, however few and small these may have 
been, we can count him no better than a daw, passing himself off for a peacock 
by the aid of feathers stuck into his plumage, and not properly his own. If, on the 
other hand, all revindication by others of what is theirs would leave him essen- 
tially as rich as he was before, his position in the world of poetry is not affected by 
the bringing home to him of any number of these appropriations. We need not 
fear to allow Shakespeare to be tried by this rule; and we can only admire that 
noble confidence in his own resources which left him free without scruple to adopt 
and to turn to his own uses whatever he anywhere found which was likely to prove 
serviceable to the needs of his art.’ [See Appendix: Source of the Plot, p. 636.—Ep.] 

59. thinke me for the man I am] C. & M. CowbENn CrLarkeE (Shakespeare): 
We believe that the present passage affords one of those instances . . . where 
Shakespeare employs a usually known form of expression while introducing his 
own special word into it; thus giving the effect of the usually known expression 
together with the effect and the additional meaning of his own introduced word, 
so that here, ‘think me for the man I am,’ while giving the impression of ‘take me 
for the man I am,’ conveys also the impression of ‘recognize me in thy thought 
for the man I am.’ It is this skilful method of employing conventional and well- 
known phrases in an unconventional and original manner which forms one of the 
merits of Shakespeare’s peculiar and masterly style——W. A. Wricut: Compare 
Meas. For Meas., V, i, 144, ‘I know him for a man divine and holy.’ And 
Henry VIII: Il, iv, 45: 

‘The king, your father, was reputed for 
A prince most prudent.’ 


59, 60. commands me name] For other examples wherein the ‘to’ of the infini- 
tive is omitted after certain verbs see ABBOTT, § 349. Compare Jonson, Sejanus, 
III, i, ‘If the Senate still command me serve.’ 

62. the Volcians eares! CoLLter (ed. ii.): We would fain read ‘Volscian ears.’ 
(See Text. Notes.—Ep.| 


430 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Auf. Say,what’s thy name ? 


[ACT Iv, SC. v. 


Thou haft a Grim apparance, and thy Face 65 
Beares a Command in’t : Though thy Tackles torne, 
Thou fhew’ft a Noble Veffell : What’s thy name ? 


Corio. 
Auf. 
Corio. 


Prepare thy brow to frowne:knowft y me yet? 
I know thee not ? Thy Name ? 
My name is Caius -Martius, who hath done 70 


To thee particularly, and to all the Volces 
Great hurt and Mifchiefe : thereto witnefle may 


My Surname Coriolanus. 


The painfull Seruice, 


The extreme Dangers,and the droppes of Blood 
Shed for my thankleffe Country,are requitted : 75 
But with that Surname, a good memorie 


64. what's] What is Warb. Johns. 
Var 73. 

65. apparance] F;. apparence Beech- 
ing (Falcon Sh.). 

66. Command] Commanne F;. 

Tackles] Tackle’s F, et seq. 

68. yet?] not Rowei. yet. [throwing 
off the rest of his disguise. Coll. ii. 

69. not?] not; F3F,. 

70. Martius] Matius F.. 

71. Volces] F., Var. ’78, 785, Ran. 


F;. Volfcies F,, Rowe.  Volscians 
Pope, +. Volcians Cap. Volsces Coll. 
et seq. 

73. Surname] Sir-name F,. Sirname 
Rowe,+. 

75. my] thy Ff. 

requitted| requited F3F,. 

76. Surname,| Ff, Rowe, Han. sir- 
name. Pope, Theob. Warb. sirname; 
Johns. surname; Cap. et seq. 

memorie] memorial Han. 


Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt. Volcies 


65. apparance] W. A. Wricut: Thus spelt also in Henry V. (Folio): V, ii, 76: 
‘Why, what reade you there, 
That have so cowarded and chac’d your blood 
Out of apparance.’ 


It was probably a recognized form of the word, and represented the pronunciation, 
for Cotgrave gives: Apparance: f. An apparance, or appearance? In Florio’s 
Worlde of Wordes (1598) we find: ‘Appariscenza, comelines, seemlines, appar- 
ance.’ And Huloet, Abcedarium (1552), has: Apparance. Species. [MURRAY 
(NV. E. D.,s. v. Apparence, =ance). The earlier form of the substantive answering 
to adjective apparent, which was subsequently refashioned as Appearance, by 
assimilation to the verb appear. Apparence survived, especially in senses which 
connected it more closely with apparent than appear, till c1686.] 

66, 67. Though thy Tackles . . . a Noble Vessell] StEEvVENS: A corresponding 
idea occurs in Cymbeline: 


‘The ruin speaks, that sometime 
It was a worthy building,’ [IV, ii, 354]. 
76. memorie] Jonson: The Oxford editor [Hanmer], not knowing that ‘mem- 
ory’ was used.at that time for memorial, alters it to memorial—W. A. WRIGHT: 
Compare V, vi, 188 and As You Like It, II, iii, 3, where Adam addresses Orlando: 


‘O my sweet master! O you memory 
Of old Sir Rowland!’ 


ACT IV, SC. v.] CORIOLANUS 431 


And witneffe of the Malice and Difpleafure 77 
Which thou fhould’ft beare me, only that name remains. 

The Cruelty and Enuy of the people, 

Permitted by our daftard Nobles, who 80 
Haue all forfooke me, hath deuour’d the reft : 

And fuffer’d me by th’voyce of Slaues to be 

Hoop’d out of Rome. Now this extremity, 

Hath brought me to thy Harth, not out of Hope 

(Miftake me not) to faue my life : for if 85 
I had fear’d death, of all the Men i’th’World 

I would haue voided thee. But in meere fpight 


To be full quit of thofe my Banifhers, 88 
78. should’ fi] could’ st Ff, Rowe, Pope. Han. et cet. 
me,| me. Coll. Del. Sing. ii, Ktly, 83. out of] out Var. ’78. 
Wh. i, Huds. i, Neils. 86. 7’th’] Vthe Cap. et seq. 
81. hath] have Coll. MS. (ap. Cam.). 87. I would haue voided) I would 
82. th’] the Cap. et seq. have avoided Rowe ii. I’d have avoided 


83. Hoop’d| Fi, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Pope,+, Cap. J would have ’voided 
Warb. Del. i, Cam. Cla. Whoop’d Var. ’78 et seq. 


And King Lear, IV, vii, 7, ‘These needs are memories of those worser hours.? In 
the present passage Shakespeare has taken the word from North’s Plutarch. 

81. hath deuour’d] W. A. WricuT: The verb is singular because the subject, 
‘cruelty and envy,’ is regarded as expressing a single idea, and is probably equiva- 
lent to envious cruelty. So in Psalm \xxxiv, 2, ‘My heart and my flesh crieth out 
for the living God.’—VeErRiTy compares Milton, Lycidas, 6, 7, ‘Bitter constraint 
and sad occasion dear, Compels me to disturb your season due.’ 

83. Hoop’d] W. A. Wricut: See As You Like It, III, ii, 203, ‘And yet again 
wonderful, and after that, out of all hooping!’ Both forms [hoop’d and whoop’d] 
were in use. Sherwood’s English-French Dictionary at the end of Cotgrave (1632) 
gives: ‘To hoope or hallow. Huyer, huier,’ and Cotgrave has, ‘Forhuer. To 
whoope, shout, hoot, hollow; cry whoo-whup.’ Earlier still we find in Palsgrave 
(1530), ‘I whoope, I call. le huppe.’ 

86, 87. of all the Men . . . voided thee] STEEVENS: So in Macbeth, ‘Of all men 
else I have avoided thee’ [V, viii, 4]. 

87. voided] RoLFE: We think the Folio spelling should be retained. In Golding’s 
Caesar we read, ‘they decreed that all such as eyther by sicknes or age were un- 
necessary for the warres, should void the towne’; that is, leave the town, not clear 
the town, make it void or empty, as they were but a part of the population. Com- 
pare Barrow, ‘watchful application of mind in voiding prejudices’; that is, avoid- 
ing them (not casting them out as Webster defines it). The same author has 
voidance =avoidance, ‘the voidance of fond conceits,’ etc. 

87, 88. in meere spight ... my Banishers] Case (Arden Sh.): The intense 
pride of Coriolanus cannot endure the consciousness of being a living monument 
to the triumph of his banishers. He will escape it by death and be ‘full quit’ of 
them that way if he cannot have revenge: Some, however, take ‘quit of’ as 
equivalent to revenged upon, as we say ‘quits with,’ and as Hortensio says ‘quit 


432 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. v. 


Stand I before thee heere : Then if thou haft 

A heart of wreake in thee, that wilt reuenge go 
Thine owne particular wrongs, and ftop thofe maimes 

Of thame feene through thy Country, fpeed thee ftraight 

And make my mifery ferue thy turne : So vie it, 

That my reuengefull Seruices may proue 


As Benefits to thee. For I will fight 95 

Againft my Cankred Countrey, with the Spleene 

Of all the vnder Fiends. But if fo be, 97 
go. that wilt] Ff, Rowe, Pope, cet. 

Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Varr. Ran. 94, 95. That...to thee.] Om. Bell. 

Mal. Dyce i, Wh. Cam.+, Neils. 95. thee.] thee; Cap. et seq. 

and with Cap. conj. that will Han. et 96. Cankred] canker’d Pope et seq. 


with’ in Tam. of Shr., III, i, 92, ‘if once I find thee ranging Hortensio will be quit 
with thee by changing.’ 

go. heart of wreake] JoHNSON: That is, a heart of resentment.—STEEVENS: 
‘Wreak’ is an ancient term for revenge. So in Tit. And., ‘Take wreak on Rome 
for this ingratitude,’ [IV, iii, 33] -WRicHT compares the corresponding passage in 
North’s Plutarch: ‘If thou hast any heart to be wrecked of the injuries thy enemies 
have done thee, speed thee now.’ 

go. that wilt] Dyce (ed. i.): Here ‘wilt’ is usually changed to will, but the 
expression is elliptical—that wilt, i. e., that thou wilt——LIsr. (ed. ii.): The Folio 
has ‘wilt’; which in my former edition I inconsiderately retained and defended— 
—W. A. Wricut: That is, that thou wilt. ‘Wilt’ is probably retained here in 
consequence of the immediately preceding ‘thee,’ just as above, l. 70, ‘My name 
is Caius Marcius who hath done,’ &c. 

QI, 92. maimes Of shame] JOHNSON: That is, disgraceful diminutions of terri- 
tory.—Dettus: Rather, those devastations which the Romans had inflicted on 
the Volscian territory, and which, like to open wounds, should be stopped. So 
Coriolanus speaks a little further on, ‘Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country’s 
breast..—CasEe (Arden Sh.): Those ignominious, dishonouring mutilations, or 
disablements (possibly territory annexed or cities occupied or, it may be, tribute. 
The verb ‘stop’ implies inflictions that continue, such as these would be, rather 
than the mere marks of invasion). See z Henry IV: IV, i, 42, ‘Your father’s 
sickness is a maim to us.’ 

92. seene through thy Country] DeIcHton: Which your country shows from 
one end to the other, though there seems to be also the idea of rents in a garment.— 
CasE: It may be as Deighton puts it. Or, just possibly, Coriolanus intends to 
contrast the ‘particular wrongs’ of Aufidius (his personal beatings) with the 
shames which he apprehends through his country, and which affect him as being 
hers. 

96, 97. the Spleene Of all the vnder Fiends] STEEVENS: Shakespeare, by im- 
puting a stronger degree of inveteracy to subordinate fiends, seems to intimate, 
and very justly, that malice of revenge is more predominant in the lower than the 
upper classes of society. This circumstance is repeatedly exemplified in the con- 
duct of Jack Cade and other heroes of the mob—MAatone: This appears to me 


ACT IV, SC. v.] CORIOLANUS 433 


Thou dar’ft not this, and that to proue more Fortunes 98 
Th’art tyr’d, then in a word, I alfo am 
Longer to liue moft wearie : and prefent 100 


My throat to thee, and to thy Ancient Malice : 
Which not to cut, would fhew thee but a Foole, 
Since I haue euer followed thee with hate, 

Drawne Tunnes of Blood out of thy Countries brett, 


And cannot liue but to thy fhame, vnleffe 105 
It be to do thee feruice. 
Auf. Oh Martius, Martius; 107 
99. Th’art] Thowrt Rowe, Pope, Neils. Thou art Cap. et cet. 
Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Dyce, Sta. 102. Foole] Fooole F2. 
Wh. Cam.-+, Del. ii, Words. Huds. ii, 103. followed] follow’d F, et seq. 


to be refining too much. ‘Under fiends’ in this passage does not mean, as I con- 
ceive, fiends subordinate, or in an inferior station, but infernal fiends. So in 
I Henry VI: 


‘Now, ye familiar spirits that are call’d 
Out of the powerful regions under earth,’ &c., [V, iii, 10]. 


In Shakespeare’s time some fiends were supposed to inhabit the air, others to 
dwell under ground, &c.—STEEvENs: As Shakespeare uses the word underskinker 
to express the lowest rank of waiter, I do not find myself disposed to give up my 
explanation of under fiends. Instances, however, of ‘too much refinement’ are 
not peculiar to me.—BosweEtLt: ‘Under fiends,’ I apprehend, means no more than 
the common phrase, the fiends below. 

98. Thou ... and that] For other examples wherein that is omitted and then 
inserted see ABBOTT, § 285. 

107. Auf. Oh Martius, Martius] VireHorr (Sh’s Coriolan.: Sh. Jahrbuch, 
iv, 51): Aufidius recognizes Coriolanus as soon as he casts aside his disguise; 
he feigns for a short time not to know him in order to bring his hated opponent 
to a circumstantial declaration, and under cover of this to form his own plan as 
to how he will treat him. However warm and sincere his first speech, beginning 
‘Oh Martius, Martius,’ may sound, it is byno means honest. The superabundance 
of his expressions and his bearing towards Coriolanus as the 3 Servant describes 
it [ll. 199-210] plainly point to dissimulation and duplicity. It is, indeed, quite 
usual with Shakespeare, if he portrays love and faith in the form of hypocrisy, 
to choose the most glaring colours. As regards Aufidius it is for the first time, at 
the close of the play, when his hated opponent lies dead before him, that we may 
trust his words when he says: 

‘My rage is gone 
And I am struck with sorrow.’— 


Verity (Student’s Sh.): We have noted how closely Shakespeare has followed 

North’s Plutarch in the speech assigned to Coriolanus. Here we should observe 

how he has amplified the very brief reply of Tullus Aufidius given by Plutarch. 
28 


434 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT Iv, SC. v. 


Each word thou haft {poke, hath weeded from my heart 108 


A roote of Ancient Enuy. 


If Iupiter 


Should from yond clowd fpeake diuine things, IIo 
And fay ’tis true; I’de not beleeue them more 


Then thee all-Noble Martius. 

108. thou haft] thow’st 
(—Var. ’73). 

tro, 112. Lines end: /ay...thee... 
twine Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Coll. ii, Hal. Ktly, Schmidt, 
Chambers, Beeching (Falcon Sh.). 

r10. yond] F2, Coll. Del. Dyce, Wh. 
Cam.+, Huds. i, Craig, Neils. yon’ 


Pope,+- 


Let me twine 112 


Cap. yon F;F, et cet. 

110. diuine things] to me things divine 
Pope, + (—Var. ’73). 

111. them] him Var. ’73, Words. 
Huds. ii, Walker. 

112. Let] O let Cap. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Hal. 

twine] entwine Ktly. 


This amplification is part of Shakespeare’s general treatment of the Aufidius 
element, which bulks far more important in the play than in the history.— 
S. Brooke (p. 239): Aufidius is the instrument of the fate of Coriolanus. He 
shows the bottom of his heart in his answer to his former enemy. But his envy 
is only rooted out because he sees his ancient foe in the gloom of misfortune. 
Envy is too subtle a devil to leave the heart so soon, and Shakespeare knows its 
fashions. Moreover, with envy ever goes hate. It is envy’s boon companion. And 


Aufidius’s hate was deep: Where I fad hie were it 


At home, upon my brother’s guard, even there 
Against the hospitable canon, would I 
Wash my fierce hand in’s heart,’ [I, x, 27-30]. 


Such a hatred does not die; it only sleeps for a time. We have a comfortable way 
of thinking that our vices have gone when the reason of them is momentarily taken 
away. It was agreeable to Aufidius at first to be magnanimous to his rival, to be 
able to say ‘Poor Coriolanus,’ and to give him half his power. That flattered 
his patronising pride. But the moment Coriolanus again took precedence, envy 
came back with seven more devils than before; and in the resurrection of this envy 
and its results lies the rest of the drama. The envy of Aufidius is deepened by the 
pride of Coriolanus, who will, even in exile, have the first place; and he uses this 
insolent pride, as the Tribunes used it before, to work the ruin of Coriolanus, who 
had learned nothing from all his pain and follies, who was still himself his only law, 
his only right. 

110-112. Should from . . . Martius] Dyce opines that the metrical arrange- 
ment of these lines as given in the Folio is doubtless right, though 1. 110 ‘is cer- 
tainly mutilated.’ He speaks with decided disfavor of Pope’s insertion (see Text. 
Notes). In his ed. ii. he queries: ‘Should from out yonder cloud speak divine 
things?’ quoting in support of this Hamlet, III, ii, 392, ‘yonder cloud.’ Both 
Wordsworth and Hudson, ed. ii, adopt Dyce’s conjectured emendation in their 
texts.—Ep.—Lettsom (ap. Walker, Crit., iii, 209, foot-note): The arrangement 
of the old copies is probably right, but has not a word, perhaps cleaving, 
dropped out before ‘cloud’?—Assorr (§ 505) classes ]. 110 as among those of 
four accents, as thus: 


‘Shéuld from | yond cléud, | spéak di | vine things.’ 


ACT IV, SC. v.] CORIOLANUS 435 


Mine armes about that body, where againft 113 
My grained Afh an hundred times hath broke, 
And fcarr’d the Moone with fplinters : heere I cleep II5 
113. where againft] where—against ii. (MS.), Dyce, Sta. Hal. Wh. i, 
Pope,+, Cap. Coll. iii, Words. Neils. Words. scared Sing. ii, Coll. iii. 
115. fcarr’d] scar’d Rowe ii,+, Cap. 115. cleep] clip Pope et seq. 


Varr. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Knt, Coll. 


‘But,’ he adds, ‘I should prefer: 
“Tf Jupiter 
Shéuld from | yond cloud, | spéak di | vine things | and sdy 
“Tis true,’ — | I’d nét | believe | them mére 
Than thée, | all-né | ble Mércius.” 


Shakespeare would have written “‘things divine,” not ‘divine things,” at the end 
of a verse.’ [See Text. Notes, ll. 110-112.—Ep.]—E. K. Caampers (Warwick Sh.): 
I have adopted Schmidt’s [Capell’s?] arrangement of these lines. In any case, 
one line must be octosyllabic, and the best dramatic effect is gained by letting it 
bel. 112. The place of the missing foot is filled up by a long pause, during which 
the old rivals gaze into each other’s eyes. 

113. where against] For other examples of this transposition of the preposition 
see ABBOTT, § 203. 

115. scarr’d the Moone] Capeti: Hyperbole is the natural speech of exulting, 
and Aufidius has several strains of it, but this the most signal; one of its words 
is ambiguous in its present orthography, and the old spelling should have been 
kept to, which is ‘scarr’d’; the face (as we call it) of the moon has something of 
that appearance, and hence rose the idea.—MAtoneE: The old copy has ‘scarr’d,’ 
and, I believe, rightly. The modern editors read scar’d, that is, frightened, a 
reading to which the following line in Richard III. certainly adds some support, 
“Amaze the welkin with your broken staves,’ [V, iii, 341] —STEEVENS: I read with 
the modern editors, rejecting the Chrononhotonthological idea of scarifying the 
moon. The verb to scare is again written scarr in the old copy of Winter’s Tale, 
‘They have scarr’d away two of my best sheep,’ [III, iii, 66] —J. Mrrrorp (Gentle- 
man’s Maga., Nov., 1844, p. 186): See Drayton in England’s Parnassus, p. 450: 


‘The staves, like yce, in shivers small did flie 
The splints, like byrds, did mount into the skie.’— 


De tvs, following Malone, compares, for a like hyperbole, Winter’s Tale, ‘The ship 
boring the moon with her mainmast,’ ITI, iii, 92 —W. S. WALKER (Text, etc., iii, 
212): The word meant is undoubtedly scared. Scare is frequently, if not uniformly, 
spelt scarre in the Folio, e. g., Tro. & Cress., near the end, last page, col. 1, ‘Scarre 
Troy out of it selfe.’ Rom. & Jul., V, iii, p. 79 (erratum for 77), col. 1, ‘But then 
a noyse did scarre me from the Tombe.’ And 1 Henry VI: I, vi, p. 100, col. 1, 
‘The Scar-Crow that affrights our Children so.’ And Steevens’s note.—VERITY 
(Student’s Sh.): ‘Scarred’ is stronger and more vivid than the suggested altera- 
tion, scared.—Casr (Arden Sh.): Scar’d was adopted by Rowe without any ad- 
vantage from exchanging one hyperbole for another. The heavens or heavenly 


436 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. v. 


The Anuile of my Sword, and do conteft 116 
As hotly,and as Nobly with thy Loue, 
As euer in Ambitious ftrength, I did 

Contend againft thy Valour. Know thou firft, 


I Jou’d the Maid I married : neuer man 120 
IIQ-124. Know...Threfhold] | Mne- 119. Know thou firft,) Know thou, 
monic Warb. jirst Rowe. 


bodies are often in danger in Marlowe’s Tamburlaine the Great (both parts), see, 
for example, Pt ii, II, iv. (ed. Cunningham, 39 6): 


‘And with the cannon break the frame of heaven 
Batter the shining palace of the sun, 
And shiver all the starry firmament.’ 


115. cleep] That is, embrace. See Shakespeare passim. 

116. The Anuile of my Sword] SrrrveNns: Aufidius so styles Coriolanus be- 
cause he had formerly laid as heavy blows on him as a smith strikes on his anvil. 
So in Hamlet: 


‘And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall 

On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne 

With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword 
Now falls on Priam,’ I, ii, 511-514.— 


W. A. WricHT repeats, substantially, this explanation, adding: ‘It would have 
been unnecessary to explain this but for the proposal to read handle instead of 
“anvil” (Green, Shakespeare and the Emblem Writers, p. 327). 

119. Know thou first,] THEOBALD (Letter to Warburton, 12 Feb., 1729, in Nichols, 
ii, 487): I would point it, ‘—Know thou, first,’ etc. Though I loved my wife 
before I married her, yet was I not more rejoiced to see her first enter my house, 
than I now am in seeing thee here. [See Text. Notes. Drttus also offers the 
same suggestion.—Ep.]—SrauntTon: ‘First’ apparently means here noblest, as in 
i, 39, where Volumnia calls Coriolanus ‘my first son.—Rev. Jonn HuNTER: We 
believe that Aufidius simply means that he would first mention the sincerity of 
his love for the maid he married in order to give effect to the protestation of his 
delight at seeing Coriolanus. [C. & M. CowpEN CLARKE interpret this use of 
‘first’ here in the same sense as does Hunter.—Ep.]—P. A. Danie: Read, ‘Know, 
thou first!’ 7. e., thou first of men. Aufidius addresses Coriolanus throughout in 
superlatives: ‘All noble Marcius!’ ‘Thou noble thing!’ ‘Thou Mars!’ ‘Most 
absolute sir.’ Compare i, 39, where Volumnia addresses Coriolanus as ‘My first 
son.’ 

120, 121. neuer man Sigh’d truer breath] Matonr: The same expression is 
found in our author’s Ven. & Ad., ‘T’ll sigh celestial breath, whose gentle wind 
Shall cool the heat of this descending sun,’ [l. 189]. Again, in The Two Noble 
Kinsmen, by Shakespeare and Fletcher, 1634: 


‘And vow that lover never yet made sigh 
Truer than I,’ [V, i, 125]. 


ACT IV, SC. v.] CORIOLANUS 437 


Sigh’d truer breath. But that I fee thee heere 121 
Thou Noble thing, more dances my rapt heart, 

Then when I firft my wedded Miftris faw 

Beftride my Threfhold. Why, thou Mars I tell thee, 124 


124. Beftride] Beftrid Ff. 


121-124. But that I see thee ... my Threshold] F. Harris (The Man Sh., 
p. 242): Aufidius was not sucha friend to Coriolanus that we can take his protesta- 
tion seriously. The argument is evidently a stock argument to Shakespeare; a 
part of the ordinary furniture of his mind; it is like a fashionable dress of the 
period—the wearer does not notice its peculiarity. The truth is, Shakespeare 
found in the literature of his time, and in the minds of his contemporaries, a 
fantastically high appreciation of friendship with a corresponding disdain for 
love as we moderns understand it. In Wit’s Commonwealth, 1598, we find, ‘The 
love of men to women is a thing common and of course, but the friendship of man 
to man, infinite and immortal.’ Passionate devotion to friendship is a sort of 
mark of the Renaissance, and the words ‘love’ and ‘lover’ in Elizabethan English 
were commonly used for ‘friend’ and ‘friendship.’ Moreover, one must not for- 
get that Lyly, whose euphuistic speech affected Shakespeare for years, had handled 
this same incident in his Campaspe, where Alexander gives up his love to his rival, 
Apelles. Shakespeare, not to be outdone in any loyalty, sets forth the same fan- 
tastical devotion in his sonnets and plays. 

123, 124. my wedded Mistris . .. my Threshold] STEEVENS: Shakespeare was 
unaware that a Roman bride, on her entry into her husband’s house, was prohibited 
from bestriding his threshold; and that, lest she should even touch it, she was 
always lifted over it. Thus Lucan, li, 359, ‘Tralata vetuit contingere limina 
planta.—C. & M. CowpbEn CLarKE (Shakespeare): So far from proving that 
Shakespeare was ‘unaware’ of the custom in question, we think that the present 
passage shows that he knew the classic ceremonial of receiving a bride at the 
entrance of the bridegroom’s house, of her being borne across the threshold, and 
of its having been thus specially marked as the barrier which separated her from 
her girlhood’s condition, and which introduced her to the new sphere of a wedded 
home and wedded duties. We think that Shakespeare’s making Aufidius advert 
thus particularly to the point when first he beheld his wedded mistress cross his 
threshold, betokens the poet’s perfect consciousness that there was an ancient 
solemn rite connected with the circumstance; and that the word ‘bestride’ is not 
to be taken literally for ‘step across,’ but is to be taken as meaning ‘pass over,’ 
‘cross over.—W. A. Wricut: A Roman bride was carried over the threshold of 
her husband’s house. We know nothing of the custom of Antium in this respect, 
nor did Shakespeare. [Asa comment on Steevens’s patronising and pompous note 
this, by Wright, is, I think, much better than that by the Cowden Clarkes. Wright 
plainly shows that the question does not merit serious discussion.—Ep.]—Miss 
C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Aufidius is in an ecstatic mood, and must use an 
energetic word for the act of entering a threshold. Besides he has already passed 
from his figure of speech as to his Bride crossing his threshold to this new-beloved 
warrior putting the first foot over, in the act of entrance, according to Roman 
custom, without touching the threshold itself, which it was unlucky to do. Hence 
brides were carried over. 


438 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. v. 


We haue a Power on foote : and I had purpofe 125 
Once more to hew thy Target from thy Brawne, 

Or loofe mine Arme for’t : Thou haft beate mee out 

Twelue feuerall times, and I haue nightly fince 

Dreamt of encounters ’twixt thy felfe and me : 

We haue beene downe together in my fleepe, 130 
Vnbuckling Helmes, fitting each others Throat, 

And wak’d halfe dead with nothing. Worthy Martius, 


Had we no other quarrell elfe to Rome, but that 133 
127. mine] my Rowe ii,+. 133- no other quarrell elfe| no quarrel 
beate] bear Rowe i. else F;F,, Rowe,+, Var. 778, ’85, Ran. 
129-132. Dreamt...nothing] Mne- Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Cam.+, Dyce ii, 
monic Warb. Words. Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. no 


other quarrel Var. ’73. 


126, 127. Once more... . for’t] Dr1cHton: I had resolved either to hew your 
shield from your brawny arm, or lose my own arm in the attempt. ‘Once more’ 
does not mean that he had ever done so before, but that he was once more to 
make the attempt, and either succeed in it or perish. 

126. thy Target from thy Brawne] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): That is, 
Shield from off his arm, so brawny that he calls it ‘Brawne.’ The emphasis in 
speaking should fall on the pronoun ‘mine’ in the next line, to give the contrast 
between the arm holding the shield and mine own arme wresting it from thine. 

127. Thou hast beate mee out] Murray (JN. £. D., s. v. Out. 6. c): To a full 
end, completely, quite, outright. 1598. Barret: Theor. Warres, 110: ‘Such as be 
slaine right out.’ 1610. Tempest, I, ii, 41, ‘Then thou wast not Out three yeeres 
old.—Detius: ‘Out’ does not qualify ‘beat’; but rather ‘twelve several times.’ 
[Thus also both Schmidt and Wright. Schmidt (Lex., s. v. Out. 5) gives several 
other examples of this word wherein it bears the sense completely, fully. Whitelaw 
and Rolfe connect ‘out’ with what precedes.—ED.] 

129. thy selfe] Scammr (Coriolanus): Shakespeare always writes thyself, and 
similar forms, as two separate words, and in many places it would be more con- 
formable to pay attention to this orthography, since thyself is often with him only 
equivalent to thy person or thou. For example, ‘he whom next thyself of all the 
world I loved,’ [Tempest, I, ii, 68]. This will be more apparent if an adjective 
stands before self, ‘Your high self . . . you have obscured With a swain’s wear- 
ing,’ Winter’s Tale, [IV, iv, 7]. 

132. wak’d halfe dead with nothing] MALonE: Unless the two preceding lines 
be considered as parenthetical, here is another instance of our author’s concluding 
a sentence as if the former part had been constructed differently. ‘We have been 
down’ must be considered as if he had written, I have been down with you, in 
my sleep, and wak’d, &c.—KEIGHTLEY (Expositor, p. 370): [After ‘nothing’] 
there is apparently a line lost; or there is an aposiopesis—W. A. Wricut: The 
construction of the sentence goes back to |. 128, ‘I have nightly since,’ etc., as if 
“We have been down . . . throat’ were in a parenthesis. 

133. to Rome] W. A. Wricut: That is, against Rome. See Much Ado, Il, 
i, 243: ‘The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you.’ And Twelfth Night, II, iv, 
248, ‘I am sure no man hath any quarrel to me.’ [See also ABport, § 187.] 


“ é 
i, 
it, 
7 , 
ia 
p 


RR ek Pe aes 


a ES Se ee a Nee a ee 


ACT IV, SC. v.] CORIOLANUS 439 


Thou art thence Banifh’d, we would mufter all 


From twelue, to feuentie : and powring Warre 135 
Into the bowels of vngratefull Rome, 
Like a bold Flood o’re-beate. Oh come, go in, £37 


137. o’re-beate] F,. o’re-beat F;F;. o’er-beat Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. i, Knt, Cam.+, Neils. Verity. o’er-bear her Ktly. ’er-bear’t Wh. (Z. Jack- 
son). o’er-bear Rowe et cet. 


137. o’re-beate] STEEVENS: Though this is intelligible, and the reading of the 
old copy, perhaps our author wrote o’er-bear. So in Othello, ‘Is of such flood- 
gate and o’er-bearing nature,’ [I, iii, 56. This note does not appear until 
Steevens’s own edition, 1793, and is another lamentable example of his lack of 
attention to the texts of his predecessors; the more remarkable in this instance, 
as in the Variorum of 1773, which he himself edited with Johnson, the text, follow- 
ing Rowe, reads: ‘o’er-bear.’—Ep.]—CotureEr: The Folio, 1623, belonging to the 
Duke of Devonshire [has o’rebeate], while that of Lord Francis Egerton has ‘o’er- 
beare.’ Southern altered the word in his copy of the 4'* Folio (now the property 
of Mr Holgate) to ‘o’er-bear.—W. N. Lerrsom (ap. Dyce ii.), in reference to 
Jackson’s proposal ‘o’er-bear’t,’ remarks: ‘The pronoun, I think, can scarcely be 
dispensed with here, but it should be her.—Kr1GHTLEY (Expositor, 370) makes 
the same suggestion, and so reads in his text—R. G. WuitTE: Every copy of the 
First Folio that I have seen has ‘Like a bold flood ore beate’; but Mr Collier says 
that the late Earl of Ellesmere’s has ‘ore beare.’ I believe this to be the result of 
mere accidental injury to the ¢ or the wearing of it before that copy was printed. 
Corrections of the Folio as it was going through the press are not to be assumed on 
such evidence. I have yet to find indications that they were made in any instance. 
Countless examples might be produced in contemporary volumes in which what 
appears to be an 7 in one copy of a book is plainly a / in another—CAMBRIDGE Epp. 
(Note ix.): Mr Staunton, to whom [the Earl of Ellesmere’s First Folio] has been 
lent, has kindly consulted it for us, and says that the reading there is ‘o’re beate’ 
or ‘o’re beare.’ He adds: ‘It is difficult to say which. There are other cases in 
the Folio where the ¢ and x so nearly resemble each other that I can hardly decide 
between them.’—C. & M. CowpENn CLARKE (Shakespeare): Rowe’s correction seems 
to us to be obviously right, not only from the sense required here, but by the evi- 
dence afforded by another passage of similar meaning in the present play, where 
Shakespeare has used ‘o’er-bear’ and not ‘o’er-beat’: 


‘Whose rage doth rend 
Like interrupted waters, and o’erbear 
What they are used to bear,’ [III, i, 299-301]. 


In Pericles, V, i, 195, we find: 


‘Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me 
O’erbear the shores of my mortality.’ 


It may either be that ‘’t’ is understood in this sentence, or that ‘o’erbear’ is here 
treated as a neuter verb, of which treatment (an active verb as a neuter verb) 
we have other instances in Shakespeare—Scumipt (Coriolanus): ‘O’erbear’ is 
evidently the correct reading of a word in the Folio, which may there be regarded 


440 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. v. 


And take our Friendly Senators by’th’hands 138 
Who now are heere, taking their leaues of mee, 
Who am prepar’d againft your Territories, 140 


Though not for Rome it felfe. 

Corio. You bleffe me Gods. 

Auf. Therefore moft abfolute Sir, if thou wilt haue 
The leading of thine owne Reuenges, take 
Th’one halfe of my Commiffion,and fet downe 145 
As beft thou art experienc’d, fince thou know’ ft 
Thy Countries ftrength and weakneffe, thine own waies 
Whether to knocke againft the Gates of Rome, 


Or rudely vifit them in parts remote,| 149 
138. th’ hands] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. Dyce ii, Words. One Pope,+. The 
the hands Cap. et cet. one Cap. et cet. 
145. Th’one] Ff, Rowe, Coll. Wh. i, 147. wates] ways; Rowe et seq. 


as o’erbeat. The latter word is nothing; o’erbear, on the other hand, is the proper 
expression for a flood which overflows the bank and bears all before it. The 
lack of an object is somewhat remarkable-—W. A. Wricut follows the Folio 
reading in the Cambridge, Globe, and Clarendon editions, though in the last of 
these he remarks that ‘o’erbear’ is ‘perhaps the true reading,’ quoting in support 
of it the passage from Othello given by Steevens, the passage from Pericles given 
by the Clarkes, and adding as his own contribution: 
“The ocean, overpeering of his list, 
Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste, 
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head, 
O’erbears your officers,’ Hamlet, IV, v, 102.— 
KINNEAR (p. 326): Both sense and metre require Jackson’s correction ‘o’er-bear’t.’ 
Compare IV, vi, 97-101: 
‘A fearful army, led by Caius Marcius 
Associated with Aufidius, rages 
Upon our territories; and have already 
O’erborne their way, consumed with fire, and took 
What lay before them.’— 


Verity (Student’s Sh.): The metaphor of waves beating against and breaking 
down a barrier is a natural one, and the object of the verb is easily supplied. There 
seems no need for the change o’er-bear—Gorpon: ‘O’er-bear’ is Shakespeare’s 
regular word for the action of a flood. We had it in III, i, 300. We have it again 
in IV, vi, 100. O’erbeat is possible, but unlikely. 

142. You blesse me Gods] Verity (Student’s Sh.): It would have been a far 
greater ‘blessing’ if the Volscians had slain him at once. 

149. in parts remote] Miss C. PorTER (First Folio Sh.): In this cunning manner 
Shakespeare meets and makes use of the facts as told by Plutarch, who describes 
first a foray led by Coriolanus, before Rome itself was besieged. Otherwise 
Shakespeare leaves out the foray: that he knew he did and artistically why he did, 
this mention may persuade us. 


ACT IV, SC. v.] 


CORIOLANUS 441 


To fright them, ere deftroy. But come in, 150 
Let me commend thee firft, to thofe that fhall 


Say yea to thy defires. 


A thoufand welcomes, 


And more a Friend, then ere an Enemie, 
Yet Martius that was much. Your hand: moft welcome. 


Exeunt 155 


Enter two of the Seruingmen. 
1 Heere’s a {trange alteration ? 157 


150. them...deftroy] them...destroy 
them Ktly. ’em...destroy ’em Id. conj. 
destroying Anon. ap. Cam. 

come in] come, come in Rowe ii, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Cap. 
now come in Lettsom. sir, come in 
Words. come thou in Huds. ii. 

151. commend] comment F.F3. 

155. Exeunt.] Exeunt Coriolanus 
and Aufidius. Cap. et seq. 

156-239. Om. Bell. 


156. Enter...Seruingmen] Enter two 
Servants. Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Om. Cap. et seq. The 
two Servingmen come forward. 
Cam.+, Dyce ii, Words. Huds. ii, 
Craig, Neils. 

157,158. I, 2] 1 Ser., 2 Ser. Rowe,+ 
(throughout). 3 S., 2S. Cap. (through- 
out). 

157. Heere’s...) Cam.+, Dyce ii, 
Words. Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. [ad- 


ScENE v. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. vancing] Here’s... Cap. et seq. 


I50. ere destroy. But come in] E. K. Caampers (Warwick Sh.): Various 
emendations have been proposed to avoid the octosyllabic line. But Aufidius 
ends his address with a dramatic pause; the rest of the speech is spoken as the 
two move towards the inner door of the hall. [To the same effect ABBort, § 484, 
remarks that ‘the last syllable of “destroy” seems prolonged.’—En.] 

156. Enter... Seruingmen] S. BRooxE (p. 240): It is characteristic of Shake- 
speare’s work that he introduces here, after Aufidius and Coriolanus meet, a 
humorous episode in the talk of the servants. The two leaders deceive themselves 
into an apparent friendship, each ignorant of what their passions of pride and 
envy are sure to produce. But the servants see much further than their masters. 
They see the folly of both these great men and laugh at it, especially at that of 
their master. Their talk is an excellent piece of wit, of human nature; and also 
of their class, when they are mere hirelings. They have not a vestige of care for 
their country, only for their own interests. ‘Let me have war, say I; it exceeds 
peace as day does night; it’s sprightly, waking, full of vent. . . . The wars for 
my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap as Volscians.’ And it may be that 
Shakespeare meant a satire on the class feeling of the nobility of Rome by noting 
something of the same kind in a different and a lower class.—BRADLEY (Shake- 
spearean Tragedy, p. 61): Sometimes [towards the close of a] Tragedy we find 
humourous or semi-humourous passages. On the whole such passages occur 
most frequently in the early or middle part of the play, which naturally grows more 
sombre as it nears the close; but their occasional introduction in the Fourth Act, 
and even later, affords variety and relief, and also heightens by contrast the tragic 
feelings. For example, there is a touch of comedy in the conversation of Lady 
Macduff with her little boy. Purely and delightfully humourous are the talk and 
behaviour of the servants in that admirable scene where Coriolanus comes dis- 
guised to the house of Aufidius; of a more mingled kind is the effect of the discussion 


442 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. v. 


2 By my hand, I had thoght to haue ftroken himwith 158 
a Cudgell, and yet my minde gaue me, his cloathes made 
a falfe report of him. 160 
1 What an Arme he has, he turn’d me about with his 
finger and his thumbe,as one would fet vp a Top. 
2 Nay,I knew by his face that there was fome-thing 
in him. He had fir,a kinde of face me thought, I cannot 
tell how to tearme it. 165 
1 He had fo,looking as it were, would I were hang’d 
but I thought there was more in him, then I could think. 
2 So did I,Ile be fworne : He is fimply the rareft man 


i th’world. 169 
158. firoken] F., Schmidt. strooken 166. were,] were— Rowe et seq. 

Cap. /ftrucken FF, et cet. 169. vth’] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. 7the 
159. Cudgell] crudgel Pope ii. Cap. et seq. 


gaue] misgave Anon. ap. Cam. 


between Menenius and the Sentinels in V, ii.; and in the very middle of the supreme 
scene between the hero, Volumnia, and Virgilia, little Marcius makes us burst out 
laughing (V, iii.). 

158. I had thoght] Scumrpt (Coriolanus): Shakespeare uses ‘I had thought’ 
rather than ‘T thought,’ and quite according to rule, inasmuch as the thought was 
abortive, and, conformably, the infinitive perfect follows; especially in the sense: 
I meant, I was about, I had a mind, where the intention has not come to fruition; 
for example, ‘I had thought, sir, to have held my peace,’ Winter’s Tale, [I, ii, 28]; 
‘I had thought to have yerked him here under the ribs,’ Othello, [I, ii, 5]. 

158. stroken] Compare, for this participial formation, Jul. Ces., III, i, 200, 
‘How like a deer, strucken by many princes, Dost thou lie here.’ 

I59. my minde gaue me] Braptey (NV. E. D., s. v. give. vi, 22.): Of one’s 
‘heart,’ mind, conscience, etc.: To suggest to one that; in unfavourable sense, to 
misgive. Also to prompt (one) to do something. Also, quasi-impersonal, /¢ 
gives me = I have a foreboding. 1551. Robinson tr. More’s Utopia: I. (Arber), 
67, ‘To speke truelye as my minde geueth me.’ [Compare also Henry VIII: 
V, ili, 109, ‘My mind gave me, In seeking tales and informations Against this 
man. ... Ye blew the fire that burns ye.—Wricut compares I, ix, 68, ‘To us 
that give you truly’; but this, I think, is not strictly parallel to the present pas- 
sage; ‘give’ there means rather to represent, as in Ant. & Cleo., I, iv, 39, ‘men’s 
reports Give him much wrong’d.’—Ep.] 

164, 165. I cannot tell how to tearme it] W. A. WricHT: The servants find it 
as difficult to express themselves as Bottom did on waking from his transfor- 
mation. 

168-179. He is simply... an assault too] CAsr (Arden Sh.): This is an 
ambiguous passage. The Folio reading in l. 175 gives the adversative ‘but’ in 
‘but a greater soldier than he’ a more natural effect, and makes the first serving- 
man unmistakably mean Aufidius as the greater soldier in his first speech. What 
follows is ambiguously expressed, and throws doubt on the reading by creating a 
strong probability that Coriolanus is intended, but yet it is not inconsistent with 


ACTILV, SC. Ve] CORIOLANUS 443 


1 I thinke he is : but a greater foldier then he, 170 
You wot one. 

2 Who my Mafter ? 

1 Nay, it’s no matter for that. 

2 Worth fix on him. 

1 Nay not fo neither : but I take him to be the greater 175 
Souldiour. 

2 Faith looke you,one cannot tell how to fay that:for 
the Defence of a Towne, our Generall is excellent. 


1 I, and for an affault too. 179 

170, 171. As prose Pope et seq. 172. Who] Who? Cap. et seq. 

171. one] on Dyce, Wh. Glo. Words. 174. on] of Johns. Cap. Varr. Mal. 
Huds. ii, Craig, Chambers, Beeching. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt. 


a preference of Aufidius as the profession by both servants up to the intervention 
of the Third. On the other hand, Dyce’s text [l. 171], if adopted—and it has very 
strong claims—extends the verbal ambiguity by not distinguishing which—in 
‘but a greater soldier than he you wot on’—is the greater soldier, as well as which, 
in]. 174, is worth six of the others. But looking at the whole, including what follows 
after the entry of the Third Servingman, the first impression on reading Dyce’s 
text, namely, that Coriolanus is intended in both cases, is confirmed. The am- 
biguity in Il. 170-172 arises from the fact that the words ‘but a greater soldier 
than he you wot on’ may mean a qualification of assent to the rare excellence of 
Coriolanus in this particular sense, ‘but you know of a greater soldier than he is’ 
(the sense of the Folio text), ‘but (also he’s) a greater soldier than one you know of.’ 
“You wot on (or of)’ is a form of expression used to avoid an imprudent or indecent 
reference. See Two Gentlemen, IV, iv, 30, ‘’twas I did the wrong you wot of,’ 
Meas. for Meas., II, i, 155. 

171. You wot one] E. K. Cuampers (Warwick Sh.): Laccept Dyce’s emendation 
because both the servants seem agreed that Coriolanus is the better soldier— VERITY 
(Student’s Sh.): You know the one I mean; ‘wot on’ (Dyce) would be simpler, or ‘you 
wot the one.’—PacrE: There is no making any consistent sense of what the serving- 
men say. By reason of their bewilderment, and from fear of speaking disparag- 
ingly of their own master (which may be high treason), their opinions are expressed 
confusedly, and in such manner as to mean either that Coriolanus is better than 
Aufidius, or vice versa. Further on they grow bolder.—Brrcuinc (Falcon Sh.): 
The ‘but’ is certainly in favour of the Folio reading. What follows is in favour 
of Dyce’s correction; and there would be no need of mystery if the servant 
were praising his master. In I, ii, 6 the Folio has ‘thought one’ for ‘thought 
on.’ 

174. Worth six on him] Detrus: In the opinion of the 2°d Servant Aufidius 
outweighs six such as Coriolanus. The following ‘him’ in ‘I take him’ refers to 
Aufidius.—W. A. Wricut: Delius interprets this as referring to Aufidius, and so 
we should infer from the First Servingman’s reply, but it is not consistent with 
what follows, ll. 191, 192, and perhaps Shakespeare did not intend that the ser- 
vants should, in their admiration for Coriolanus, always express the same opinion 
of their master. 


444 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. v. 
Enter the third Seruingman, 180 
3 Oh Slaues, I can tell you Newes, News you Rafcals 
Both. What, what,what? Let’s partake. 
3 I would not be a Roman of all Nations; I had as 
liue be a condemn’d man. 
Both. Wherefore? Wherefore? 185 
3. Why here’s he that was wont to thwacke our Ge- 
nerall, Caius Martius. 
1 Why do you fay, thwacke our Generall ? 
3 I do not fay thwacke our Generall, but he was al- 
wayes good enough for him 190 
2 Come we are fellowes and friends : he was euer too 
hard for him, I haue heard him fay fo himfelfe. 
1 He was too hard for him directly, to fay the Troth 
on’t before Corioles, he fcotcht him,and notcht him like a 
Carbinado, 195 


180. Enter...Seruingman.] Enter a 
third Servant. Rowe,+, Varr. Ran. 
Wh. i. Re-enter first Servant. Cap. 
Re-enter third Servingman. Cam.+, 
Craig, Neils. Re-enter third Servant. 
Mal. et cet. 

181. 3] 1. S. Cap. (throughout). 


184. liue] lief Cap. Wh. i, Huds. 
Words. Craig. lieve F, et cet. 

193. Troth] truth Steev. Varr. Sing. 
Knt, Coll. Del. Sta. Hal. Ktly, Wh. 
Huds. i, Craig. 

194. Corioles] Coriolus Ff, Rowe. 
Corioli Pope et seq. 


182, 185. Both] 2. 3. Cap. 1 & 2 
Ser. Mal. et seq. 


195. Carbinado] Carbonado F,. 


191. Come we are fellowes and friends] DrE1cuTon: As fellows and good friends 
we may say among ourselves what we really think; and so I do not hesitate to 
admit that Marcius was always more than a match for our master. The Second 
Servant, who a short while before had asserted that Aufidius was worth six of 
Marcius, now that he finds which way the wind is blowing and that he need not be 
afraid of being betrayed to his master, turns round and admits that, after all, his 
master was no match for Marcius. 

193. directly] W. A. Wricut: Like ‘simply,’ in 1. 168, ‘directly’ here means 
plainly, manifestly. Compare Othello, II, i, 221, ‘Desdemona is directly in love 
with him.” [ApBorr compares Jul. Ce@s., III, iii, 22, ‘Directly, I am going to 
Ceesar’s funeral,’ where ‘directly’ means without ambiguity; Schmidt (Lex.) also 
takes it here in this sense, which is, I think, more consistent than the meaning 
plainly, as given by Wright.—Ep.] 

193. to say the Troth] W. A. Wricut: That is, éruth. In this sense it is always 
used with ‘speak’ or ‘say.’ See Mid. N. Dream, II, ii, 36, ‘And to speak troth 
I have forgot our way.’ And Cymbeline, V, v, 274, ‘Now fear is from me, Ill speak 
troth.’ Elsewhere it signifies faith, as in Mid. N. Dream, II, ii, 42, ‘One heart, 
one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.’ In a very considerable number of passages 
‘troth’ has been changed by modern editors to truth. 

194. scotcht] W. A. WricuT: That is, cut, slashed, as a cook slashes a beefsteak. 
Compare Macbeth, Il, ii, 213, “We have scotch’d the snake, not kill’d it,’ where 


ACT TV, SC. v.] CORIOLANUS 445 


2 And hee had bin Cannibally giuen, hee might haue 196 
boyld and eaten him too, 

1 But more of thy Newes. 

3. Why he is fo made on heere within, as if hee were 
Son and Heire to Mars, fet at vpper end o’th’Table : No 200 
queftion askt him by any of the Senators, but they ftand 
bald before him. Our Generall himfelfe makes a Miftris 
of him, Sanctifies himfelfe with’s hand, and turnes vp the 
white o’th’eye to his Difcourfe. But the bottome of the 
Newes is, our Generall is cut i’th’middle,& but one halfe 205 


196. And hee had| And had he 200. o’th’] o’the Cap. et seq. 
Rowe,+. An he had Cap. et seq. 203. hand] hands Rowe ii,+. 
197. boyld| Ff. boil’d Rowe. boiled 204, 205. o’th’;1’th’] o’the; in the Cap. 


Schmidt, Chambers. broil’d Pope et cet. et seq. 


Theobald substituted ‘scotch’d’ for ‘scorch’d,’ the reading of the folios. The sub- 
stantive occurs in Ant. & Cleo., IV, vii, 10, ‘I have yet Room for six scotches more.’ 

197. boyld] Craic (Arden Sh.): There is no necessity to change ‘boiled’ to 
broiled, with Pope, as is usually done. The Second Servant wants to vary the 
metaphor a little; he means he was at his mercy.—CasE (Jbid.): All the same, 
broiling naturally follows scoiching, and boiling does not. 

199. he is so made on] That is, so much is made of him. 

200. set at vpper end o’th’Table] ‘In an Elizabethan mansion the hall, where 
the meals took place, was furnished with an upper table capable of extension, 
known as a draw-table, at which the family sat, chairs being set for the master 
and mistress of the house and stools for the younger members of the household 
and ordinary guests; along the sides of the hall were ranged plain long tables and 
forms for the servants and poorer dependents. When guests could not find room 
at the high table, the upper ends of the side tables were used for their accommoda- 
tion, a salt being placed where the distinction of class commenced.? Percy 
Macquoid, The Home (Shakespeare’s England, vol. ii, ch. xx, p. 123). 

200. at vpper end] For other examples of the omission of the after prepositions 
in adverbial phrases see ABBortT, § go, or Shakespeare passim. 

200-202. No question askt... but... before him] Cratc (Arden Sh.): 
That is, as to precedency; no one objected—E. K. CaampBers (Warwick Sh.): 
‘But’ is here a conjunction, uwnless.—DeE1cHTON: So far from venturing to show 
any doubt in their welcome by putting questions to him, the senators stand bare- 
headed in his presence—Case (Arden Sh.): Of the three interpretations, in all 
probability the last and simplest is the right one. 

203. Sanctifies himselfe with’s hand] Jounson: Alluding, improperly, to the 
act of crossing upon any strange event.—MAtoneE: I rather imagine the meaning 
is, ‘considers the touch of his hand as holy; clasps it with the same reverence as a 
lover would clasp the hand of a mistress.’ If there be any religious allusion, I 
should rather suppose it to be the imposition of the hand in confirmation.— 
STEEVENS: Perhaps the allusion is (however out of place) to the degree of sanctity 
anciently supposed to be derived from touching the corporal relic of a saint or 
martyr. 


446 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. v. 
of what he was yefterdav. For the other ha’s halfe, by 206 
the intreaty and graunt of the whole Table. Hee’l go he 
fayes, and fole the Porter of Rome Gates by th’eares. He 
will mowe all downe before him, and leaue his paflage 
poul’d. 210 
2 And he’s as like to do’t,as any man I can imagine. 
3 Doo’t? he will doo’t : for look you fir, he has as ma- 
ny Friends as Enemies : which Friends fir as it were, durft 
not \looke you fir) fhew themfelues (as we terme it) his 
Friends, whileft he’s in Dire¢titude. 215 


1 Direétitude? What’s that ? 


206. yefterdav] Fy. 

208. fole] Ff. sowl Dyce, Cam.+, 
Del. ii, Words. Huds. ii, Neils. sowle 
Rowe et cet. 

209. all downe] down all Rowe,+, 
Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. i, Coll. Del. Sta. Hal. Wh. i, 


Huds. i, Craig. 

210. poul’d| poll’d Rowe,+, Cap. 
Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Ktly, Wh. 
Cam. i, Huds. Neils. polled Var. ’03 
et.cet. 

215, 216. Directitude] 
Coll. ii. (MS.). 


Dejectitude 


208. sole... by th’eares] SrrEvENs: So Heywood, Love’s Mistress, 1636, 
‘Venus will sowle me by the ears for this,’ [III, i. (ed. Pearson, vol. v, p. 137)]. 
Perhaps Shakespeare’s allusion is to Hercules dragging out Cerberus.—W. A. 
Wricut: Major Moor in his Suffolk Words and Phrases gives, ‘Sowle. ‘To seize 
a swine by the ear. ‘Wool ’a sowle a hog?” is a frequent enquiry into the quali- 
fications of a dog. . . . Shakespeare happily uses the word in the exact Suffolk 
sense. ‘‘He’ll go, he says, and sowle the porter of Rome’s gate by the ears,” 
Coriolanus,1V, v. The last three words would be redundant to a Suffolk audience.’ 
It is found also in Hunter’s Hallamshire Glossary, and according to Forby, Vocab- 
ulary of East Anglia, it is used in Norfolk and pronounced sol/. Ray records it 
as a Lincolnshire word, and it is given also in Peacock’s Dialect of Lonsdale and 
in Atkinson’s Cleveland Glossary, as well as in the list of words at the end of 
Marshall’s Rural Economy of Yorkshire. 

208. Rome Gates] Compare ITI, iii, 130; for other examples of like noun com- 
pounds see, if needful, ABBort, § 430. 

210. poul’d] JoHNson: That is, bared, cleared—W. A. WricuT: ‘To poll’ is, 
properly, to cut the hair, as in 2 Samuel, xiv, 26, in the description of Absalom, 
‘And when he polled his head, for it was at every year’s end that he polled it.’ 
{Steevens and Malone give several other examples of this use of the word.—Ep.] 

215. Directitude] Matone: I suspect the author wrote, Whilst he’s in dis- 
creditude, a made word, instead of discredit. He intended, I suppose, to put an 
uncommon word into the mouth of this servant which had some resemblance to 
sense, but could hardly have meant that he should talk absolute nonsense.— 
Cotter (Notes & Emendations, etc., i, 360): Perhaps the following [emendation] 
may be considered as belonging to the class of literal errors superabundant in both 
folios. ‘Directitude’ is clearly a misprint for dejectitude, a rather fine word, used 
by the third Servant to denote the disastrous condition of the affairs of Coriolanus, 
which might be just as unintelligible to the first Servant as ‘directitude.’? The 
blunder must have been produced by the scribe having written deiectitude with an 


ACT IV, SC. v.] CORIOLANUS 447 


3 But when they fhall fee fir,his Creft vp againe,and 217 
the man in blood, they will out of their Burroughes (like 
Conies after Raine) and reuell all with him. 219 


219. reuell] reveal Rowe ii. ravel Daniel. 


z instead of a 7.—SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, p. 223): What does the passage gain by 
the change of ‘directitude’ for the equally non-descript word dejectitude? There 
can be no doubt that the Servant is intended to blunder in the use of ‘directitude,’ 
which he mistakes for discreditude—T. MommsEn (Der Perkins Folio, p. 274): 
If, as Malone contends, the Servant was not intended to speak absolute nonsense, 
but merely to use an unusual word, wherein lay the source of amusement for 
the audience? The servant is not speaking pompous nonsense, like another Don 
Armado, but rather the purest servant-jargon, the prime characteristic of which 
is the use of strange words and the being baffled by them. When Mr Singer says 
that ‘directitude’ is a blunder of the Servant’s for discreditude—which Malone 
suggests as a manufactured word—we really do not know whether Mr Singer or 
the Servant is the cleverer. The faulty utterance of the one dictating or the reader 
could, with an intentionally corrupt word, easily lead to yet greater corruption, as 
in Aristophanes, where a dialect is being spoken Leo (Coriolanus): The Servant 
himself does not understand the word that he uses or else he would show his erudi- 
tion by answering the question. At all events he means dejectitude, the emendation 
of Collier’s MS. Corrector.—C. & M. CowbENn CriarxkeE (Shakespeare): The Third 
Servant, wishing to use a fine long word and intending to coin some such term as 
discreditude from discredit, or dejectitude from dejectedness (Shakespeare using the 
words discredit, deject, and dejected in such a way as to countenance either of these 
suggestions), blunders out his grandiloquent ‘directitude.? The author’s relish 
of the joke is pleasantly indicated by his making the First Servant repeat the word 
amazedly, as if not knowing what to make of it, and ask its meaning; and then 
making the Third Servant avoid the inconvenient enquiry by not noticing it, but 
running on with his own harangue. [Were the Clarkes unaware that in both of 
their proposed readings they were anticipated? It is unusual for them to omit 
mention of the source of emendations given by them.—Ep.]—WauitELAw: That is, 
whilst he holds straight on the way prescribed to him, like a beast submitting to 
be driven. The word is no doubt an intentionally clumsy coinage (whether from 
direct or from direction) on the pattern of rectitude —Scummpt (Coriolanus): Rather 
than Malone’s discreditude we might suggest, with regard to what follows, a per- 
version of decrepitude. The word should remain clearly unintelligible, in comical 
contrast to the simple phrase ‘show themselves his friends,’ but spoken with 
the excusatory expression ‘as we term it.’—W. A. Wricut: It is quite useless to 
speculate as to what the serving man intended, for he merely uses a sounding word 
without well knowing what it meant. That Shakespeare ‘could hardly have meant 
that he should talk absolute nonsense’ does not seem to be quite so impossible as 
Malone imagined. Menenius certainly imposes on the mob with words of his own 
coinage.—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): High-flown nonsense, of course, as the 
question of the next line shows. Malone’s guess that he meant ‘discreditude’ is a 
good one; but not that the author so wrote, because it is clear that the author 
meant to show the fellow losing his little meaning in a heap of words, and capping 
his climax with ambitious senselessness. 

218, 219. like Conies after Raine] Joun Burroucus, in his Notes by the Way, 


448 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. v. 


1 But when goes this forward : 220 
3 To morrow, to day, prefently, you fhall haue the 
Drum ftrooke vp this afternoone : ’Tis as it were a parcel 
of their Feaft,and to be executed ere they wipe their lips. 
2 Why then wee fhall haue a ftirring World againe : 
This peace is nothing, but to ruft Iron,'encreafe Taylors, 225 
and breed Ballad-makers. 
1 Let me haue Warre fay I, it exceeds peace as farre 
as day do’s night : It’s {prightly walking, audible,and full 228 


222. flrooke] F.F3.  strook Cap. ing Cap. Ktly. 
Struck F, et cet. 228. {prightly walking,| Ff, Rowe, 
225. nothing] worth nothing Fy, Schmidt. spritely walking Sta. 
Rowe,+ (— Var. ’73). good for noth- sprightly, waking, Pope et cet. 


ed. v, p. 188, says: ‘In our northern or New England states we should have to 
substitute woodchucks for rabbits [in this passage], as our rabbits do not burrow, 
but sit all day in their forms, under a bush or amid the woods, and as they are not 
seen moving about after a rain, or at all by day; but in England Shakespeare’s 
line is exactly descriptive.’ 

21g. reuell all with him] Scamupt (Coriolanus): ‘Revel’ bears originally per- 
haps not the idea of rioting, but rather the freedom from all restraint. ‘Was’t 
you that revelled in our parliament?’ asks Margaret in 3 Henry VI: I, iv, 71, of 
the captured York who had borne himself there as though master. In the same 
play ‘his father (z. e., Henry V.) revelled in the heart of France,’ [II, ii, 150]. In 
the present passage, therefore, the word does not convey a meaning in any way 
in contradiction to the picture of the conies after rain. 

225. This peace is nothing] STEEVENS: I believe a word or two have been lost. 
Shakespeare probably wrote, This peace is good for nothing, but, &c. [Steevens, 
as usual, ignores the work of his predecessor Capell, see Text. Notes—Enp.] 

228. audible] Scumipt (Coriolanus): Not hearable, but rather with the active 
sense, hearing well, having an open ear. 

228, 229. full of Vent] Jounson: That is, full of rwmour, full of materials for 
discourse—COLLIER (Notes & Emendations, etc., p. 360): ‘Full of vaunt,’ says the 
old corrector, with much greater plausibility, full of deeds deserving to be vaunted. 
—SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, etc., p. 223): This isa very unnecessary change; Johnson 
is right in his explanation. Shakespeare puts this word into the mouth of the 
conceited Servant to ridicule it, as he, in common with Ben Jonson, has done in 
Twelfth Night. Thus in Volpone, II, i, ‘Pray you what news, sirs, vents our climate?’ 
—T. MommseEn (Der Perkins Folio, p. 237): The common reading may well be re- 
tained, with comparison to, ‘Thou didst make tolerable vent of thy travel,’ All’s Well, 
II, iii, 213, although it is possible that here also vawnt should be written. The 
other passages, such as, for example, Twelfth Night, IV, i, 12, where ‘to vent one’s 
folly’ is merely a translation of ‘to vent one’s secret,’ are not admissible, and it 
should be noted, in the first place, that vent absolute, equivalent to wtterence, 
rumour, is admissible, as Johnson explains it. Vawnt is excellently appropriate-— 
Later: I am of the opinion that the Folio reading is best elucidated by, full of 
fresh air, in contradistinction to the dull condition of peace-—Dertrus: ‘Full of 
vent’ means everything whereby one may throw aside all restraint, that which 


; 
| 
| 


ACT IV, SC. v.] CORIOLANUS 449 


[228, 229. full of Vent] 

furnishes opportunity for a man to sow his wild oats——STauNTON: ‘Vent’ is 
voice, utterance—BAyNES (Edinburgh Review, Oct., 1892, p. 339): The phrase 
‘full of vent’ has so perplexed the critics that more than one has proposed to sub- 
stitute for it “full of vaunt.’ The Folio text is, however, perfectly accurate, and 
peculiarly expressive, although it has never yet been correctly explained. The 
only explanation attempted is that of Johnson, repeated by subsequent editors, 
that ‘full of vent’ means ‘full of rumour, full of materials of [for] discourse.’ This, 
however, is a mere conjecture, and not a happy one, as it altogether misses the 
distinctive meaning of the phrase. ‘Vent’ is a technical term in hunting to express 
the scenting of the game by the hounds employed in the chase. Both noun and 
verb are habitually used in this sense. Their exact meaning and use will be made 
clear by an extract or two from Turberville’s translation of Du Fouilloux, the popular 
manual of hunting in Shakespeare’s day. The first extract refers to the wiles and 
subtleties of the hart when keenly pressed in the chase: ‘therewithall he wil lie flat 
downe vpon his bellie in some of their layres, and so let the houndes ouershoote 
him: and bicause they should have no sent of him, nor vent him, he wil trusse 
all his .iiii. feete vnder his belly and wil blow and breath vpon ye grounde in some 
moyst place: in such sorte yt I haue seene the houndes passe by such an Harte 
within a yeard of him and neuer vent him,’ [Booke of Hunting, Tudor and Stuart 
Library, p. 111]. Further on the author, speaking of the hart, says again ex- 
pressly, ‘When he smelleth or venteth anything, we say he hath this or that in the 
wind.’ In the same way, when the hound vents anything, he pauses to verify the 
scent, and then, full of eager excitement, strains in the leash to be after the game 
that is thus perceived to be a-foot. The following extract from the rhyming report 
of a huntsman upon sight of a hart in pride of grease illustrates this: 


‘Then if my Prince, demaund what head he beare, 

I answere thus, with sober words and cheare: 

My liege I went, this morning on my quest, 

My hound did sticke, and seemde to vent some beast,’ [Op. cit., p. 96]. 


The use of the noun is exemplified in another hunting rhyme, or huntsman’s soliloquy, 
entitled ‘The Blazon of the Hart,’ which is of special interest from the vividness of 
the picture it brings before us: 


‘And whiles I seeke his slotte where he hath fedde 
The sweete byrdes sing, to cheare my drowsie hedde 
And when my Hounde, doth streyne vpon good vent, 
I must confesse, the same dothe me content,’ [p. 60]. 


The technical meaning and use of the word in these passages is sufficiently clear, 
and it will be seen how happily Shakespeare employs it. To strain at the lyam 
or leash ‘upon good vent’ is in Shakespeare’s phrase to be ‘full of vent,’ or in 
other words, keenly excited, full of pluck and courage, of throbbing energy and 
impetuous desire, in a word, full of all the kindling stir and commotion of antic- 
ipated conflict. This is not only in harmony with the passage, but gives point 
and force to the whole description. War is naturally personified as a trained 
hound roused to animated motion by the scent of game, giving tongue, and strain- 
ing in the slips at the near prospect of the exciting chase. This explanation justifies 
the reading of the Folios, ‘sprightly walking, audible, full of vent,’ or at least 


29 


450 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT tv, SEV. 


[228, 229. full of Vent] 
affords a better explanation of it than has yet been offered. Staunton explains 
‘sprightly walking’ as ‘quick moving or marching,’ with evident reference to mil- 
itary movements, and with regard to the special phrase under review he says 
boldly, ‘vent is voice, utterance.’ But the previous epithet, ‘audible,’ gives this 
feature of the description ‘vent,’ referring not to sound at all, but to the quick 
perception of the game, ‘and the signs of eagerness, such as kindled eye, dilated 
nostril, and muscular impatience, which keen relish for the sport produces. In 
such a connection ‘sprightly walking’ would refer to the more lively and definite 
advance arising from the discovery of good vent as compared with the dissatisfied 
snuffings and uncertain progress when nothing is in view. [This article is reprinted 
in Baynes’s volume, Shakespeare Studies, p. 300——Ep.]—WmtELAw: That is, 
full of excitement, letting off of steam, freedom of utterance-——Scumipr in his 
notes to this play here accepts the interpretation of Delius that ‘full of vent’ 
means, with complete lack of all restraint, and so defines it in his Lexicon, s. v. 
Vent (s), with the present passage as the only example, adding, ‘If “‘vent”’ is, 
indeed, a technical term of sportsmen for scent, as it has been asserted in Edinb. 
Rev., Oct., 1872, and it could be proved to have been so in the time of Shakespeare, 
the explanation given there would be undoubtedly preferable to any other.’— 
W. A. Wricut: According to the view [of the writer in the Edinburgh Magazine] 
war is compared to a pack of hounds in full cry. But I think it is scarcely in 
accordance with what follows in the description of peace, where the epithets appear 
to correspond to the epithets applied to war, but in an inverted order: ‘insensible’ 
corresponding to ‘spritely,’ ‘sleepy’ to ‘waking,’ ‘deaf’ to ‘audible,’ and ‘mulled’ 
to ‘full of vent.’ If this view is correct, the figure involved in ‘full of vent’ is 
not from the hunting field, but the expression must be descriptive of something in 
wine which is the opposite to that conveyed by ‘mulled.’ And as ‘mulled’ sig- 
nifies ‘flat, insipid,’ ‘full of vent’ would seem to be either effervescent, working, 
ready to burst the cask, or full of scent. Cotgrave, indeed, gives ‘Odorement . . . 
a smell, waft, sent, vent’; but it does not appear from this that ‘vent’ means ‘scent’ 
except as a hunting term, and I therefore hesitate to suggest that it is equivalent 
to what is now termed the bouquet of wine-——Hunson (ed. ii.): ‘Full of vent’ 
has puzzled the editors vastly; and we are at last indebted to The Edinburgh Review, 
for what seems a right explanation of it—Pace: ‘Full of vent’ may mean simply 
full of utterance, i. e., sound or noise. Compare Ven. & Ad., 334, ‘Free vent of 
words love’s fire doth assuage.’—BEEcHING (Falcon Sh.): The epithets of war and 
peace correspond to each other, spritely to insensible; waking to sleepy; deaf to 
audible, which must therefore have an active sense; mulled, to full of vent, which 
accordingly means ‘full of go,’ like champagne. It has been proposed unneces- 
sarily to explain this last as a hunting term. Compare Macbeth, I, iv, 20, ‘full 
of growing.’—E. K. Caamprrs (Warwick Sh.): That is, full of outlets for energy; 
compare the use of ‘vent’ in III, i, 316—CuoLmetry: ‘Full of vent’ is opposed 
to ‘mulled’ in the next line. The meaning of neither expression is clear, but prob- 
ably the metaphor is from wine in both cases, ‘full of vent’ meaning lively, ready 
to escape from the cask or bottle, while mulled wine is a comparatively flat con- 
coction.—MAnppDEN (p. 53, foot-note), in corroboration of Baynes’s interpretation, 
says: ‘The word “vent” occurs as a verb, in the sense of fo scent in Spenser 
(Shepheard’s Calendar) and Drayton (Polyolbion). It is the Norman-French 
equivalent for the Anglo-Saxon “wind,” used frequently in the sense of scent 


ACT IV, sc. v.] CORIOLANUS 451 


[228, 229. full of Vent] 
by Shakespeare, both as a verb and as a substantive: Tit. Andron., IV, i, 97; 
tbid., IV, ii, 133; All’s Well, III, vi, 122; ibid., V, ii, 10; 3 Henry VI: III, ii, 14; 
Hamlet, III, ii, 262. In the Shepheard’s Calendar the bullock “venteth into the 
winde.” This term of art must have been somewhat unusual in poetry, for 
Spenser thinks it needful to explain it in his Glosse thus, “venteth, snuffeth in the 
winde.” It is strange that the restoration of the Folio thus suggested has not 
been generally adopted. Dr Schmidt (Lexicon) accepts it conditionally upon its 
being shown that the word “vent” bore the meaning attributed to it; a condition 
surely amply fulfilled. The comparison of war (King John, IV, iii, 149) to an 
eager hound is a favorite one with Shakespeare, as in Henry V: III, i, 31, and 
Jul. Ces., Ii, i, 273.’—VeERity (Student’s Sh.): Literally ‘full of the scent’ of the 
game, and so ‘full of dash and spirit,’ like a hound which strikes the trail and at 
once ‘gives tongue’; compare ‘audible.’ The metaphor here from hunting fol- 
lows naturally on the metaphor in ll. 217, 218; and Shakespeare more than once 
compares war with a hound. The Glossary of the Globe ed. has, ‘like wine, full 
of working, effervescent, opposed to ‘‘mulled.”’’ But the other explanation of 
‘vent’ as a term of the chase is the one now commonly accepted, and there can be 
little doubt, if any, as to its correctness now that the history of ‘vent’ has been 
fully ascertained. Note that it opposes the phrase not merely to ‘mulled,’ but 
to the whole description of peace, especially to ‘insensible.’? I see no need to pair 
off each epithet as a precise contrast. The speaker is a serving-man, and such 
people are not masters of exact antithesis——Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): 
Scenting the game ahead and full of life, as a hound strains to be let loose for the 
chase when upon the scent, ‘vent’ being for the hound, in hunting terminology, 
what ‘in blood’ is for the game.—Gorpon: ‘Full of vent’ is literally full of emission 
or discharge; 7. e., bursting with strong life (like strong wine), bubbling over, effer- 
vescent; opposed to ‘mulled’ in the next line. Compare I, i, 243, ‘to vent Our 
mustie superfluity.’ This explanation is a modification of that given by the Globe 
editors. The explanation now in favour is that ‘vent’ is a hunting term. A 
hound was said to ‘vent’ the game when he smelt him in the wind. War would 
then be likened to a pack of hounds in full cry; ‘audible’ would express their cry; 
and ‘full of vent’ would mean ‘full of the spirit of the chase.’ This is attractive 
but far-fetched. It is obtained by (1) singling out for over-emphasis one term of 
the four, and (2) entirely neglecting the antithesis in the four terms that follow 
in ll. 229, 230. The antithesis is strict and unmistakable: ‘insensible’ ((‘spritely,’ 
‘sleepy’) (‘waking,’ ‘deaf’) (‘audible,’ ‘mulled’)), ‘full of vent.’ The hunting men 
who proposed the explanation may be pardoned their over-emphasis, but not 
their neglect of the whole structure of the passage. If ‘mulled’ corresponds to 
‘full of vent,’ as it must, then ‘full of vent’ can have nothing to do with hunting. — 
DE£IGHTON apparently accepts the interpretation offered by Baynes that ‘vent’ is 
here used as the technical hunting term for scent. As regards Wright’s interpre- 
tation Deighton remarks: ‘Granting a correspondency between the epithets 
(though “deaf” can hardly be said to correspond with “‘audible”), we have no 
proof that “mulled” meant in Shakespeare’s day “flat, insipid.’”’ At present the 
term is generally used of wine boiled with sugar and spices. But this modern 
sense Skeat says is due to a total loss of the original sense of the word. ‘‘The 
older form is mulled ale, a corruption of muld-ale or mold-ale, literally a funeral ale 
or banquet. . . . Compare Lowland Scotch mulde-mete, literally mould-meat, a 


452 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. v. 


of Vent. Peace, is a very Apoplexy, Lethargie, mull’d, 229 


229. Vent] vaunt Coll. MS. event 229. mull’d) muddl’d Coll. ili. mute 
Coll. iii. S. Walker (Crit. i, 188), Huds. ii. 
Lethargie] a lethergy S. Walker muddie or muddied Kinnear. 
(Crit. i, 91), Huds. ii. 


funeral banquet.” In this uncertainty as to the figures intended I have preferred 
to retain the Folio reading “sprightly walking.” ’—Casr (Arden Sh.): As war is 
spritely, wide awake, keen of ear, so, possibly, it is full of utterance, vents much; 
compare ‘What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent,’ III, i, 316. Others 
are confident of allusion to hunting in the technical term vent, and some trace a 
personification of war as a trained hound through the series of expressions. It is 
true that Shakespeare makes war a dog elsewhere, but in plain language. Mr 
Craig, in the Little Quarto Shakespeare, combating this idea, thinks that ‘“‘full of 
vent” may mean, very efficacious to clear the country of its surplus population,’ 
and refers to I, i, 243, 244. This is given here as his only recorded interpretation 
of the passage, but with emphatic dissent. Wright sees an apposition in the epi- 
thets given to war and peace respectively, taken in reverse order. A correspond- 
ence may exist, but it may also be only apparent or accidental. Such exactitude 
is in strong contrast with what follows. That which is sprightly, walking, etc., 
may indeed destroy men, but apoplexy, lethargy, or anything sleepy and insensible 
may be acquitted of any activity in getting bastards. 

229-231. Peace, is a very Apoplexy ...of men] H. CoLermceE (ii, 179): 
‘Plague of this dead peace,—this bastard-breeding, lousy, idleness,’ Fletcher, 
Mad Lover, Act I. By these, and many other scattered allusions in the plays of 
the period, we may conjecture that the long shutting of the Temple of Janus by 
the Rex Pacificus was far from popular. Yet there can be no doubt that in pre- 
serving peace, and neglecting the military, he acted most beneficially for the 
people, though ruinously for his family and the regal power.—BuckKNILL (Medical 
Knowledge, etc., p. 210): The activity and vigour of a state of war is paradoxically 
preferred to peace, as if the former were a state of health, and the latter a disease. 
Hamlet makes peace the time of health, though of plethoric health which ripens 
into war. Apoplexy is here confounded with lethargy, which is described as pro- 
ceeding by the degrees—mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible. The term ‘apoplexy’ is 
used rather loosely by Shakespeare in many places, but always to signify an 
affection of the brain; whereas modern physicians have most absurdly used the 
same term for sudden diseases of other organs, and thus speak and write of apo- 
plexy of the lungs and apoplexy of the liver—Br. NicHotson (Notes & Queries, 
16 Oct., 1886, p. 305): The phrasing [Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy] does not 
seem to me idiomatic English. To make it ordinary idiomatic English we must, 
I think, do one of two things. Either with Walker insert a before ‘lethargy,’ 
and also punctuate apoplexy; this makes the clause from ‘lethargy’ an explanation 
of ‘apoplexy’; and it may be remarked that such an explanation agrees very exactly 
with Falstaff’s, ‘This apoplexy is, I take it, a kind of lethargy; . . . a kind of 
sleeping in the blood’ (2 Henry IV: I, ii, 104-5). Or we might read apoplexy- 
lethargy, the lethargy consequent on an apoplectic attack. And with reference to 
either suggestion it should be remembered that in those days ‘apoplexy’ did not 
bring to mind those ideas with which it is now associated. Thus Andrew Boord, 


ACT IV, Sc. v.] CORIOLANUS 453 


deafe, fleepe, infensible, a getter of more baftard Chil- 230 
dren, then warres a deftroyer of men. 

2 ’Tis fo, and as warres in fome fort may be faide to 
be a Rauifher, fo it cannot be denied, but peace is a great 
maker of Cuckolds. 


1 I,and it makes men hate one another. 235 
230. fleepe] Fz. asleep Cap. fleepy Sta. Hal. Wh. Huds. i. Weayr’s Rowe 
F;F, et cet. li. et cet. war Rowe ii, Pope,+, Cap. 
230-234. a@  getter...Cuckolds}] Om. Varr. Ran. Sta. Ktly, Cam.+, Coll. 
Words. iii, Huds. Craig. 
231, 232. warres] Wars F,, Rowe i, 233. great] greater Wh. i. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Coll. Dyce i, 235, 236. Mnemonic Warb. 


‘Doctor of Phisicke,’ in fol. 16 of the Breviarie of Health, 1552, tells us: ‘A poplexis 
is the Greek word [&7omAnéia, a sudden smiting]. In Latin it is named Percussio. 
In English it is named a sodeyne striking downe, taking away a mans wit, reson, 
and moving.’ 

229. mull’d] Hanmer: That is, softened and dispirited, as wine is when burnt 
and sweetened. Latin: Mollitus——Lro (Coriolanus): The only instance in Shake- 
speare where this word is used, and I agree, therefore, with Walker’s emendation, 
mute. [Leo does not, however, adopt it in his text.—Ep.]—Casr (Arden Sh.): 
That is, softened, drowsified like mulled wine, which is heated, spiced,and sweetened. 
So, perhaps, especially if contrasted with ‘full of vent,’ but the NV. E. D. cites this 
passage under a rare obsolete verb ‘of obscure origin,’ meaning: To dull, stupefy, 
together with another from Cotton’s Poems, 1689, p. 96, ‘Till ale which crowns 
all such pretences, Mull’d them again into their senses.’ It is, however, difficult 
to give this sense of dull, stupefy to Cotton’s word even ironically. It occurs ina 
Burlesque upon the Great Frost and refers to two sides at foot-ball who were literally 
frozen stiff, ‘With a good handsome space between ’em.’ This points rather to 
the sense softened. The WN. E. D., in discussing the origin of mull (to mull ale, 
etc.), says: ‘Another unsupported conjecture is that the original sense may have 
been “‘to soften,” “render mild” (compare Dutch mul, soft), of which Mull [to dull, 
stupefy] might be another application.’ The Cotton passage seems to favour that 
conjecture. 

231. then warres a destroyer of men] Matone: That is, than wars are a 
destroyer of men. Our author almost everywhere uses wars in the plural. See 
1. 232. Mr Pope, not attending to this, reads, ‘than war’s, etc., which all the 
subsequent editors have adopted.—StTrEvens: I should have persisted in adher- 
ence to the reading of Mr Pope had not a similar irregularity in speech occurred in 
All’s Well, Il, i, 26, where the second Lord says, ‘O, ’tis brave wars!’ as we have 
here, ‘wars may be said to bea ravisher.’ Perhaps, however, in all these instances 
the old blundering transcribers or printers may have given us wars instead of 
war.—BosweELt (Var. ’21): Mr Malone had collected twenty-four instances from 
various contemporaries of Shakespeare in support of the text, but as the phrase- 
ology which Mr Steevens questioned is not altogether disused even at this day, 
J have forborne to insert them.—Dvyce (ed. ii.): The two passages [the present 
one and that from All’s Well] are not similar; and besides, though our author 


454 THE TRAGEDIE OF JACT Iv, SC. vi. 

3 Reafon, becaufe they then leffe neede one another: 236 
The Warres for my money. I hope to fee Romanes as 
cheape as Volcians. They are rifing,they are rifing. 


Both. In, in, in, in. Exeunt 239 
[Scene VI.] 
Enter the two Tribunes, Sicinius ,and Brutus. I 
Sicin. We heare not of him, neither need we fear him, 
His remedies are tame, the prefent peace, 2 


lick Place in Rome. Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Varr. Ran. Rome. A publick 


238. Volcians] F.F;, Cap. Mal. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Knt. Volces Var. ’78, 85, 


Ran. Volfcians F,, Rowe et cet. 
They...rifing.] As separate line 
Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. 


Place. Cap. et cet. 
1. the two Tribunes] Fi, Cam. Cla. 
Om. Rowe et cet. 


3. remedies] enmities Kinnear. 
tame, the] Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
tame 7’th’ Theob. Warb. Johns. ta’en, 
Var. ’78 et cet. the Johns. conj. Jame ithe Mason. 
ScENE vi. Pope et seq. SCENE Iv. tamed by the Coll. MS. tame. The 
Rowe. Wh. tame i’the Cap. et cet. 
Rome. Rowe, Pope, Han. A pub- 3-10. the...friendly] Om. Bell. 


239. Both] Ff, Rowe,+. First and 
Second Serv. Cam. Cla. Neils. All 
Three. Dyce ii, Words. Huds. ii. All. 


frequently uses ‘wars’ for ‘war,’ the first words cf the present speech, ‘Let me 
have Warre,’ prove that in the concluding portion of it he employed the singular.— 
W.N. Lerrsom: In our passage War is personified and is opposed to Peace. It is 
surely impossible that under such circumstances Shakespeare would have used 
the plural, particularly when he had begun with the singular. 

236. Reason] W. A. Wricut: That is, with good reason, or there is reason for 
it. Compare King John, V, ii, 130, ‘He is prepared, and reason too he should.’ 

230. because they then lesse neede one another] WaArBuRTON: Shakespeare, 
when he chooses to give us some weighty observation upon human nature not 
much to the credit of it, generally (as the intelligent reader may observe) puts it 
into the mouth of some low buffoon character. 

1. Enter the two Tribunes] Verity (Séudent’s Sh.): The Tribunes’ note of 
self-content and ‘security,’ contrasting with the imminence of the danger already 
revealed to us, marks a favourite form of Shakespearian tragic irony. 

3. are tame, the present peace] THEOBALD: As this passage has been hitherto 
pointed it labours under two absurdities: first, that the peace abroad and the 
quietness of the populace at home are called Marcius’s remedies; whereas, in 
truth, these were the impediments of his revenge. In the next place, the latter 
branch of the sentence is imperfect and ungrammatical—Jounson: I do not 
understand either [this line or the next], but fancy it should be read thus: 


‘—neither need we fear him; 
His remedies are ta’en, the present peace,’ etc. 


The meaning, somewhat harshly expressed, according to our author’s custom, is 
this: We need not fear him, the proper remedies against him are taken by restoring 
peace and quietness—CaPELL: By taking away a colon from ‘tame’ and reading 


ACT IV, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 455 


[3. His remedies are tame, the present peace] 

‘i’the’ for ‘the,’ the third editor has struck out an appearance of sense from what 
before had no shadow of it; but still it is no more than appearance till we can deter- 
mine with some sort of certainty what the poet intended by ‘his remedies are 
tame,’ for the words have more aspects than one. Without ent’ring upon what 
may be made of them, it is best to come at once to what the editor thinks their 
true meaning. This, as he apprehends, is pointed out by the words that precede 
them, ‘neither need we fear him’; his return, and the revenge that would follow 
it, were what they had to fear; it is these, therefore, and the instruments that might 
bring them about, which the Tribune calls Coriolanus’s ‘remedies,’ adding that 
they were ‘tame’ now, that is, still, and unlikely to have any effect.—STEEVENS, 
in reference to Johnson’s interpretation, says, ‘I rather suppose the meaning of 
Sicinius to be this: “His remedies are tame,” i. e., ineffectual in times of peace like 
these. When the people were in commotion, his friends might have strove to 
remedy his disgrace by tampering with them; but now, neither wanting to employ 
his bravery nor remembering his former actions, they are unfit subjects for the 
factions to work upon.’ As regards Mason’s suggestion, Jame, Steevens adds, ‘but 
the epithets “tame” and “wild” were, I believe, designedly opposed to each 
other.’—SraunTon: Omission is not, perhaps, the only defect in the line; the word 
‘remedies’ is very equivocal—R. G. Warre: [Instead of Theobald’s insertion] 
I think it more in keeping with the purport of the passage, and far better for its 
rhythm, to strike out ‘we’ in |. 5, where it not only breaks down an already well- 
laden verse, but substitutes a feeble and unnatural thought for one forcible and 
natural. It was in the ‘peace and quietness of the people’ that the Tribunes had 
their supposed triumph over the Patricians, who had hoped to see ‘dissentious 
numbers pestering the streets,’ but whom this peace and quietness forced to blush 
that the world went well. This is entirely lost if the Tribunes are made to say 
that they make Coriolanus’s friends blush. The rhythm of ll. 2 and 3 is also much 
more Shakespearian with a full pause after ‘tame.’ This play is very carelessly 
printed in the Folio; and I believe that ‘we’ crept in merely by the erroneous 
supposition of a printer that a new sentence began at ‘Heere,’ and that a nomina- 
tive was consequently required for ‘make.’ [Reference to the Text. Notes, 1. 5, 
will show that this reading is substantially—though White does not say so— 
Hanmer’s. White’s only change being a shifting of the comma. See also note 
by Hudson, |. 5—Ep.]—WuaireLaw: Let him do his worst; he is harmless so long 
as the people, lately so turbulent, are orderly and contented, and give his friends 
no pretext for recalling him—W. A. WricurT [adopting Theobald’s reading]: 
The sense is, The means which Coriolanus may take to redress his wrongs are no 
longer an object of fear while the people are peaceable and quiet.—PERRING 
(p. 306): What is easier than to construe this line thus, His remedies are tame, 
the present [is] peace and quietness of the people, which [that is, who] were before 
in wild hurry. On the one hand, the substantive verb is dropped in the second 
sentence, because ‘are’ has been expressed in the first; on the other hand, ‘the 
present’ is used as a noun substantive, of which there is no lack of examples. ‘Thus 
Tempest, I, i, 57, the substantive verb is left to be understood, albeit it had not 
been previously expressed, as ‘The king and prince at prayers’; and in the same 
play, I, i, 24, we have, ‘to work the peace of the present.’ Yet in this passage 
Theobald must needs interpolate ‘i’ before ‘the present,’ and all break after him 
like a flock of sheep. 


456 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT IV, SC. vi. 


And quietneffe of the people, which before 

Were in wilde hurry. Heere do we make his Friends 5 
Bluth, that the world goes well : who rather had, 

Though they themfelues did fuffer by’t, behold 

Diffentious numbers peftring ftreets, then fee 

Our Tradefmen finging in their fhops,and going 


About their Funétions friendly. 10 
Enter -Menentus. 
Bru. We ftood too’t in good time. Is this Menenius|? 
Sicin. ’Tis he, ’tis he : O he is grown moft kind of late: 
Haile Sir. Mene. Haile to you both. 14 


4. of the] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Var. 


73. 0th’? Theob. Warb. Johns. othe 
Var. ’78 et cet. 
5. hurry...make] hurry...we make 


Pope, Theob. hurry here, do make 


Han. hurry. Here he makes Warb. 
Johns. Var. ’73. hurry, here do make 
Wh. Huds. ii. 


7. behold] beheld Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns, Knt. 
8. pefring] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 
pestering Var. ’73 et cet. 
zz. Enter Menenius.] After Jae: 1. 


13-22. ’Tis he...wife] Fi, Rowe,+, 
Knt, Huds. i. As verse, ending lines: 
kind ... Coriolanus... Commonwealth... it 
..Uf...you?...wife Ktly. Ending lines: 
late...Coriolanus...Friends...do...it...if... 
you...wife. Glo. Wh. ii, Neils. Ending 
lines: kind...both...mift...ftand;...it....if... 
you?...wife, Cap. et cet. 

13,14. As verse, ending lines: kind... 
both. Sta. “ 

14. Haile Sir.| Hail, sir. Bru. Hail, 
sir. Cap. Dyce ii, Words. Huds. ii. 
Both Tri. Hail, sir! Glo. Wh. ii. 


13 Dyce. After time. 1. 12 Cam.+. 


5. Heere do we make] Hupson (ed. ii.): Here I am induced by clear reasons, 
both of logic and of metre, to adopt the reading of Hanmer. Some change is 
evidently required in order to make any sense at all of the passage, and Theobald’s 
change [in 1. 3] saves neither the metre nor the logic. In this present line ‘we’ 
is palpably redundant in verse and paralogical in sense; the speaker’s drift being 
not that we, the Tribunes, but that the peace and quietness of the people, make 
the Patricians ashamed of having predicted popular commotions as the conse- 
quences of the hero’s banishment. [Hudson has, however, adopted White’s punc- 
tuation of Hanmer’s reading.—Ep.] 

8. pestring] W. S. WALKER (C7it., ii, 351): To pester a place or person, for to 
crowd, to throng them. [The present line quoted.] In the following passages we 
may see how the change of meaning originated: Hamlet, I, ii, 22, ‘He hath not 
fail’d to pester us with messages.’ 1 Henry IV: I, iii, 50, ‘To be so pestered with 
a popinjay.—W. A. Wricut: The French ‘Empestrer’ is explained by Cotgrave, 
‘To pester, intricate, intangle, trouble, incomber.’ 

13. "Tis he... of late] ApBorr (§ 498) quotes this as an example of an ap- 
parent Alexandrine, suggesting that the ‘O’ might coalesce with the following 
vowel. 

14. Haile to you both] STEEVENS: From this reply of Menenius it should seem 
that both the Tribunes had saluted him; a circumstance also to be inferred from the 
present deficiency in the metre, which would be restored by reading (according to 
the proposal of a modern editor). [See Text. Notes.] 


e 


ACT IV, SC. vi.] 


CORIOLANUS 457 


Sicin. Your Coriolanus is not much mift, but with his 15 
Friends ; the Commonwealth doth ftand, and fo would 


do,were he more angry at it. 


Mene. A\ll’s well, and might haue bene much better, 


if he could haue temporiz’d. 


Sicin. Where is he,heare you ? 
Mene. Nay I heare nothing : 


20 


His Mother and his wife, heare nothing from him. 
Enter three or foure Citizens. 
All. The Gods preferue you both. 
Sicin. Gooden our Neighbours. 25 
Bru. Gooden to you all,gooden to you all. 
1 Our felues,our wiues,and children, on our knees, 


Are bound to pray for you both. 


Sicin. Liue,and thriue. 


Bru. Farewell kinde Neighbours : 30 
We witht Cortolanus had lou’d you as we did. 


All. Now the Gods keepe you. 
Both Trt. Farewell, farewell. 


Exeunt Citizens 


Sicin. This is a happier and more comely time, 
Then when thefe Fellowes ran about the ftreets, 35 


Crying Confufion. 
Bru. Caius Martius was 


A worthy Officer i’th’Warre, but Infolent, 
O’recome with Pride, Ambitious,paft all thinking 


Selfe-louing.| 


15-20. As verse, ending lines: mil... 
ftand...it....if...you Var. ’73. 

15. Coriolanus] Coriolanus, sir, Cap. 
Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Sing. i, Dyce ii, 
Words. Huds. ii. 

23-36. Om. Bell. 

24. All.] Cit. Mal. et seq. 

25, 26] Gooden... Gooden... gooden] 
Good-den ...Good-den ... good-den Coll. 
Sing. ii, Ktly, Wh. Huds. Words. 
Craig. God-den ...God-den...God-den 
Dyce, Sta. Cam.+, Neils. Good-e’en... 
Good-e’en...good-e’en F,, Rowe et cet. 


40 


25. our] Om. F;F,, Rowe,+. 

27. 1] First Cit. Dyce, Cam.+. 1 
Cit. Rowe et cet. 

28. you both] both you Dyce conj. 
Huds. ii. 

29. Liue] Live, live Cap. 

30, 31. Farewell...Coriolanus] As one 
line Han. Cap. et seq. 

38. 7th’) v’the Cap. et seq. 

39. Ambitious,...thinking| Ambitious 
...thinking, F, et seq. 

40, 41. Selfe-louing...Throne,| As one 
line Theob. et seq. 


15, 16. is not much mist, but with his Friends] Ansorr (§ 505) quotes these 
words as forming an example of a line of four accents; the line is, however, not of 
Shakespeare’s versification, but a metrical arrangement of this prose passage by 


the Globe editors.—Ep. 


458 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vi. 


Sicin. And affecting one fole Throne, without affiftace 41 

<Mene. I thinke not fo. 

Sicin. We fhould by this, to all our Lamention, 
If he had gone forth Confull, found it fo. 

Bru. The Gods haue well preuented it,and Rome 45 
Sits fafe and ftill, without him. 

Enter an Aadile. 
idile. Worthy Tribunes, 


There is a Slaue whom we haue put in prifon, 49 

41. fole] whofe Rowe ii. 43. Lamention] Fy. 
affifiace| assistants Han. Bell. 44. Confull] Counfell F>. 

assistance iwt Steev. conj. assistancie found it fo] have found it so Mal. 

Walker (Crit., ii, 48). conj. Ktly. find it so Huds.i. so have 
42. I thinke] Nay, I think Pope, found it. Huds. i, Words. 

Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Cap. 47. an Aidile.] Ff, Cam.+. Aedile. 
43. fhould] had Pope,+, Cap. Varr. Rowe et cet. 

Ran. Mal. 49. in] into F,. 


41. affecting one sole Throne] Verity (Student’s Sh.): The Tribunes back each 
other up. The first time (III, iii, 2, 3) it was Brutus who made this charge. Then 
(III, iii, 83-86) Sicinius took it up; now he harps on it again. 

41, 42. without . . . so] ApBorr (§ 506) quotes: ‘Without assistance. Men. 
I think not so,’ as an example of a Shakespearian line of four accents; as will be 
seen, this is, however, Theobald’s versification, not Shakespeare’s.—Ep. 

41. without assistace] JOHNSON: That is without assessors; without any other 
suffrage.—THEOBALD (Letter to Warburton, 12 Feb., 1729; Nichols, ii, 488): The 
text is slightly corrupted, and the versification neglected. Read: 

‘Self-loving. 
Sic. And affecting one sole throne, 
Without assistants. 
Men. Nay, I think not so.’ 


[As will be seen, Hanmer’s text reads assistants, but inasmuch as Theobald did not 
adopt this conjecture in either edition, or mention it in his notes, Hanmer doubt- 
less made the change independently.—STEEVENS also opines that: ‘It is not 
improbable that Shakespeare instead of “‘assistance” wrote assistants. Thus in 
the old copies of our author we have ingredience for ingredients, occurrents for 
occurrence.’ —ED.] 

43, 44. We should .. . found it so] MAtoneE: Perhaps the author wrote, We 
should have by this, or have found it so. Without one or other of these insertions 
the construction is imperfect.—AsBort (§ 415): In this anomalous passage ‘should’ 
is treated as though it were ‘should have,’ owing to the introduction of the con- 
ditional sentence with ‘had.’ So Richard III: Il, v, 56, ‘We would have had 
you heard.’ 

43. our Lamention] ABsorr (§ 219): Your, our, their, &c., are often used in 
their old signification, as genitives, where we should use ‘of you,’ &c. [Compare 
I, ix, 45, ‘At your only choice.’] 

49, 50. a Slaue .. . Reports] For other examples of this omission of the rela- 
tive, where the antecedent clause is emphatic, see ABBort, § 244. 


ACT IV, SC. vi.] 


CORIOLANUS 459 


Reports the Volces with two feuerall Powers 50 
Are entred in the Roman Territories, 
And with the deepeft malice of the Warre, 


Deftroy, what lies before ’em. 
Mene. ’Tis Auffidius, 


Who hearing of our Martius Banifhment, 55 
Thrufts forth his hornes againe into the world 
Which were In-fhell’d, when Martius ftood for Rome, 


And durft not once peepe out. 
Sicin. 


Come, what talke you of <-Aartius. 


Bru. Go fee this Rumorer whipt, it cannot be, 60 


The Volces dare breake with vs. 


Mene. Cannot be? 


We haue Record, that very well it can, 
And three examples of the like, hath beene 


Within my Age. 


But reafon with the fellow 65 


Before you punifh him, where he heard this, 
Leaft you fhall chance to whip your Information, 
And beate the Meffenger, who bids beware 


Of what is to be dreaded. 


50, 61. Volces] F.F;, Var. ’78, 85, 
Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt. 
Volicies F,, Rowe. Volscians Pope,+. 
Volcians Cap. Volsces Coll. et seq. 

51. entred| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. ent’red Neils. en- 
ter’d Cap. et cet. 

53. Deftroy] Destroys Rowe ii. 

’em|] them Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
Knt, Coll. Del. Hal. Wh. Huds. Craig. 


69 


55. Martius] Martius’s F,, Rowe. 
Martius’ (or Marcius’) Pope et seq. 

58, 59. And...talke you] As one line 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Coll. Dyce, Hal. Wh. 
Huds. Cam.+, Words. Craig, Neils. 

60. whipt,| whipt. Pope et seq. 

64. hath] have F, et seq. 

67. fhall| should Sing. Ktly, Huds. i. 

69-71. As two lines, ending: me... 
pofible. Pope et seq. 


49. whom we haue put in prison] E. K. Coampers (Warwick Sh.): This touch, 
showing how incredible the truth appeared, is perhaps the most ironical thing in 


the scene. 


51. in] For other examples of ‘in’ for into see Shakespeare passim. 


57. stood for Rome] STEEVENS: That is, stood up in its defence. 


Had the 


expression in the text been met with in a learned author it might have passed for 


a Latinism, ‘ 


—summis stantem pro turribus Idam,’ 4ineid, ix, 575. 


64. hath beene] W. A. Wricut: So the first three Folios, which perhaps Shake- 
speare wrote in consequence of the subject being separated from the verb by the 
intervening words ‘the like,’ with which the verb is made to agree. 

67. Least you shall chance] For other examples wherein the future is used 
where we should now use the subjunctive or infinitive see ABBorr, § 348. 

67. your Information] W. A. WricuT: That is, the source of your information, 
your informant; abstract for concrete, as in II, i, 178. 


460 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vi. 


Sicin. Tell not me : I know this cannot be. 70 
Bru. Not poffible. 
Enter a Meffenger. 
Mef. The Nobles in great earneftneffe are going 
All to the Senate-houfe : fome newes is comming 
That turnes their Countenances. 75 
Sicin. ’Tis this Slaue : 
Go whip him fore the peoples eyes : His raifing, 
Nothing but his report. 
Mef. Yes worthy Sir, 
The Slaues report is feconded,and more 80 
More fearfull is deliuer’d. 
Sicin. What more fearefull ? 
Mef. It is {poke freely out of many mouths, 
How probable I do not know, that Martius 


Ioyn’d with Auffidius, leads a power ’gain{ft Rome, 85 

And vowes Reuenge as {pacious, as betweene 

The yong’ft and oldeft thing. 87 
74. comming] F.F;. coming F,, Knt 85. Auffidius] Aufidius F, (through- 

i, Del. i. come in Mal. Var. ’21, Coll. out). 

i, iii, Sing. ii, Ktly, Huds. i. come 87. yong’ fi] youngest Rowe. young’ ft 

Rowe et cet. Pope et seq. 


74. some newes is comming] STEEVENS: Old copy [F,], redundantly, some 
news is come in. The Second Folio, coming; but I think erroneously.—BoswE Lt: 
Such redundant terminations, laying the emphasis on the first of two words, is 
common among Shakespeare’s contemporaries.—KNicuHT: We retain the reading 
of the original. The reader will remember Mr Campbell’s fine image, ‘Coming 
events throw [cast] their shadows before. —Dycre: Mr Knight retains the folio 
reading (because the reader will remember Campbell’s fine image, the Roman 
nobles, of course, being gifted, like Campbell’s wizard, with the second sight!). 
Now, it is quite evident that the mistake of ‘comming’ for come was occasioned by 
the transcriber’s or compositor’s eye having caught the word immediately above, 
‘going.’ (So in Tempest, II, ii, 185: 


‘Nor fetch in firing, at requiring, 
Nor scrape trenchering, nor wash dish,’ 


where the word ‘trenchering’ originated in the preceding ‘firing’ and ‘requiring.’) 

75. That turnes their Countenances] MALoNeE: That is, renders their aspect 
sour. This allusion to the acescence of milk occurs again in Timon, ‘Has friendship 
such a faint and milky heart, It turns in less than two nights?’ [III, i, 57].— 
STEEVENS: I believe nothing more is meant than changes their countenances. So in 
Cymbeline, ‘Change you, madame The worthy Leonatus is in safety,’ [I, vi, 12]. 

80, 81. more More fearfull] For other examples of ‘more’ thus used, as a noun 
and adverb in juxtaposition, see ABBoTT, § 51. 

86, 87. as spacious . . . oldest thing] WHITELAW: Revenge that shall embrace 


ACT IV, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 461 


Sicin. This is moft likely. 88 
Bru. Rais’d onely, that the weaker fort may wifh 
Good Martius home againe. go 


Sicin. The very tricke on’t. 
Mene. This is vnlikely, 
He,and Auffidius can no more attone 93 


90. Good] God Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), can Cap. 
Dyce i, Wh. Huds. i. 93. attone] be one Pope. at one 
92-94. As two lines, the first ending: Wray ap. Cam. 


all, from the youngest to the oldest—E. K. Cuampers (Warwick Sh.): It is, 
rather, ‘revenge, as infinite in its extent as from the creation to today.’ 
[Chambers wrongly assigns the interpretation, to which he makes objection, to 
Grant White, led thereto doubtless by Rolfe’s ed., where this interpretation is 
given signed simply ‘Wh.,’ which is Rolfe’s regular symbol for Whitelaw’s Rugby 
ed. of this play. Rolfe’s abbreviation for R. G. White is the single letter W.—Ep.] 

88-91. Sicin. This is most likely ...tricke on’t] BapHam (Text of Sh., p. 
289): It is far more probable that Sicinius says, ‘This is most likely, rais’d only,’ 
&c., and that Brutus answers, ‘The very trick on’t.’ 

90-92. Good Martius. . . vnlikely] Asporr (§ 514): Interruptions are some- 
times not allowed to interfere with the completeness of the speaker’s verse. This 
is natural in dialogue when the interruption comes from a third person. If there 
are two interlocutors, sometimes either interlocution will complete the line. [The 
present passage quoted.] 

90. Good Martius] CoLtreR (Notes & Emendations, etc., p. 361): ‘God Marcius’ 
is the emendation [of the MS. Corrector], which adds vastly to the force of the 
passage, and is most accordant with the character of the speaker; ‘good Marcius’ 
is comparatively tame and unmeaning. Cominius soon afterwards, talking of 
Coriolanus, says, ‘He is their god,’ &c. Brutus could hardly intend to call Marcius 
‘good’ when adverting to his reported return; but he applies the word god to 
him in derision, as if Coriolanus were in a manner worshipped by a certain class 
of his admirers.—Ipmp. (Shakespeare, ed. ii.): Precisely in the same spirit Ulysses, 
in Tro. & Cress., I, iii, 169, speaks of ‘god Achilles,’ but it is not there tamely 
printed ‘good Achilles.’—Dvce (ed. ii.): In my former edition I too hastily adopted 
the reading of Mr Collier’s MS. Corrector, ‘God Marcius,’ and I have now to regret 
that I should have been partly the cause of Mr Grant White’s adopting that errone- 
ous reading. [White remarked that he accepted it ‘with some hesitation.’— 
Ep.]|—Hupson (ed. i.): We adopt the change from Mr Collier’s second folio 
partly because the magnificent sneer expressed by it is in Shakespeare’s best manner. 
Of course ‘god Marcius’ is spoken ironically. [In his ed. ii. Hudson silently adopts 
the Folio reading. Under Dyce’s castigation the sneer had, perhaps, lost some of 
its magnificence.—ED.] 

93. can no more attone] THEOBALD: That is, be reconciled, agree; for in this 
sense the word is as frequently used as in the active one to pacify, to reconcile. So 
in As You Like It, 

‘Then is there mirth in heav’n 
When earthly things made ev’n 
Atone together,’ [V, iv, 116].— 


462 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. vi. 


Then violent’ft Contrariety. 
Enter Meffenger. 95 
Mef. You are fent for to the Senate : 
A fearefull Army, led by Caius Martius, 
Affociated with Auffidius, Rages 
Vpon our Territories,and haue already 
O’re-borne their way, confum’d with fire,and tooke 100 
What lay before them. 
Enter Comintus. 
Com. Oh you haue made good worke. 
Mene. What newes? What newes? 
Com.You haue holp to rauifh your owne daughters,& 105 
To melt the Citty Leades vpon your pates, 
To fee your Wiues difhonour’d to your Nofes. 
Mene. What’s the newes? What’s the newes? 


Com. Your Temples burned in their Ciment, and 109 
94. violent’ft]  violentest Pope et Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. 773. 
seq. Enter a second Messenger. Dyce, 
Contrariety] contrarieties Han. Cam.+, Words. Huds. ii, Neils. Enter 
Bell, Huds. ii. contraries Cap. another Messenger. Han. et cet. 
95-101. Om. Bell. 98. Auffidius,] Aufidius’s F3F,. 
95. Enter Meffenger.] Ff, Rowe, 99. and haue] they've Han. 


W. A. Wricut: The word is used transitively elsewhere by Shakespeare. See 
Othello, TV, i, 244. The phrases ‘to be at one’ and ‘to set at one’ were of com- 
mon occurrence, and from the adverb ‘at one’ the verb ‘atone’ seems to have been 
formed. 

94. Then violent’st Contrariety] W. S. WALKER (Vers., p. 170): The Folio 
has ‘violent’st,’ the true reading. It is a line of three feet and a half, not of four 
feet, which would not be Shakespearean; and for the same reason, I, i, 76. [Foot- 
note by Lettsom, Walker’s editor, ‘It was Walker’s opinion that Shakespeare 
did not introduce verses of eight or nine syllables in his system of versification.’] 

94. Contrariety] M. Mason: I should read contrarieties —STEEVENS: Mr 
Mason might have supported his conjecture by the following passage in Lear, 
‘No contraries hold more antipathy Than I and such a knave,’ [II, ii, 93. Both 
Mason and Steevens might have saved time for other notes had they but ex- 
amined the texts of some of their predecessors. See Text. Notes—Enp.] 

106. the Citty Leades] Matone: Our author, I believe, was here thinking of 
the old city gates of London.—StrEvens: The same phrase has occurred already 
in this play—[II, i, 227]. Leads were not peculiar to our city gates. Few ancient 
houses of consequence were without them. 

tog. burned] W. S. WALKER (Vers., p. 40): Probably the poets of that age could 
not, or would not, use confirm’d, &c. (rm, &c., followed by d), as disyllables, &c., 
on account of the then mode of pronouncing rm, rn, &c., and therefore there was 
no metrical convenience to be served by suppressing the e in ed. I am inclined 
to think from what I have observed that they usually retained it in such cases. 
[The present line quoted, among others, in illustration.] 


ACT IV, SC. vi.] 


CORIOLANUS 463 


Your Franchifes, whereon you ftood, confin’d IIo 


Into an Augors boare. 
Mene. 


Pray now, your Newes : 


You haue made faire worke I feare me : pray your newes, 
If Martius fhould be ioyn’d with Volceans. 


Com. 


If? He is their God, he leads them like a thing II5 


Made by fome other Deity then Nature, 

That fhapes man Better : and they follow him 
Again{ft vs Brats, with no leffe Confidence, 
Then Boyes purfuing Summer Butter-flies, 


Or Butchers killing Flyes, 


111. Augors boare] F,. Augors boar 
F;. Augers bore F,. auger’s bore 
Rowe, Cap. Knt, Coll. Ktly, Wh. 
Cam.+, Craig, Neils. augur’s bore 
Var.’21. augre’s bore Pope et cet. 

112. your] the Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. 
Varr. Ran. 

114, 115. Jf...Jf?] As one line Cap. 


120 


Var. ’78 et seq. 

114. Volceans.] Volscians. Fy. the 
Volscians. Rowe i. the Volscians, 
Rowe ii, Pope. the Volscians,— 
Theob.+. Volcians;— Cap. Knt. 
Volsces— Var. 778, ’85. Volscians,— 
Coll. et seq. 

117. man] men Han. 


109. Ciment] W. A. WricHT: With the accent on the first syllable, as in Ant. 
& Cleo., II, ii, 29, ‘The piece of virtue, which is set Betwixt us as the cement of 
our love.’ 

110. whereon you stood] Casre (Arden Sh.): On which you insisted. A com- 
mon one among the various meanings of ‘to stand upon,’ and may be illustrated 
by r Henry VI: II, iv, 27, 28, ‘Let him that is a true-born gentleman And stands 
upon the honour of his birth’; and Jonson, Every Man in his Humour, I, i, 90, ‘Nor 
stand so much on your gentility.’ The sense ‘on which you depended’ would 
also be possible here, though not so biting. See also Il. 122, 123, post. [Compare 
I, ix, 49 and II, ii, 166.] 

111. Into an Augors boare] STEEVENS: So in Macbeth, ‘—our fate Hid in an 
augre-hole,’ [II, iii, 128]. 

119, 120. Then Boyes... . Butter-flies . . . killing Flyes] Caperz: The editor 
could have been glad to have had some authority for driving these ‘flies’ away 
{l. 120], they come too near to the other; if he had not stood in awe of the wits, 
it is possible he might have turn’d them to—sheep; for he thinks there is some 
likelihood that the ‘flies’ were brought there by the printer—Lro (Coriolanus): 
I would prefer another word after ‘killing,’ since the comparison is very forced, 
and I suppose the repetition to be an error of the compositor. Pigs, for instance 
(though there are many words which may be chosen as well), would be better 
than ‘Flyes.’—W. S. WALKER (Crit., iii, 212): Write or at least pronounce, *but- 


terflees.’ Drayton, Muses’ Elysium, viii.: 
‘Of lilies shall the pillows be 
With down stuft of the butterflee,’ 
Nymphidia. (I quote here from a note in the Variorum Sh., vol. vi, p. 52, where 


the passage is cited with a different purpose): 


464 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vi. 


Mene. You haue made good worke, 121 
You and your Apron men : you,that ftood fo much 
Vpon the voyce of occupation, and 


The breath of Garlicke-eaters. 124 
121. You haue] You've Pope,+, worke. and reading so you, |.127. Han. 

Words. Lines end: /hake... Hercules... worke. 
122. you, that] that Pope,+ (—Var. and reading He will, |. 127 Steev. Varr. 

73). Sing. Coll. Del. Dyce, Hal. Ktly, Wh. 
124-127. Lines end: Rome...fhake... Huds. Glo. Cla. Words. Craig. 


‘The seat, the soft wool of the bee, 
The cover (gallantly to see) 
The wing of a py’d butterflee, 

I trow, ’twas simple trimming,’ 


[ed. Hughs, p. 162]. Butterfly (as I am informed) is pronounced butterflee (u 
as oo in took) in Lancashire; and so also, I doubt not, in Yorkshire, as fly in that 
county is pronounced flee. I know not if the difference of spelling which the folio 
exhibits in the two words of Coriolanus, Butter-flies and Flyes, indicates anything. 
[HEeRFoRD (Eversley ed.) in a note signed simply L. makes the same suggestion as 
Walker in regard to the pronunciation of ‘butterfly,’ citing in illustration the 
above passage from The Muses’ Elysium.—Ep.]—E. K. CHAMBERS: Compare 
the picture of Coriolanus’s child in I, iii, 63, 64.—Utrict (Zusdize und Berichti- 
gungen zu Coriolanus, p. 179): I have adopted in the text Mason’s [Capell’s] 
emendation sheep, since I am convinced that ‘flies’ is a misprint, induced by the 
word ‘butterflies’ directly above it. Cominius wishes to say: The Volscians fol- 
low Coriolanus with the very same confidence in the war against us as do boys 
wage war on butterflies, or butchers on sheep. To this undoubted meaning of 
the passage ‘flies’ is so inconsistent that it can without doubt be nothing other 
than a misprint. 

123. voyce of occupation] Matone: ‘Occupation’ is here used for mechanics, 
men occupied in daily business. So again in Jzl. Ces., I, ii, ‘An I had been a man 
of any occupation,’ &c. So Horace uses artes for artifices, ‘Urit enim fulgore suo, 
qui pregravat artes Infra se positas,’ [EZ pist., II, i, 1. 13])——M. Mason: The word 
‘crafts’ is used in the like manner where Menenius says, 1. 147, ‘—you have made 
fair hands, You and your crafts.—VERPLANCK: A phrase of contempt in the 
mouth of a military aristocrat. 

124. breath of Garlicke-eaters] JoHNSON: To smell of garlick was once such a 
brand of vulgarity that garlic was a food forbidden to an ancient order of Spanish 
knights mentioned by Guevara.—MAtoneE: So in Meas. for Meas., ‘—he would 
mouth with a beggar, though she smelled brown bread and garlic,’ [III, ii, r95].— 
STEEVENS: From the following passage in Dekker’s [f it be not good Play, the Devil 
is in it, 1612, it should appear that garlic was once much used in England, and 
afterwards as much out of fashion: ‘Fortune favours nobody but Garlicke nor 
Garlicke neither now: yet she has strong reason to love it: for tho Garlicke made 
her smell abhominably in the nostrills of the gallants, yet she had smelt and stuncke 
worse but for garlicke,’ [Works, ed. Pearson, iii, 324]—Cotzter (ed. ii.): SreEEVENS 
was not aware that the old dramatist referred to a jig which had been brought out 


ACT IV, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 465 


Com. Hee’l fhake your Rome about your eares 125 
Mene. As Hercules did fhake downe Mellow Fruite : 
You haue made faire worke. 
Brut. But is this true fir ? 
Com, I, and you’! looke pale 


Before you finde it other. All the Regions 130 

Do {milingly Reuolt, and who refifts 

Are mock’d for valiant Ignorance, 132 
126, 127. did...worke.| As one line 131, 132. refifis Are] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 

Cap. Cam. Theob. resist Are only Han. Cap. 
130. Regions] region-cities Badham. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Sta. Words. resist 

legions Coll. iii. (MS.), Wh. Are merely Anon. ap. Cam. resist Are 


131. /milingly] seemingly Warb. Bell. Warb. et cet. 
132. valiant] their valiant Ktly. 


at the Fortune Theatre under the title of Garlic. Taylor, the Water-poet, men- 
tions it by name in his Cast over the Water (Works, p. 150): 


‘And for his action he eclipseth quite 
The Jig of Garlic, or the Punk’s delight.’ 


‘Greene’s Tu Quogue and those Garlic Jigs’ are mentioned as having been extraor- 
dinarily successful in H. Parrot’s ‘Laquei Ridiculosi, 1613; and Dekker, in his 
Satiromastix, 1602, calls Ben Jonson’s ‘strong garlic comedies.’ See also Robert 
Taylor’s Hog hath Lost his Pearl, 1614, where Haddit, offering a piece to the 
player, and wishing to recommend it, says, ‘Garlic stinks to this,’ &c., Dodsley’s 
‘Old Plays,’ vi, 337, ed. 1825. 

126. As Hercules ... Mellow Fruite] THEoBALD (Letter to Warburton, Feb. 
12, 1729; Nichols, ii, 488): I suspect almost that our Poet, according to his custom, 
is alluding to the known fable; if so, might we not rather read, ‘th’ yellow fruit,’ 
t. e., the golden fruit in the gardens of the Hesperides. 

130. Regions] CoLirer (ed. ii.): ‘All the legions’ in the corr. fo. 1632; but we 
adhere to the old and received text, no change being necessary.—Dvyce (ed. i.): 
The MS. correction is very plausible, for it is doubtful if the old text is to be ex- 
plained by what Aufidius says, ‘All places yield to him ere he sits down,’ IV, vii, 
30; here Cominius, eager to mortify the Tribunes, may be exaggerating the suc- 
cesses of Coriolanus; and elsewhere the folio has legions misprinted ‘regions.’ 
[Dyce refers to r Henry VI: V, iii, 11, where Warburton conjectures we should 
read Jegions.—Ep.]—Isrp. (ed. ii.): I have felt strongly inclined to adopt the MS. 
correction, but Mr W. N. Lettsom remarks that ‘the Romans had no army on 
foot, and consequently no legions. —R. G. WuirE: Considering the context, 
‘smilingly revolt,’ ‘valiant ignorance,’ and ‘constant fools,’ and that the Folio has 
twice elsewhere the misprint ‘regions’ for Jegzons, I have little hesitation in accept- 
ing the reading of Mr Collier’s folio of 1632. 

131. who resists] For other examples of this construction see Abort, § 251. 

132. valiant Ignorance] STEEVENS: So in Tro. & Cress., ‘I had rather be a 
tick in a sheep, than such a valiant ignorance,’ [III, iii, 316]. 


30 


466 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vi. 


And perifh conrant Fooles: who is’t can blame him ? 133 
Your Enemies and his, finde fomething in him. 
Mene. Weare all vndone, vnleffe 135 


The Noble man haue mercy. 
Com. Who fhall aske it? 

The Tribunes cannot doo’t for fhame ; the people 
Deferue fuch pitty of him, as the Wolfe 
Doe’s of the Shepheards : For his beft Friends, if they 140 
Should fay be good to Rome, they charg’d him, euen 
As thofe fhould do that had deferu’d his hate, 
And therein fhew’d like Enemies. 

Me.’Tis true,if he were putting to my houfe, the brand 144 


135. We are] We've Pope, + (—Var. 140. For] Om. Pope,+ (—Var. 773). 
78). 141. charg’d] charge Pope,+. 
136, 137. mercy. Com. Who...] mercy 143, 144. And...’Tis true] As one 


on us. Com. Mercyl—Who... Words. line Pope et seq. 


133-136. who is’t... haue mercy] W. S. WALKER (Crit., iii, 213): Arrange, 
perhaps, 
‘Who is’t can blame him? your enemies and his 
Find something in him. 
Men. We’re all undone unless 
The noble man have mercy.’ 


141-143. they charg’d him .. . And therein shew’d] Jonnson: Their charge 
or injunction would show them insensible of their wrongs, and make them show 
like enemies. I read shew, not shewed, like enemies—MAtone (Var. 1778): -The 
old copy has ‘charg’d’ and ‘shew’d.’ If one is changed, so ought the other. I 
read, ‘They’d charge him—and therein shew.’ [As Malone did not repeat this in 
his own edition it may be considered as withdrawn.|—M. Mason (Comments, 
etc., p. 257): There can be no doubt but this passage, as it stands, is very inac- 
curate, and that Malone’s amendment will correct every error, and render it. 
grammatical; but it appears to me that the inaccuracy is that of the author him- 
self, and, of course, should not be amended, as one of a similar nature occurs in 
Act II, sc. ii, ll. 17-19.—Matone: ‘They charg’d, and therein show’d’ has here 
the force of ‘They would charge, and therein show.’ [See Apsorr, § 361.]— 
Lertsom (ap. Dyce ii.) : Plutarch says that when Coriolanus was besieging Lavinium 
with the Volsces, the Roman people were desirous to annul the decree of his ban- 
ishment, but the Senate then maintained it. Possibly Shakespeare may here 
allude to that circumstance, though it is not mentioned in the play.—Casx (Arden 
Sh.): That is, they would be attacking him in the same way as those that had 
deserved his hate, and so doing would be confused with them (iit. would seem like 
enemies). The sense of charge presents some difficulty; probably it is a shade of 
the sense command, enjoin upon, as in All’s Well, IV, ii, 56, ‘Now will I charge 
you in the band of truth. . . . Remain there but an hour,’ etc.; A Lover’s Complaint, 
220, ‘Nature hath charged me that I hoard them not.’ 


ACT IV, SC. vi.] 


CORIOLANUS 467 


That fhould confume it, I haue not the face 145 


To fay, befeech you ceafe. 


You haue made faire hands, 


You and your Crafts, you haue crafted faire. 


Com. You haue brought 


A Trembling vpon Rome, fuch as was neuer 


S’incapeable of helpe. 150 
Trt. Say not,we brought it. 
Mene. How? Was’t we ? We lou’d him, 

But like Beafts, and Cowardly Nobles, 153 


145. fhould] would Rowe,+ (—Var. 
? 

73) 

146, 147, 148. You haue] You've 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Dyce 
ii, Words. 

147. Crafts, you] handy-crafts Coll. 
Anon. ap. Cam. 

150. S’incapeable] Ff, Wh.i. So in- 


151. Tri.] Both Tri. Dyce, Words. 
Neils. 

152-156. Lines end: Beajis...Clufters 
...1 feare Pope et seq. 

152. Was’t] Ff, Rowe, Neils. Was 
it Pope et cet. 

153. Beasts, and Cowardly] beasts, 
and coward Pope,+ (—Var. ’73). 
beasts and cowardly, Schmidt conj. 


capeable Rowe et cet. 


146. You haue made faire hands] WHITELAW: Ironically, ‘You have not soiled 
your hands at all.’—Scumipt (Coriolanus): You have done a fine piece of work, 
you have done your work well. So in Henry VIII. the Chamberlain says to the 
Porters, ‘Ye have made a fine hand, fellows; There’s a trim rabble let in,’ [V, 
iv, 74]. Not, as Whitelaw takes it, ironically—Casr: So in Fortune by Land and 
‘Sea (Pearson’s Heywood, vi, 423), ‘We have made a fair hand on’t, have we not?’ 
The ominous sense here illustrated is related to one of those recorded as still 
existent provincially. See Eng. Dialect Dict., ‘Make a hand, to spoil, waste, 
destroy.’ 

147. You and your Crafts] Corirer (Notes and Emendations, etc., p. 361): 
On the authority of the Old Corrector we ought unquestionably to read handycrafts 
for ‘crafts.’ This change completes the defective line, and shows that Menenius 
uses the introductory expression, ‘You have made fair hands,’ in order that he 
may follow it up by the contemptuous mention of handycrafts—Dycr: No; the 
old text is quite right. To ‘make fair hands’ (or ‘a fine hand’) is a common enough 
expression (so Henry VIII: V, iv, 74); and the change of ‘crafts’ to handycrafts 
is unnecessary for the sense, because manual labor is sufficiently implied in the 
former word. As to ‘the metre’—the Corrector’s alteration deranges it entirely, 
‘You and your crafts! you've crafted fair!’ make up a perfect line with ‘ Yow’ve 
brought,’ etc—BRowneE (p. 18) and Assorr (§ 486) propose, metri gratia, that 
‘crafts’ be here pronounced as a dissyllable cra-afts, since ‘an emphatic monosyl- 
lable is often made to take the place of an entire foot.’ 

147. crafted] W. A. Wricut: Menenius is a great word-maker. We are 
already indebted to him for ‘empiricutic,’ ‘fidiused,’ ‘conspectuities.’ 

149, 150. A Trembling vpon Rome... of helpe] Wurrrtaw: A panic, the 
like of which—so desperate as this is—never was. Or we might read, referring 
‘so incapable of help’ to ‘Rome, such as ’twas never’; such as = such that, a 
usage not ungrammatical when Shakespeare wrote. 


468 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vi. 


Gaue way vnto your Clufters, who did hoote 
Him out o’th’Citty. 155 
Com. But I feare 
They’l roare him in againe. Tullus Auffidius, 
The fecond name of men, obeyes his points 
As if he were his Officer : Defperation, 
Is all the Policy, Strength,and Defence 160 
That Rome can make againft them. 
Enter a Troope of Citizens. 
Mene. Heere come the Clufters. 
And is Auffidius with him ? You are they 
That made the Ayre vnwholfome, when you caft 165 
Your ftinking, greafie Caps,in hooting 
At Coriolanus Exile. Now he’s comming,. 
And not a haire vpon a Souldiers head 
Which will not proue a whip : As many Coxcombes 
As you threw Caps vp,will he tumble downe, 170 
And pay you for your voyces. Tis no matter, 
If he could burne vs all into oue coale, 
We haue deferu’d it. 
Omnes. Faith,we heare fearfull Newes. 
1 Cit, For mine owne part, 175 
When I faid banifh him, I faid ’twas pitty. 


154. unto] to Pope,+, Varr. Ran. 166, 167. Your...At] As one line 

Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Hal. Pope et seq. 
did hoote| hooted Han. 166. ftinking] old and Words. 

155. o’th’] o’the Cap. et seq. 167. Now] How F.F;. 

156. But I feare] Om. F2. 172. could) showd Rowe. should 

158. points] ’points Han. Pope,+. 

162. SCENE vil. Pope, Han. Warb. oue] Fy. 
Johns. 174. Omnes] Cit. Cap. et seq. 


165. ca/fl] cast-up Ktly. 


157. They’l roare him in againe] Jounson: As they hooted at his departure, 
they will roar at his return; as he went out with scoffs, he will come back with 
lamentations. 

158. his points] W. A. WricHt: That is, his commands or directions. In 
military language ‘a point of war’ was a signal given by sound of a trumpet. See 
2 Henry IV: IV, i, 52: 


Suining ere 
Your pens to lances and your tongue divine 
To a loud trumpet and a point of war.’ 


166. in hooting] For other examples wherein ‘in’ is used in the sense in the act of 
or while see, if needful, ABBorrt, § 164. 


ACT IV, SC. vi.] 


2 And fo did I. 


CORIOLANUS 469 


177 


3. And fo did I : and to fay the truth, fo did very ma- 


ny of vs, that we did we did for the beft,and though wee 
willingly confented to his Banifhment,yet it was againft 180 


our will. 


Com. Y’are goodly things, you Voyces. 


Mene. 


You haue made good worke 


You and your cry. Shal’s to the Capitoll? 


Com. Oh I,what elfe? 
Sicin. 


Exeunt both. 185 


Go Matters get you home, be not difmaid, 


Thefe are a Side, that would be glad to haue 


This true, which they fo feeme to feare. 


And fhew no figne of Feare. 


1 (itt. 


Go home, 


The Gods bee good to vs : Come Matters let’s 190 


home, I euer faid we were i’th wrong, when we banifh’d 


him. 


178. 3] 2 F.. 3 Cit. Rowe et seq. 

179. vs, that] us. That Johns. et seq. 

182. Y’are] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Wh. 
you're Cap. Huds. i, Craig, Neils. 
ye’re Dyce, Sta. Cam.+, Words. Huds. 
ii. you are Var. ’78 et cet. 

183. made] made you Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 

183, 184. good...Capitoll] As one line, 


192 


verse Cap. et seq. 

184. Shal’s] Shall us Var. ’78, ’85, 
Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. 

185. both] Om. Rowe,+. Com.and 
Men. Cap. et cet. 

186. not difmaid] no dismaid Rowe 
i. not dismay’d Rowe ii. et seq. 

191. 7th] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 7’the 
Cap. et cet. 


182-184. Y’are...to the Capitoll] Bayrretp (p. 189): Editors divide thus: 


‘Ye’re goodly things, you voices.—You have made 
Good work, you and your cry. Shall’s to the Capitol?’ 


But we shall get nearer to the original form of the passage if we read and divide 
thus: 
‘Com. You are | goodly | things, you | voices. 
Men. You have | made good | work, 
You and your | cry. Shall | we to the | Capitol?’ 


A quadrisyllabic (‘voices. You have’) divided between two speakers is extremely 
common, and when we restore ‘we’ and give it the stress required by the context, 
we do not credit the poet with a line of which he would have been ashamed. 

184. cry] See III, iii, 146. 

184. Shal’s] Apsporr (§ 215): ‘Shall,’ originally meaning necessity or obligation, 
and therefore not denoting an action on the part of the subject, was used in the 
South of England as an impersonal verb. So Chaucer, ‘us oughte,’ and we also 
find ‘as ws wol,’ 2. e., ‘as it is pleasing to us.’ Hence in Shakespeare: ‘Say, where 
shall’s lay him?’ Cymbeline, IV, ii, 233; ‘Shall’s have a play of this?’ Ibid., V, 
v, 228; ‘Shall’s attend you there?’ Wint. Tale, I, ii, 178; [also the present line]. 


470 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


2 (it. So did we all. 


Sicin. Nor I. 
Bru. 

Would buy this for a lye. 
Sicin. Pray let’s go. 


[ACT IV, SC. Vii. 


But come, let’s home. Exit Cit. 193 
Bru. Ido not like this Newes. 


195 


Let’s to the Capitoll : would halfe my wealth 


Exeunt Tribunes. 198 


[Scene VII.] 


Enter Auffidius with his Lieutenant. I 
Auf. Do they ftill flye to’th’Roman ? 


Lieu. 


I do not know what Witchcraft’s in him : but 


Your Soldiers vfe him as the Grace ’fore meate, 
Their talke at Table, and their Thankes at end, 5 
And you are darkned in this ation Sir, 


Euen by your owne. 


193. Exit] Exeunt Johns. et seq. 

198. let’s] Ff, Rowe, Huds. i, Neils. 
let us Pope et cet. 

ScENE vit. Cap. et seq. SCENE v. 


7 

1. Enter...Lieutenant.] Enter, march- 
ing, Aufidius, and a Volcian Officer: 
Forces at a distance. Cap. Enter...and 


‘his Lieutenant. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 


Rowe. ScENE vu. Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. 

A Camp. Rowe, Pope. Roman Ter- 
ritories. Cap. A Camp; at a small dis- 
tance from Rome. Theob. et cet. 


Knt, Coll. Del. Dyce, Sta. Hal. Ktly, 
Wh. Huds. 

3. Lieu.] Off. Cap. (throughout). 

6. darkned] dark’ned Neils. darken’d 
Rowe et cet. 


197. Would buy this] LEo (Coriolanus): The repetition of ‘would’ is somewhat 
heavy; could in this line would perhaps be better reading. 

1. Auffidius with his Lieutenant] BEEcHING (Falcon Sh.): It is perhaps note- 
worthy that both in I, x. and here Aufidius is represented in conversation with 
his inferiors. The dishonourable envy he there displayed has now become as 
dishonourable a jealousy. 

5. at end] For examples of this omission of the after prepositions in adverbial 
phrases see ABBOTT, § go. 

6. darkned] W. A. Wricut: The Folios have ‘darkned,’ and this was, no doubt, 
the pronunciation of the word. It appears to have been the custom so to shorten 
the participles of verbs ending in a syllable of which the final letter is a liquid.— 
Case: See II, i, 283, where, however, the word is used with a deeper significance, 
and Ant. & Cleo., III, i, 21-24: 

‘Who does i’ the wars more than his captain can 
Becomes his captain’s captain; and ambition, 
The soldier’s virtue, rather makes choice of loss 
Than gain which darkens him.’ 


7. your owne] W. A. Wricut: That is, your soldiers—Casr: I think ‘your 
own men,’ in view of what precedes. Some, however, including Mr Craig, under- 
stand ‘your own action in making him joint commander.’ It might possibly also 
refer to Coriolanus, who owed his position to Aufidius, and this would agree better 
with the passage from Ant. & Cleo. cited above. In this case ‘darken’d’ would 
be best rendered by ‘eclips’d,’ cast into the shade. 


ACT IV, SC. vii.] 


Auf. 


I cannot helpe it now, 


CORIOLANUS 471 


Vnieffe by vfing meanes I lame the foote 


Of our defigne. 


He beares himfelfe more proudlier, 10 


Euen to my perfon, then I thought he would 
When firft I did embrace him. Yet his Nature 
In that’s no Changeling, and I muft excufe 


What cannot be amended. 
Lieu. Yet I wifh Sir, 


15 


(I meane for your particular) you had not 
Ioyn’d in Commiffion with him : but either haue borne 
The action of your felfe, or elfe to him, had left it foly. 18 


10. proudlier] proudly Ff, Rowe,+, 
Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 


17, 18. Lines end: either...el fe...foly. 


Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Coll. Del. 
Dyce, Sta. Hal. Ktly, Wh. Cam. Glo. 


17. either haue] had Pope,+ (—Var. 
73). either Cap. Varr. Ran. either 
had Mal. et seq. 

18. The...to him] As one line Pope,+, 
Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Knt, Cla. 


Huds. Words. Craig, Neils. Joly] F.F;. solely to be done 


Words. /olely F, et cet. 


10-14. He beares himselfe . . . be amended] MacCativum (p. 616): It is said 
that for his revenge Coriolanus condescends to fawn upon Aufidius and the Volscians. 
This is not very plausible. His speech of greeting certainly shows no servile 
propitiation, and, according to Tullus, it is conspicuously absent in his subse- 
quent behaviour. [The present lines quoted.] And elsewhere Tullus complains 
that his guest has ‘waged him with his countenance,’ [V, vi, 45]. The only ground 
for saying that he paid court to the Volces is alleged in Tullus’ speech that just 
precedes this accusation of haughtiness to himself, [V, vi, 27-30]. But the speaker 
is an enemy, and an enemy who has to account for the disagreeable circumstance 
that his own adherents have gone over to his rival, and who, moreover, at the 
time is looking for a plea that ‘admits of good construction.’ There is nothing 
that we see or hear of Coriolanus elsewhere that supports the charge. 

Io. more proudlier] MALONE: We have already had in this play ‘more worthier,’ 
(IIT, i, 146], as in Timon, IV, i, 36, we have ‘more kinder’; yet the modern edi- 
tors read here ‘more proudly.’ [See Text. Notes; and for other examples, ABBortT, 
§ 11.] 

13. Changeling] Casr (Arden Sh.): Here, in sense, shifter, inconstant, turn-coat, 
as in zt Henry IV: V, i, 76, ‘Of fickle changelings and poor discontents,’ etc. The 
expression is found in various places in North’s Plutarch, e. g., Alcibiades (ed. 1612, 
p. 210): ‘But he that had inwardly seene his naturall doings, and goodwill indeed 
lye naked before him, would certainly have vsed this common saying, This woman 
is no changeling’; and Agesilaus, p. 620: ‘For he was no changeling, but the selfe 
same man in state and condition that he was before he took his iourny.’ See also 
Gabriel Harvey, Trimming of Thomas Nash (ed. Grosart, iii, 16), ‘For indeed 
I saw you to be no changeling.’ 

17, 18. either haue borne... left it soly] MALONE: The old copy reads, have 
borne, which cannot be right. For the emendation [kad borne] now made I am 
answerable. [Pope should have, at least, half the credit, see Text. Notes ——Ep.]— 


472 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vii. 


cAuf. I vnderftand thee well,and be thou fure 
When he fhall come to his account, he knowes not 20 
What I can vrge againft him, although it feemes 


21. him, although] him; though Pope, + (—Var.’73). him. Although Cap. et cet. 


STEEVENS: I suppose the word had, or have, to be alike superfluous, and that the 
passage should be thus regulated: 
‘—-but either borne 
The action of yourself, or else to him 
Had left it solely.’— 


Axspott (§ 479) gives Malone’s regulation of these lines as an example wherein 
the final -ion is pronounced as a dissyllable in ‘commission,’ adding that the 
original Folio text is the better, since it avoids the necessity of laying two accents 
on ‘commission,’ qualifying his preference somewhat by remarking that the Folio 
‘is, however, not of much weight as regards arrangement.’—Ep. 

19-28. I vnderstand thee well . . . our account] Craic (Arden Sh.): What did 
Aufidius mean by this? After a very careful study of the Life of Coriolanus, in 
North, I am inclined to think that this is the explanation: The passage in Shake- 
speare’s mind seems to have been that wherein it appears, that when the ambas- 
sadors came from Rome the first time to treat of peace, Coriolanus demanded that 
the Romans should ‘restore unto the Volsces, all their landes and citties they 
had taken from them in former warres; and, moreover, that they should geve them 
the like honour and freedome of Rome, as they had before geven to the Latines.’ 
He gave them thirty days for answer and ‘departed his armie out of the territories 
of the Romaines,’ and the relation goes on: ‘This was the first matter wherewith 
the Volsces (that most envied Martius glorie and authoritie) dyd charge Martius 
with. Among those Tullus was chief; who though he had receyved no private in- 
jurie or displeasure of Martius, yet the common faulte and imperfection of man’s 
nature wroght in him, and it grieved him to see his own reputation blemished,’ 
etc. A little later it continues: ‘From hence they derived all their first accusations 
and secret murmurings against Martius. For private captaines . . . gave it out 
that the removing of the campe was a manifest treason,’ etc-—MacCaLtum 
(p. 619): This is, no doubt, suggested by the incident of the thirty days’ truce, 
of which Plutarch makes so much and which Shakespeare totally suppresses. But 
the vague reference becomes all the more pregnant when we are to understand 
that Coriolanus has, at unawares and against his purpose, granted some little 
concessions to the victims of hiswrath. That Aufidius’ statement has some founda- 
tion is made probable by the words of the Antium Lord, who is no enemy to 
Marcius, but reproaches Tullus with his murder and reverently bewails his death: 


‘What faults he made before the last, I think, 
Might have found easy fines,’ V, vi, 79. 


Faults, then, from the Volscian point of view, he has committed in the opinion 
of a sympathetic and impartial onlooker, which means that as a Roman he has 
shown forbearance. 

21. What I can vrge against him] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): This 
scene is adroitly fashioned to reveal Aufidius as entirely changed in mood toward 


ACT IV, SC. vii.] CORIOLANUS 473 


And fo he thinkes, and is no leffe apparant 22 
To th’vulgar eye, that he beares all things fairely : 
And fhewes good Husbandry for the Volcian State, 
Fights Dragon-like, and does atcheeue as foone 25 
As draw his Sword : yet he hath left vndone 
That which fhall breake his necke, or hazard mine, 
When ere we come to our account. 
Lieu. Sir, I befeech you, think you he’l carry Rome ? 


Auf. All places yeelds to him ere he fits downe, 30 

23. To th’) To the Cap. et seq. 28. When cre] When eve F,. When 

24. Volcian] Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. eer Rowe,+. Whene’er Cap. et seq. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt. Vol- 29. I befeech you] I beseech Pope, 
cean F,F;. Volfcian F, et cet. Theob. Han. Warb. 

28, 29. When...Siv] As one line and 30. yeelds] yeeld F,. yield F, et 
reading But, Sir, ’Beseech you Cap. seq. 


Coriolanus since his last appearance. He is now secretly eager to urge anything 
against him there can possibly be made to urge. Thus the impending fall of 
Coriolanus is seen before the Fourth Act closes as hanging upon the hatred of the 
most powerful man among his new allies. The occasion to get the better of him, 
for which he hopes, is thus darkly shown to be looming up. 

26. he hath left vndone] LEo (Coriolanus): Aufidius hints at the conquest 
and demolition of Rome and the massacre of the inhabitants, and his words sig- 
nify, ‘He has not yet done it, and I doubt whether he will do it.’ Afterwards 
he says, ‘When, Caius, Rome is thine, thou art poor’st of all; then shortly art 
thou mine.’—BEEcHING (Falcon Sh.): What this was is never explained. The 
withdrawal from Rome furnished a better accusation.—E. K. CHAMBERS (Warwick 
Sh.): It is difficult to say what charges Aufidius now means to bring against 
Coriolanus. He has not yet betrayed Antium by sparing Rome. In V, vi. no 
other definite accusation is made against him, though certain unspecified ‘faults 
before the last’ are mentioned in V, vi, 79. [That which Coriolanus has left un- 
done is, in the eyes of Aufidius, a due and proper recognition of all that has been 
accorded him by his quondam foe. Aufidius returns to this in V, vi, 25-45, and 
it is, I think, evident that his plan for the destruction of Coriolanus is here sug- 
gested; but the betrayal of the Antiates by Coriolanus causes Aufidius to drop 
the personal element, and merge it in the more serious charge of treason.—ED.| 

28, 29. When ere we come... carry Rome] W. S. WALKER (C7it., iii, 213): 
Query? 

‘When we come t’ our account. 
Sir, I beseech you 
Think you he’ll carry Rome?’ 
Or, omitting Szr, 


‘When e’er we come, &c.—’Beseech you,’ &c. 
30. All places yeelds to him, etc.] CoLrerimpcE (Notes on Coriol.): I have al- 


ways thought this, in itself so beautiful speech, the least explicable from the 
mood and full intention of the speaker of any in the whole works of Shakespeare, 


474 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. vii. 


[30. All places yeelds to him ere he sits downe] 
I cherish the hope that I am mistaken, and that, becoming wiser, I shall discover 
some profound excellence in that in which I now appear to detect an imperfection.— 
VERPLANCK, in answer to the foregoing remark, says: ‘I cannot perceive the diffi- 
culty; the speech corresponds with the mixed character of the speaker, too gen- 
erous not to see and admire his rival’s merit, yet not sufficiently magnanimous 
to be free from the malignant desire of revenging himself upon his rival for that 
very superiority.,—MacCattum (p. 657): Here there are puzzling expressions in 
detail, but they have, on the whole, been satisfactorily explained, and it is not to 
them that Coleridge refers. (Of these, the most perplexing to me is the distinction 
Shakespeare makes between ‘the nobility,’ on the one hand, and ‘the senators and 
patricians’ on the other. What was in his mind? I fail to find an explanation 
even on trying to render his thought in terms of contemporary arrangements in 
England. ‘Peers,’ ‘parliament men,’ and ‘gentry’ would not do.) It strikes one 
indeed as a series of disconnected jottings that have as little to do with each other 
as with the situation and attitude of Aufidius. First he gives reasons for expecting 
the capture of Rome; then he enumerates defects in the character of Coriolanus 
that have led to his banishment with a supplementary acknowledgement of his 
merits; next he makes general reflections on the relation of virtue to the construc- 
tion put upon it, and on the danger that lies in conspicuous power; thereafter he 
points out that things are brought to naught by themselves or their likes; and 
finally, he predicts that when Rome is taken he will get the better of his rival. 
Is there here a mere congeries of thoughts as one chance suggestion leads to an- 
other with which it happens to be casually associated, or does one continuous thread 
of meaning run through the whole? I would venture to maintain the latter opinion 
with more confidence than I do if Coleridge had not been so emphatic. Jn the 
first place, we have to remember what goes before. The report of the Lieutenant 
confirms the jealousy of Aufidius, who is further embittered by the thought that 
he is losing credit, but reflects that he can bring weighty charges against Coriolanus. 
Thereupon the Lieutenant meaningly rejoins: ‘Think you he’ll carry Rome?’ 
It is a contingency to be reckoned with, for clearly, if Rome falls, any previous 
mistakes or complaisances alleged against the conqueror will find ready pardon. 
So Aufidius discusses the matter in the light of these two main considerations: 
(x) that he must get rid of his rival, and (2) that his rival may do the state a 
crowning service. He admits that Coriolanus, what with his own efficiency, what 
with the friendliness of one class in Rome and the helplessness of the remainder, 
is likely to achieve the grand exploit. How then will Aufidius’ chances stand? 
Formerly Marcius deserved as well of his own country when he had overthrown 
Corioli, yet that did not secure him. What qualities in himself discounted his 
services to Rome, and may again discount his services to Antium? Pride of pros- 
perity, disregard of his opportunities, his unaccommodating peremptory beha- 
viour—all of these faults which, in point of fact, afterward, contributed to his 
death—brought about his banishment, though truly he had merit enough to make 
men overlook such trifles. This shows how worth depends on the way it is taken, 
and how ability, even when of the sterling kind that wins its own approval, may 
find the throne of its public recognition to be, more properly, its certain grave. 
Thus likes counteract likes; the greater the popularity, the greater the reaction; 
the greater the superiority, the more certainly it will balk itself. So, and this is 
the conclusion of the whole matter, even when Marcius has won Rome by a greater 


ACT IV, SC. vii.] CORIOLANUS 475 


And theiNobility of Rome are his : 31 
The Senators and Patricians loue him too : 

The Tribunes are no Soldiers : and their people 

Will be as rafh in the repeale, as hafty 


To expell him thence. I thinke hee’! be to Rome 35 
As is the Afpray to the Fifth, who takes it 
32. Senators] Senator F>. 36. Afpray] osprey Theob. (Pope ii.) 
35-37. I thinke...Nature] Om. Bell. et seq. 


conquest than when he won Corioli, the result will be the same. His proud, im- 
prudent, and overbearing conduct will obscure his high deserts. These will be 
construed only by public opinion, and the very prowess in which he delights will 
rouse an adulation, which, when he is no longer required, will swing round to its 
opposite. So his success will correct itself. His very triumph over Rome will be 
guarantee for Aufidius’ triumph over him. If this amplified paraphrase give the 
meaning, that meaning is coherent enough and is quite suitable to the mood and 
attitude of the speaker—E. K. Cuampers (Warwick Sh.): Surely Coleridge is 
right. The speech is out of keeping with Aufidius’ mood in this scene. Perhaps 
the explanation is that it is not wholly dramatic; for once the dramatist, not the 
puppet, speaks. On the eve of the catastrophe Shakespeare pauses to sum up his 
hero’s career so far—GorDon: Why this distinction, it is often asked, between 
the nobility, on the one hand, and the senators and patricians on the other? They 
were clearly one group. The reason, I imagine, is in North’s Plutarch, in such a 
sentence as this: ‘For they did ground this second insurrection against the Nobility 
and Patricians,’ &c. Shakespeare may have thought that they were in some 
way distinct. 

32. loue him too] CapEty: ‘Too’ has not its ordinary signification of likewise, 
but is to be understood as if it came before ‘love him’; both ‘senators and patricians 
love him,’ for they, and they only, were the Roman nobility. 

36. the Aspray] Popr: The Osprey, a kind of eagle, ossifraga—THEOBALD: 
Though one’s search might have been very vain to find any such word as ‘ Aspray,’ 
yet I easily imagined something must be couch’d, under the corruption, in its 
nature destructive to fish, and that made a prey of them, and this suspicion led 
me to the discovery. The Osprey is a species of the eagle of a strong make that 
haunts the sea and lakes for its food, and altogether preys on fish. It is called the 
Aquila Marina, as also Avis ossifraga; thence contracted first, perhaps, into 
Osphrey, and then, with regard to the ease of pronunciation, Osprey. Pliny gives 
us this description of its acute sight and eagerness after its prey: ‘Halieetus, 
clarissima oculorum acie, librans ex alto sese, viso in mari pisce, preeceps in mare 
ruens, et discussis pectore aquis, rapiens.’ It may not be disagreeable to go a 
little farther to explain the propriety of the Poet’s allusion. Why will Coriolanus 
be to Rome as the Osprey to the fish: ‘he’ll take it By sovereignty of nature’? 
Shakespeare, ’tis well known, has a peculiarity in thinking, and, whenever he is 
acquainted with nature, is sure to allude to her most uncommon effects and opera- 
tions. I am very apt to imagine, therefore, that the poet meant Coriolanus would 
take Rome by the very opinion and terror of his name, as fish are taken by the 
Osprey through an instinctive fear they have of him. ‘The fishermen’ (says 
our old naturalist, William Turner) ‘are used to anoint their bait with osprey’s 


476 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. vii. 


By Soueraignty of Nature. Firft, he was a7 
A Noble feruant to them, but he could not 
Carry his Honors eeuen : whether ’was Pride 39 


39. ’was] F, Om. Pope,+. "twas F;F, et cet. 


fat, thinking thereby to make them the more efficacious; because when that bird 
is hovering in the air, all the fish that are beneath him (the nature of the eagle, 
as it is believed, compelling them to it) turn up their bellies and, as it were, give 
him his choice which he will take of them.’ Gesner goes a little farther in support 
of this odd instinct, telling us, ‘that while this bird flutters in the air, and some- 
times, as it were, seems suspended there, he drops a certain quantity of his fat, 
by the influence whereof the fish are so affrighted and confounded that they im- 
mediately turn themselves belly upward; upon which he sowses down perpendicu- 
larly like a stone, and seizes them in his talons.’ To this, I dare say, Shakespeare 
alludes in this expression of the ‘Sovereignty of Nature.’ This very thought is 
again touched by Beaumont and Fletcher in their Two Noble Kinsmen, a play in 
which there is a tradition of our author having been jointly concerned: 


‘—But, oh Jove! your actions, 
Soon as they move, as Asprays do the fish 
Subdue before they touch,’ [ed. Brooke, I, i, 140]. 


For here again we must read Ospreys.—LANGTON: We find in Drayton’s Polyolbion, 
Song xxv, [ll. 134-138], a full account of the osprey, which shows the justness and 
beauty of the simile: 


‘The Ospray oft here seen, though seldom here it breeds, 
Which over them the fish no sooner do espy, 

But (betwixt him and them, by an antipathy) 

Turning their bellies up, as though their death they saw, 
They at his pleasure lie, to stuff his glutt’nous maw.’ 


[This reference first appears in the Varioruwm 1773, and was doubtless furnished 
Johnson by his well-loved friend, Bennet Langton.—Ep.]—STEEVENS: So in The 
Battle of Alcazar, 1594: 


‘I will provide thee of a princely osprey, 

That as she flieth over fish in pools, 

The fish shall turn their glistering bellies up, 

And thou shalt take thy liberal choice of all,’ [ed. Dyce, ii, 110]. 


Such is the fabulous history of the osprey. I learn, however, from Mr Lambe’s 
notes to the ancient metrical legend of The Battle of Flodden, that the osprey is a 
‘rare, large, blackish hawk, with a long neck and blue legs. Its prey is fish, and it 
is sometimes seen hovering over the Tweed.’—Harris: The osprey is a different 
bird from the sea-eagle, to which the above quotations allude, but its prey is the 
same. See Pennant’s British Zoédlogy, 46 Linn. Syst. Nat. 129. [See also Wil- 
lughby, Ornithology, Bk ii, p. 59.—Eb.] 

39-47. whether ’was Pride . . . the warre] JoHNSoN: Aufidius assigns three 
probable reasons of the miscarriage of Coriolanus: pride, which easily follows 
an uninterrupted train of success; unskilfulness to regulate the consequences of 


ACT IV, SC. vii.] CORIOLANUS 477 


Which out of dayly Fortune euer taints 40 
The happy man ; whether dete¢t of iudgement, 

To faile in the difpofing of thofe chances 

Which he was Lord of : or whether Nature, 

Not to be other then one thing, not moouing 

From th’Caske to th’Cufhion : but commanding peace 45 
Euen with the fame aufterity and garbe, 

As he controll’d the warre, But one of thefe 

(As he hath {pices of them all) not all, 

For I dare fo farre free him, made him fear’d, 

So hated, and fo banifh’d : but he ha’s a Merit 50 
To choake it in the vtt’rance : So our Vertue, 


41. detect] defect Fi. 50. &@ Merit] merit Pope, Theob. Han. 
42-50. To faile...banifh’d] Om. Bell. Warb. Johns. Cap. 
43. Which...Lord of] Whereof...the 51. To choake] Tho chokes Han. 
lord Pope, + (—Var. ’73). Though he choke Cap. 
Nature] nature in him Ktly. Vertue] Veriues F,. Virtues F;F, 
47. warre.| war; Theob. et seq. et seq. 


his own victories; a stubborn uniformity of nature, which could not make the 
proper transition from the casque or helmet to the cushion or chair of civil authority, 
but acted with the same despotism in peace as in war. 

42. To faile] For other examples of the infinitive indefinitely used for forms 
of the gerund, see Abbott, § 356; compare ‘Too proud to be so valiant,’ I, i, 283 
ante. Both Browne (p. 17) and Abbott (§ 283) quote the present line as an ex- 
ample wherein, metri gratia, the diphthong az is to be resolved into two sounds. 

43-45. Which . . . From] BApHam (Criticism A pplied to Sh., p. 8): The words. 
‘not’ and ‘from’ should be the last syllables of lines 43 and 44. 

43. or whether] Compare I, iii, 65, 66; see, if needful, ABBorrT, § 136. 

44. Not... one thing] W. A. Wricut: ‘Not to be other than one thing,’ but, 
like Cesar, ‘constant as the Northern star,’ and like him, ruined by his obstinacy. 

46. the same austerity and garbe] W. A. Wricut: That is, the same severe and 
unbending demeanour. Another instance of the figure hendiadys. For ‘garb’ 
see Hamlet, II, ii, 390, ‘Let me comply with you in this garb.’ And Jonson, 
Every Man out of his Humour, IV, iv, ‘His seniors give him good slight looks. 
After their garb.’ 

48. spices of them all) not all] Matone: That is, not all complete, not all 
in their full extent—SrrEvENS: So in Winter’s Tale, ‘—for all Thy by-gone 
fooleries were but spices of it,’ [III, ii, 185].—Heartu (p. 425): This passage as it 
now reads is mere nonsense. For if Aufidius knew that Coriolanus had a spice 
of every one of the three defects here enumerated, and that some one or other of 
them, he knew not which, was the principal cause of his exile, how could he be 
sure, and answer for it, that every one of them did not contribute in some measure 
towards it? Iam, therefore, inclined to believe that our poet might have written, 
‘(As he hath spices of them all), not gall.’ By gall I suppose is meant envy and 
resentment arising from it. 

50, 51. he ha’s a Merit... in the vtt’rance] Jounson: He has a merit for 


478 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vii. 


[50, 51. he ha’s a Merit . . . in the vtt’rance] 

no other purpose than to destroy it by boasting it—BosweEti: I rather under- 
stand it, ‘But such is his merit as ought to choke the utterance of his faults.’— 
VeRPLANCK: I cannot understand these words [as Johnson explains them], which 
seem, on the contrary, to say, Some one of his faults made him feared, but such 
is his merit that it ought to choke and stifle the proclaiming his fault, whatever 
it was.—DeEtius: With Johnson’s explanation ‘but’ is not in accord; perhaps it 
would, therefore, be better to read ¢hat, and thus connect the latter part with 
the foregoing ‘banish’d.’—BuLtocu suggests that these words be transposed to 
follow ‘what it hath done,’ 1. 55.—C. & M. Cowpen CLarxeE (Shakespeare): We 
think the obscure effect here is partly attributable to the repeated use of the word 
‘but’ in the speech, and partly to the mode in which ‘it’ occurs in this clause of 
the sentence. In the clauses ‘but he could not,’ ‘but commanding peace,’ and 
“but one of these’ the word ‘but’ is used as a particle of objection; whereas in the 
last clause, ‘but he has a merit,’ ‘but’ seems to be used in the sense of ‘however’ 
or ‘nevertheless.’ After having enumerated the faults of character in Coriolanus 
Aufidius ends his sentence by the admission, ‘Nevertheless, he has a merit,’ &c. 
It is this last clause of admission which presents the chief difficulty; and we have 
to bear well in mind Shakespeare’s peculiarities of style when trying to discover 
its precise meaning. Remembering these peculiarities—his very condensed ex- 
pression and elliptical construction, together with his mode of using ‘it,’ either to 
a just-named antecedent or to an implied particular—this clause may bear three 
interpretations: 1St, ‘However he has one merit, that of checking panegyric on 
it’ (his own merit). 2"4, ‘Nevertheless, he has merit sufficient to stifle the decree 
of his banishment (implied in the previous words ‘so banish’d’ and ‘rash in the 
repeal,’ ‘utterance’ in this case being taken to mean ‘carrying out to the utter- 
most’). 34, ‘Nevertheless, he has a merit to quench what I have been uttering 
as to his faults’ (implied in ‘one of these, as he hath spices of them all,’ &c.). 
There is still a fourth interpretation that the clause will bear, which, considering 
the drift of the argument as carried out to the end of the speech, seems to be 
probably meant: ‘However, he has a merit, a merit which destroys its own power 
by striving to assert that power.—WuiITELAw: He did noble service as a soldier, 
and, though as a statesman, promoted for his service in the wars, he fell into 
disgrace, yet, confronted with the transcendent merit of the man (which only waits 
its opportunity, war, not peace), the very name of his fault must stick in the throats 
of his accusers.—BEECHING (Henry Irving Sh.): ‘It’? may mean detraction, or some 
such idea supplied from ‘hated.’ If ‘it’ refers to ‘banishment,’ the sense must be 
‘which ought to have choked it in the utterance.—DrIcHTON: Johnson’s explanation 
seems to me to be the meaning, except that to ‘utterance’ I would give the less 
restricted and older meaning of publishing, displaying, not necessarily in an offensive 
way. The gist of the passage is that every good gift conferred upon him is counter- 
balanced by some weakness; he has raised himself to a high position by his valour, 
but his pride has marred his good fortune; he has, by his force of character, made 
himself master of great opportunities, but his defect of judgment has caused him 
to misuse those opportunities; he has the faculty of impressing men with his 
authority, but he cannot recognize the occasions on which that faculty should 
not be exercised; in every case some ‘vicious mole of nature’ counteracts the 
qualities which would otherwise make his character so perfect. For a very similar 
train of thought compare /Zamlet, I, iv, 23-38. 


ACT IV, SC. vii.] CORIOLANUS 479 


Lie in th’interpretation of the time, 2 
And power vnto it felfe moft commendable, 
Hath not a Tombe fo euident as a Chaire 


T’extoll what it hath done. 55 
52, 53. Lie...vnto] Live...in Coll. ii. tonguc...a charmer’s Ktly. proem...a 

(MS.). tear Wetherell (N. & Q., Aug. 1, 1868). 
53-55. Om. Words. but a tomb for envy as a sharer Bulloch. 
54. Tombe...a Chaire] tomb...a hair tomb...the chaiy Kinnear. 

Sing. Huds. i. tomb...care Mitford 55. T’extoll] To extol Cap. et seq. 


(Gentlemen’s Maga., Nov., 1844). To entomb Cartwright. 


53-55. And power... what it hath done] WarBurRToN: This is a common 
thought, but miserably ill expressed. The sense is, the virtue which delights to 
commend itself, will find the surest tomb in that chair wherein it holds forth its 
own commendations: ‘unto itself most commendable,’ z. e., which hath a very high 
opinion of itself—Monck Mason (Comments, etc., p. 259): The obvious objection 
to Johnson’s and Warburton’s explanations arises from the peculiar temper of 
Coriolanus, which renders them totally inapplicable to him in the sense which 
they give them; for he was so far from boasting of his exploits himself that he 
could not bear to hear them extolled by others; and we find that when his arch- 
enemy, Aufidius, sums up the defects of his character, that of boasting is not 
upon the list. The passage, indeed, is so very obscure that I cannot but think 
there is an error in it, and that we ought to read, ‘But he has a merit to choak 
kim in the utterance’ instead of ‘to choak it.’ What Aufidius means to say is: 
‘That his merit was so transcendent that the recital of it excited the envy and the 
apprehensions of the people; and that, therefore, the power with which it was 
accompanied had nothing that tended more surely to its destruction than the 
chair from which it was applauded.’—Capett (vol. I, pt i, p. 97): The words 
‘So our virtue’ and the line after them are a general reflection upon the power 
of opinion over the ‘virtues’ and endowments of all men, arising from the liberties 
which he himself had just taken with those of Coriolanus: ’tis opinion, says he, 
‘the interpretation of the time, that gives them their hue, and determines the 
degree of their goodness; and that opinion will sink them, pronounce sentence 
against them, if they are too loud in their own praise and niggards in commenda- 
tion of others. Such is the connection between the parts of this speech, and such 
the tendency of the three difficult lines that precede the four riming ones. [Capell 
quotes with approval Warburton’s paraphrase-—Ep.]|—Matone: If our author 
meant to place Coriolanus in this chair, he must have forgot his character, for, 
as Mr Mason has justly observed, he has already been described as one who was 
so far from being a boaster that he could not endure to hear ‘his nothings mon- 
ster’d.’ But I rather believe ‘in the utterance’ alludes not to Coriolanus himself, 
but to the high encomiums pronounced on him by his friends; and then the lines of 
Horace may serve as a comment on the passage before us: 


‘Urit enim fulgore suo, qui pregravat artes 
Infra se positas,’ [Zpzst., II, i, 1. 13]. 


A Passage in Tro. & Cress., however, may be urged in support of Warburton’s 
interpretation: 


480 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vii. 


[s53-55. And power . . . what it hath done] 


‘The worthiness of praise disdains his worth 
If that the prais’d himself brings the praise forth,’ [I, iii, 242]. 


Yet I still think that our poet did not mean to represent Coriolanus as his own 
eulogist—BosweELt: The pride of Coriolanus is his strongest characteristic. 
We may, perhaps, apply.to him what is said of Julius Cesar: 


‘But when I tell him he hates flatterers, 
He says he does, being then most flattered,’ [II, i, 207].— 


Monck Mason: A sentiment of a similar nature is expressed by Adam, in the 
third scene of the Second Act of As You Like It, where he says to Orlando: 


‘Your praise is come too swiftly home before you. 
Know you not, master, to some kind of men 

Their graces serve them but as enemies? 

No more do yours: your virtues, gentle master, 
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you, [ll. 9-13].— 


STEEVENS: The passage before us and the comments upon it are, to me at least, 
equally unintelligible—Ranwn: His merit is so transcendent as to be blasted by 
that envy which the bare recital of it creates. And, indeed, so far does the repu- 
tation of our virtues depend upon the public opinion that power, though derived 
from the purest source, finds not a surer instrument of destruction than the 
tongue of its panegyrist; a surer grave than the chair wherein its praise is sounded.— 
SINGER (ed. i.): Well Steevens might exclaim that the passage and the comments 
upon it were equally unintelligible. The whole speech is very incorrectly printed in 
the Folio. Thus we have ’was for ’twas, [l. 39]; detect for defect, (1. 41]; virtue for 
virtues; and evidently, chair for hair. What is the meaning of ‘Hath not a tomb so 
evident asa chair’? A hair has some propriety, as used for a thing almost invisible. 
As in The Tempest, ‘—not a hair perished.’ I take the meaning of the passage to 
be: ‘So our virtues lie at the mercy of the time’s interpretation, and power, which 
esteems itself while living so highly, hath not when defunct the least particle of 
praise allotted to it. —VERPLANCK: The reading of the older printed copies is 
retained in the present edition not because it is satisfactorily explained, or likely 
to be the true text, but because I do not see any probable emendation or solution 
of the passage. It seems to me one continuous and inexplicable misprint. Singer 
would read ‘as a hair.’ His [interpretation] is not easily extracted even from the 
lines when amended as the critic proposes.—CoLLiER (Notes & Emendations, etc., 
p. 362): The main difficulty [in this passage] has arisen out of the word ‘chair,’ 
which the old corrector informs us should be cheer, in reference to the popular ap- 
plause which usually follows great actions; and, by extolling what has been done, 
confounds the doer. The change of ‘Lie’ to Live in ]. 52 is countenanced by the 
word ‘tomb’ afterwards used; and the whole passage means that virtues depend 
upon the construction put upon them by contemporaries, and that power, though 
praiseworthy, may be buried by the very applause that is heaped upon it, &c.— 
SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, etc., p. 225): To substitute Jive for ‘lie’ would be to de- 
stroy the meaning, according to Mr Collier’s own exposition. What possible 
meaning can be attached to ‘a tomb so evident as a cheer’? [Singer again proposes 
as ‘a possible reading’ ‘evident as a hair.’—-Ep.]|—Anon. (Blackwood’s Maga., 


ACT IV, SC. vii.] CORIOLANUS 481 


[53-55- And power . . . what it hath done] 
Sep., 1853, p. 323): This passage has given a good deal of trouble to the com- 
mentators. Aufidius is describing Coriolanus as a man who, with all his merits, 
had failed through some unaccountable perversity of judgment in attaining the 
position which his genius entitled him to occupy. Our virtues, says Aufidius, 
consist in our ability to interpret and turn to good account the signs of the times. 
And power, which delights to praise itself, is sure to have a downfall so soon as 
it blazons forth its pretensions from the rostrum. The MS. Corrector proposes, 
‘—as a cheer.’ The original text is obscurely enough expressed, but the new read- 
ing seems to be utter nonsense. What can Mr Singer mean by his reading, ‘Hath 
not a tomb so evident as a hair’?—INGLEBY (Sh. Controversy, p. 148): One of 
the earliest attempts to prove the modern origin of the manuscript notes of the 
Perkins Folio by means of a test-word was made by Mr A. E. Brae, of Leeds. 
His test-word was communicated to the editor of Notes and Queries and myself 
in 1853, and I made it public in my Shakespeare Fabrications. [Brae’s test-word 
was the correction cheer; Ingleby also refers to White’s change of ‘evident’ to 
eloquent in the present line.—Ep.] But Mr Richard Garnett (Atheneum, Oct. 15, 
1859) proposes to read tongue for ‘tomb,’ wondering, with the reviewer of The 
Atheneum, for August 208, 1859, how a tomb can extol. Surely it is the chair 
which is given to extol what the man of power and virtue has done! I should not 
wonder if some future Perkins should adopt all three suggestions and read, ‘Hath 
not a tongue so eloquent as a cheer!’ I apprehend no intelligent person who reads 
the passage as corrected by Perkins will doubt for an instant that @ cheer is there 
intended to be understood in the sense a shout of applause. . . . It struck Mr 
Brae that the word cheer was necessarily employed in a modern sense, and im- 
mediately undertook a close examination of the chronology of the word cheer and 
cheers, the result of which with some of the details of the investigation he com- 
municated to me. That result was that a cheer, in the sense of a shout of applause, 
was not in use till the present century, and that, consequently, it is a test-word 
which proves the manuscript notes of the Perkins Folio to be of recent origin. 
Nothing that has since been written upon the subject has in the slightest degree 
invalidated the soundness of this criticism. In the first place, I must call attention 
to the distinction between the use of three cheers and a cheer, in the sense of an 
audible expression of applause. Supposing that it could be shown that the phrase 
‘three’ cheers was employed to express shouts of applause before 1750, and which 
I challenge the world of letters to prove, it might still happen that a cheer was not so 
employed until 1800 or thereabouts, which I challenge the world of letiers to dis- 
prove. To confound three cheers with a cheer would be as ignorant a proceeding as 
to confound the phrases ‘manning the yards’ and ‘manning a yard.’ Before 1750 
I find that three cheers is a conventional phrase employed by sailors to express a 
naval salute. On the contrary, a cheer did not mean anything of the kind; nor do 
I believe that any such a term was used by sailors till it became a land expression 
for a shout of applause, and that it did not do till the present century. [The fore- 
going, as Ingleby intimates, is an amplification of his remarks on this point as 
given in his earlier volume, Shakespeare Fabrications, which appeared in 1859. 
In the present work his discussion of the chronology of this test-word occupies 
twenty full pages with illustrative extracts. There is, I think, no need to give 
even a digest of these, as the V. E. D. is now confirmatory of his contention that 
the word cheer, in the sense of a shout of approbation, is quite modern. Finally, 


31 


482 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vii. 


ae 
[53-55. And power . . . what it hath done] 
the question itself is one which concerns the MS. corrections in Collier’s folio 
more nearly than the elucidation of the present passage as it appears in the Folio. 
For an excellent answer to Ingleby’s remarks on this particular point see The 
Shakespeare Mystery, Atlantic Monthly, September, 1861, pp. 364, 365.—Ep.]— 
Tycuo Mommsen (Der Perkins Folio, p. 239): Whatever special idea the word 
‘chair’ conveys in the sense of ‘Orator’s rostrum,’ whence continuous praise 
issues (naturally nothing more than self-praise), only gives obliquely and dis- 
tantly the same idea which cheer gives plainly; at the same time ‘chair’ is the more 
formative, and more nearly likened to a tomb, since we can think of the rostrum 
in the form of a pulpit. But such a weak comparison may have sufficed for the 
editor of the Folio—who quite misunderstood the passage—to introduce a half 
nonsensical word ‘chair’; just as the utterly senseless ‘unto’ seems to have sprung 
from the stupid idea that ‘commend’ [sic], etc., connects its objective with ‘to’ 
or ‘unto.’—Staunton: After ‘so hated, and so banished’ (1. 50) there is obviously 
a chasm which it were vain to think of filling up. The sentiment to be conveyed 
in ll. 51-55 was, no doubt, identical with that expressed in Hamlet, I, iv, 23, 24, 33-36. 


‘So oft it chances in particular men, 
That for some vicious mole of nature in them, 


. 


Their virtues else (be they as pure as grace 
As infinite as man may undergo) 

Shall in the general censure take corruption 
From that particular fault.’ 


And so, proceeds Aufidius, our very virtues appear false by the misconstruction of 
the age, and even authority, which can exact applause, has not a more inevitable, 
i. e., certain, tomb for its beset actions than the very chair of triumph wherein they are 
extolled.—R. G. Waite (Sh. Scholar, p. 365): The reading of the Folio is utterly 
incomprehensible; but the errors which make it so are those of a compositor who 
sets his ‘matter’ by ear, as many of them do. ‘Chair’ and cheer were formerly 
pronounced alike; and I have even heard some old people call a chair a cheer. 
To this fact we owe the misprint of Macbeth’s speech in Act V, sc. iii. This push 
‘Will chair (cheere in the original) me ever, or disseat me now.’ Mr Collier’s folio 
very properly changes ‘chair’ to cheer in this passage. But Mr Singer must pardon 
me for thinking his proposal deplorably tame and prosaic, even if it have any 
meaning at all. It is plain to me that Aufidius, after saying that ‘our virtues lie 
in the interpretation of the time’ (that is, in the time’s appreciation of us, not in 
our appreciation of the time, as the writer in Blackwood seems to think), adds 
that the elaborate eulogy on a great man’s tomb is a testimony to his power not 
so eloquent as a cheer to him in his lifetime. Few who write for the press can 
be fortunate enough not to know many compositors who would find no difficulty 
in setting up ‘evident’ for ‘eloquent.’ Long since it seemed plain to me that we 
should read, ‘Hath not a tomb so eloquent as a cheer To extol what it hath done.’ 
[In the margin, against this, the former owner of the copy from which this note is 
taken, W. N. Lettsom, queries, ‘What is an eloquent tomb?’—Ep.]—R. G. Wurre, 
in his edition of this play which appeared nearly ten years later, agrees with 
Staunton that some lines ‘have quite surely been lost’ after ‘and so banish’d,’ 1. so. 


ACT Iv, SC. vii.] CORIOLANUS 483 


[53-55. And power . . . what it hath done] 
His interpretation of the present passage differs materially from that in his earlier 
work; he says: ‘Aufidius is impressing upon his hearers [sic] the consequences of 
Coriolanus’ inflexible, impracticable nature. He tells them that our virtue, i. e., 
our moral power, lies in our appreciation of the time, our apprehension and mas- 
tery of the situation in which we are placed; and he adds, as a corollary, that 
power, arrogant of commendation, has not so sure, so manifest a grave as the 
seat of authority to which its deeds have raised it, and which its overweening 
egotism is likely to use in such a manner as to alienate those to whom it owes its 
elevation. There is not a comparison between a tomb and a chair, but a likening of 
“a chair to extol,” &c., toa tomb. The allusion is to the curule chair, which is very 
properly made a symbol of power in the state, as in the time of Coriolanus the 
right of sitting in it belonged to Consuls, Preetors, Atdiles, Flamens, and, of 
course, to Dictators. Shakespeare had read in North’s Plutarch, “There the Con- 
sul Cominius going up into his chayer of state in the presence of the army,’ &c., 
ed. 1579, p. 242. I was once of the opinion that Shakespeare meant Aufidius to 
utter a thought similar to that which is expressed by Bertram in All’s Well, I, ii, 48-51, 


“His good remembrance, sir, 
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb; 
So in approof lies not his epitaph 
As in your royal speech,” 


and therefore conjectured that we should read, ‘“‘Hath not a tomb so eloquent 
as a cheer”; and in Mr Collier’s folio the latter word was found, but with the 
then incongruous “‘evident”’ left unchanged. This reading, however, although con- 
sistent with itself and appropriate to the occasion, is incongruous with the larger 
purpose of the speech, which is clearly indicated in the two lines ending ‘‘strengths 
by strengths do fail.”’—KEIcHTLEY (Expositor, p. 370): I agree with Steevens in 
regarding this passage and the comments on it as being equally unintelligible. 
The meaning seems to be one which Shakespeare frequently expresses (see Tro. & 
Cress., I, iii.; II, iii.; III, iii.) —self-praise is no praise. ‘Unto itself commendable’ 
is, then, standing high in the possessor’s estimation. [Which, by the way, is merely 
a paraphrase of Warburton’s explanation—Ep.] The sense yielded by ‘tomb’ 
and chair is most trivial, and I would, therefore, venture to propose, ‘Hath not 
a tongue so evident as a charmer’s.’ Charms and spells, we know, were murmured 
or muttered in a low tone (‘wizards that peep and that mutter,’ Isaiah, viii, 19); 
and if the final letters of charmer’s had been effaced—like ‘in him,’ a few lines 
higher—and only char left, the printer might easily have taken it for chair, and 
so have made ‘tomb’ to correspond. Charmer occurs in Othello, III, iv, and the 
poet had met with it in his Bible. I have introduced it again in Ant. & Cleo., 
IV, viii—Hupson (ed. i.): We do not quite understand why a cheer should be 
spoken of as eloquent, and should much rather suppose ‘as eloquent as a fear’ 
to be the right reading. And, for aught we can see, chair might as well be a mis- 
print for tear as evident for eloquent—HENRY WELLESLEY (p. 27): Warburton 
here seems to lose sight of the distinction between Virtue and Power; and because 
the tomb of Power would infallibly convey the meaning of the grave of Power, for 
Power ceases with life, the tomb is transferred to Virtue, whereby tomb is made 
to bear the less usual sense of monumental epitaph or posthumous eulogy deliv- 
ered as from a chair or a rostrum. The context, however, speaks of actual power, 


484 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vii. 


[53-55. And power . . . what it hath done] 
living, and in full exercise. To any such harsh mode of interpretation I should 
prefer venturing to treat the whole line as corrupt, and to amend the passage thus: 


‘And Power, unto itself most commendable, 
Hath orators accordant as a choir 
To extol what it hath done,’ 


i. e., the credit we obtain for Virtues depends upon the opinion of the day for its 
value and power. And Power again, over and above the natural self-confidence, 
which is as an inward panegyric and commendation, never lacks the oratory of 
applauding multitudes to chime in with all its doings. [Wellesley, it is apparent, 
has failed utterly in comprehending Warburton’s elucidation. There is therein 
nothing to suggest an epitaph or eulogy. Again, the substitution of chow for 
‘chair’ is quite inadmissible, as the word for a band of singers, or a part of the 
church building, was uniformly spelt quire or quier until long after the time of 
Shakespeare. Our spelling of the word, choir, did not come into general use until 
toward the end of the eighteenth century.—Ep.]J—BatrEvy (i, 99): Line 54 is to 
me undiluted nonsense. All the misdirected efforts of the critics have not been 
able to extract from it a consistent meaning, while the very difficulty of doing 
it proves the text to be corrupt. If we consider attentively what the speaker 
intended to say, we shall find it to this effect, that power, when its acts are in- 
trinsically praiseworthy, does not meet with the slightest token of applause from 
the men of the time for what it has done; and to illustrate his sentiment he gives 
us, or designs to give us, an instance of something which notoriously makes a 
very faint demonstration in that way. As neither a tomb nor a chair can be con- 
sidered as designating an instrument or medium for the contemporary laudation 
of meritorious acts of power, our task is to find two words which will denote what 
those words ought to denote with clearness, but do not, and, at the same time, so 
far resemble the actual reading as to render probable the substitution of the latter 
in the place of the former. The only suggestion with this view which I have 
happened to meet with at all entitled to serious discussion is the following, which 
is partly, at least, due to the Perkins folio: ‘Hath not a tone so evident as a cheer.’ 
There are several strong objections to a reading which, at the first glance, appears 
so plausible. 1. A cheer cannot, with any propriety, be called a tone. It may 
have a tone—e. g., it may be ironical, as the House of Commons knows, but it is 
not a tone itself. 2. A cheer, which must be here construed as a general term, 
meaning the same as cheers, is a loud demonstration of applause, whereas the 
strain of the passage requires a feeble one to constitute the requisite antithesis 
between what is merited and what the least that could be given. 3. Tone is a 
word never used by Shakespeare, and cheer is never used by him in the modern 
sense of shout of approbation. The reading which I have to propose is as follows, 
‘Hath not a trump so evident as a child’s To extol what it has done.’ With our 
modern associations the word trump, which is here the same in signification as 
wumpet, may not at first be consonant with our feelings; the immediate idea 
presenting itself may be that of the trump of the card-table, with its figurative and 
slang applications, rather than the trump of fame. In Shakespeare’s pages the 
term is used solely as the equivalent of trumpet. My proposed reading, after 
the first shock has been overcome, will probably be allowed to convert the line into 
good sense with that antithetical point and that spice of sarcasm which are 


ACT IV, SC. vii.] CORIOLANUS 485 


[53-55. And power . . . what it hath done] 

requisite for the force of the passage. The degeneration of trump into tomb and 
child’s into chair, in the hands of copyists and compositors, is easily conceivable; 
while it exemplifies that insensibility to the meaning of the document before them 
into which both those classes of imitative manipulators have a perpetual tendency 
to fall. [Had Bailey but read with reasonable care Warburton’s explanation he 
would, I think, hardly have made the mistake of paraphrasing 1. 53, ‘power, when 
its acts are intrinsically praiseworthy’; and would not, assuredly, have connected 
both the words ‘tomb’ and ‘chair’ with the infinitive ‘To extol.’ I may freely 
admit that I am not yet sufficiently recovered from the ‘shock’ of Bailey’s emenda- 
tions to characterise them adequately; that task I gladly leave to the patient 
reader.—Ep.]|—HALLIwELt: Not having met with any criticism upon this passage 
in the least degree satisfactory, I leave it with the same remark as Steevens, and 
have nothing of my own to offer—LEo (Coriolanus, p. 125): In order to penetrate 
the poet’s meaning and intention we must not examine a phrase, taken out of the 
intention of the scene, but we must feel with the acting persons, and out of this 
feeling we must know how they think and how they speak. And, therefore, let 
us now become Aufidius for a moment, and see whether it might be possible for 
us to think on the ‘chair,’ the sella curilis in Rome, and reflect on things which 
do not stand in any relation to the passionate feelings of envy and revenge which 
dominate us. Aufidius feels quite well that he has lost his position as the first 
general of the Volces, and that his glory is darkened by Coriolanus; he hates him, 
and has the clear intention to ruin him so clear that he knows already his way 
and means to doit. Though Coriolanus is hated by him and some other Volscian 
Generals, he is not hated by the people, and to make him so must be the first 
step. Aufidius knows that, though small merits are willingly acknowledged, 
people do not like to be reminded of great and important merits, which lay them 
under the obligation of gratitude, and that he who is idolized is nearest to be hated 
as soon as he himself mentions his deeds. ‘He has a merit (great enough) to 
choke it in the utterance,’ and, therefore, he provokes Coriolanus, in V, vi, and 
hopes that in his fury he will boast of what he has done for the Volscian people, 
and that the ‘fire’ of his merits will be driven out by the ‘fire’ of the people’s 
pride. But that does not lie in the nature of Coriolanus, and by going just the 
contrary way, and hurting the self-love and vanity of the Volces in reminding 
them of the origin of his name of Coriolanus, he facilitates for Aufidius the attain- 
ment of his purpose. But that is a fact, though it is of a stirring dramatic effect 
(Coriolanus perishing in Antium by the same contempt of the people as in Rome) 
which has nothing to do with the former combinations of Aufidius. He intends 
to provoke Coriolanus to become his own panegyrist, and so he says: 


‘Power, unto itself most commendable, 
Has not a tomb so evident as a claim 
To extol what it has done,’ 


i. e., ‘If he, who has merits, claims the extolment of his deeds, his power is lost,” 
and, therefore, I propose not to read ‘chair,’ but claim.—Iniw. (Sh. Notes, p. 39): 
What has been written above is all very well, and when I wrote it I was fully 
convinced of having hit the bull’s-eye; but upon mature consideration I fear that 
‘chair’ is better than claim, because it gives the same sense in a more poetical 
form. The juxtaposition of ‘tomb’ and ‘chair’—the chair (sella curilis) having 


486 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. vii. 


[53-55. And power . . . what it hath done] 

materially a greater right and chance of becoming possibly a tomb than a claim 
ever could—is just what a poet writes, while a scrutinizing critic afterwards alters 
‘chair’ to the very correct, but very prosaical, claim. Claim says all, and, therefore, 
does not say enough.—C. & M. CowpEen CiarkE (Shakespeare): We think the 
passage as it stands means, ‘Our virtues lie at the mercy of popular interpretation 
in our own day; and power, ever anxious to exact commendation, has no tomb 
so sure as the pulpit of eulogium which extols its deeds.’ It must be borne in 
mind that here ‘chair’ is used for the public rostrum, cathedra, or pulpit, whence 
orations, laudatory or otherwise, were delivered to the Roman people.—P. A. 
DANIEL (p. 63): Qy, read this passage thus: 


“so our virtue 
Lives in the interpretation of the time, 
And, how e’er unto itself most commendable, 
Hath not a tomb so evident as a care 
T’ extol what it hath done.’ 


Mitford first conjectured that chaire should be care. Taken as a whole, however, 
the reading I suggest has not, I believe, been proposed before. The following 
passages may be quoted by way of illustration: ‘For then we wound our modesty 
and make foul the clearness of our deservings, when of ourselves we publish them,’ 
All’s Well, I, iii, 5-7. ‘He that is proud eats up himself: pride is his own glass, 
his own trumpet, his own chronicle; and whatever praises itself but in the deed, 
devours the deed in the praise,’ Tro. & Cress., II, ili, 149-152.—Rev. JOHN HUNTER: 
So whether anything will be accounted virtuous in us depends on the appropriate- 
ness of the time in which we show it. And power, which justifies itself to itself 
as being thoroughly deserved, has not so sure a tomb, or means of extinction, as 
when it is placed in a seat of dignity intended to exalt, or glorify, its achieve- 
ments.—WHITELAW: Our virtues are virtues no longer if the time interprets 
them as none. The soldier who is all soldier is misinterpreted in time of peace; 
for his unfitness for peace is seen, his fitness for war is not seen. So Coriolanus— 
the power he had won in war but wielded in peace, conscious of having deserved 
well, could to itself commend itself, but the chair of authority, which irritated the 
people by seeming to do nothing else but commend his past exploits fo them, 
proved just the tomb—the evident, inevitable tomb—that swallowed up the 
power it intended to display. So he offended the Romans when he had taken 
Corioli; much more will he offend the Volscians when he has taken Rome.— 
Scumipt (Coriolanus): Perhaps we should place a comma after ‘chair,’ and in- 
terpret ‘to extol,’ etc., If it (power) speaks in high terms of former deeds.— 
W. A. Wricut: Though obscurely expressed, the general sense of this passage 
seems to be, Our reputation must be left for our contemporaries to decide. (The 
expression is here emphatic, for the point on which Aufidius insists is the forget- 
fulness of the populace and their ingratitude for past services.) The orator’s 
chair from which a man extols his own actions is the inevitable tomb of that power, 
however deserving, which is the subject of praise——Hunson (ed. ii.): I am now 
thoroughly satisfied that the old text is right; or that, if any change is wanted, 
it should be ‘Hath ne’er a tomb.’ And I am indebted for this, in the first instance, 
to Mr Joseph Crosby; though I since find that Staunton and Whitelaw have 
given substantially the same solution of the difficulty. The changes made and 


ACT IV, SC. vii.] CORIOLANUS 487 


[53-55. And power . . . what it hath done] 
proposed have all proceeded upon the supposal that the construction is, ‘Hath 
not a tomb to extol’; whereas the construction is ‘a chair to extol,’ that is, ‘a 
chair that extols.’ With this key to the meaning the old text is readily seen to be 
right. . . . The speaker’s argument is that Coriolanus, by his arrogance and 
tyranny in peace, will surely and speedily kill the popularity he has gained in war. 
And so the meaning here is that power, joined to a haughty, domineering temper, 
and loved and gloried in, for its own sake, hath no grave so certain, or imminent, 
as a chair of state bestowed in honour and extolment of its deeds. Or, to put the 
matter in concrete form, let Coriolanus, with his habits of military prerogative, 
and of lording it over all about him, be once advanced to a place of civil authority, 
and he will soon become an object of public hatred; so that the very seat which 
rewards and blazons his exploits, will be sure to prove his ruin and the tomb of 
his power.—BEECcHING (Henry Irving Sh.): This may mean either ‘virtues are not 
virtues unless acknowledged to be such by our contemporaries,’ or, more probably, 
‘our virtues become vices if they are mistimed.’ Coriolanus’s soldier-like virtues 
became vices when he recognized no distinction between what was appropriate to 
war and peace. [The next passage may be interpreted], ‘Power, when it is entirely 
self-satisfied, finds, in general, no readier grave than the right of praising itself.’ 
‘Chair’ seems to mean magistrate’s chair. and so ‘authority.’ The sense of the 
passage is that power may lose itself by being boastful; but there is very probably 
some corruption of the text. [Beeching, in his notes prepared for the Falcon Edition 
a year or so later, gives the following alternative interpretation: ‘The difficulty 
of this passage arises from an uncertainty whether it is said in praise or blame 
of Coriolanus. In the former case the sense is, “Time, the great interpreter, 
reveals our virtues (notwithstanding banishment, etc.); and power which appreci- 
ates its own desert will not find so conspicuous a monument as a public chair from 
which it may be praised.” Taken this way, the passage connects with ‘“‘he has a 
merit,” etc., making the contrast of |. 57 sharper; and it preserves the Shakespearian 
sense of tomb = “‘monument’’), as in Henry V: I, ii, 228, “Or lay these bones 
in an unworthy urn, Tombless, with no remembrance over them.” Also, “the 
interpretation of (= by) the time” is construed as the same phrase afterwards 
(V, iii, 76).’ Beeching then gives his former note as the interpretation in blame 
of Coriolanus—Ep.]—PERRING (p. 308): This can only mean that the chair of 
office, which silently proclaims a man’s merit, is too often, if he could but foresee 
it, the very tomb of his power; his exaltation accelerates his precipitation; from the 
pinnacle to the pit is but a step— KINNEAR (p. 329): The meaning of the passage 
is, And power, as to itself most praiseworthy, has no tomb so certain as the 
pulpit to extol, i. e., for extolling what it hath done. The same public chair that 
pronounced the panegyric, utters the sentence of banishment or death.—G. JoIcry 
(Notes & Queries, 28 Nov., 1891, p. 423): May not the Folio reading, ‘as a chair,’ 
be a mistake for ‘as such air’? Aufidius seems to mean that, since our virtues 
lie in the interpretation of the time, departed power has no tombstone to extol 
its good deeds that will stand in evidence against the erroneous judgment ex- 
pressed by the passing breath of its contemporaries. Cf. the phrase ‘airy fame’ 
in Tro. & Cress., [I, iii, 144]; the passage in AJl’s Well (I, ii, 48-50), ‘His good re- 
membrance,’ &c., and the last couplet of Sonnet lxxxi. Perhaps ‘not’ is a mis- 
print for bwf—Pacr: Thus our very virtues are subject to the judgments passed 
on them by the age in which we live; and power, always ready to commend itself, 


488 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT IV, sc. vii. 


[53-55. And power . . . what it hath done] 
finds its surest means of destruction in the pulpit from which it proclaims its own 
exploits. Malone objects that ‘our author’ has represented Coriolanus as not 
being able to hear his brave deeds mentioned, and that, therefore, he could not 
here speak of him as a boaster. But it is not ‘our author’ who thus speaks, but 
Aufidius, whose spoken opinions of Coriolanus are not always founded on knowl- 
edge or sincerity—CHOLMELEY: Our reputation depends upon the view that our 
contemporaries take of our virtues. However laudable the great man may really 
be, he courts certain ruin when he takes to proclaiming his own praises. The 
age ‘interprets’ the eulogy and forgets the virtue—E. K. Cuampers (Warwick 
Sh.): I do not think that ‘chair’ means either the chair of the panegyrist or the 
chair of the magistrate. ‘Not a tomb so evident as a chair’ is surely a way of 
saying ‘no tomb at all,’ ‘not a wooden chair, much less a sumptuous seated statue.’ 
Then ‘unto itself’ I take as ‘in itself,’ an odd construction, but formed from ‘to 
give commendation unto virtues.’ The whole passage is a general moral drawn 
from Coriolanus’s fate in Rome, suggested by the thought of his merit just referred 
to in 1. 50. I paraphrase: ‘Coriolanus was meritorious, but merit is as our con- 
temporaries choose to think it. A man may have power and deserve commenda- 
tion, yet, if his fellow-citizens choose, he may be blotted out, and not the slightest 
monument left to speak his praise.’ The kind of sentiment is that so often put in 
the mouth of a Greek chorus—W. W. SKEaT (Notes & Queries, 34 May, 1890): 
The whole sense of this passage comes out at once by simply calling to mind that 
chair, in Tudor English, was sometimes used in the sense of ‘pulpit.’ Milton has 
it so; see ‘Chair’ in the WV. E. D., sect. 5. Cotgrave has: ‘Chatre, f. a Chair; also 
a pulpit for a preacher.’ And in modern French it still has this sense, as distinct 
from its doublet, chaise. And this is the solution of the whole matter. The idea 
might have been picked up in any church, for, indeed, the pulpit is commonly 
more ‘evident,’ z. ¢., conspicuous, than any of the fine tombs in the choir. The 
general sense is just this: ‘Power, however commendable it may seem to itself, 
can find no tomb so conspicuous, no tomb so obvious, as when it chooses for itself 
a pulpit whence to proclaim its own praises.’ This agrees very nearly with the 
explanation in the note to the Clarendon Press edition [W. A. Wright]; but it seems 
to be more emphatic and picturesque to explain the word as ‘pulpit’ than merely as 
‘orator’s chair..—HERFORD (Eversley Sh.): Our reputation for virtue is in the hands 
of our contemporaries; and power, confident of its own merits, has no more obvious 
road to ruin than by proclaiming them. This, I think, the clear sense—VERITY 
(Student’s Sh.): Aufidius has been saying that Coriolanus, in spite of his noble ser- 
vices to the State, has been brought down by some failing which set his fellow-coun- 
trymen against him. This leads (‘so’) to the general reflection that every man, 
however great, is conditioned by public opinion, and that self-laudation, above all 
in the highly-placed, is suicidal. [Verity cites Malone’s objection to the accusa- 
tion of self-praise urged against Coriolanus, and refutes it in substantially the 
same manner as does Page.—Ep.] The obscurity and metre of lines 51-53, the 
uncertainty in |. 57, and the poor rhymes in 56-59 combine to suggest that some 
corruption of the whole passage has taken place. But of many emendations, 
none is at all taking. Note that ‘the time’ is Shakespeare’s constant phrase for 
‘the age,’ ‘one’s contemporaries.’ I do not think that it is possible to interpret, 
‘Time, the great interpreter, reveals our virtues,’ as if Shakespeare had written 
‘time’ alone (not ‘the time’). ‘Lie in’=‘to be in the power of, to depend on,’ is 


ACT IV, SC. vii.] CORIOLANUS 489 


[53-55- And power . . . what it hath done] 


a common Shakespearian use—STaNLEy Woop: The general sense of this seems 
to me to be as follows, A man’s greatness depends not so much upon his character 
or his acts, as upon people’s judgment of them. Coriolanus’s power in Rome, 
intrinsically great and worthy of all praise (unto itself=in itself), has been re- 
duced to nothing because the praises which were showered upon him by the 
Senate and the nobles were offensive to the people and the Tribunes, whose inter- 
pretation of his merits has prevailed. This explanation assumes that Aufidius 
knew what course events had taken in Rome, a reasonable assumption consider- 
ing his recent association with Coriolanus.—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): 
Only let it be that the virtue or ability in us is equal to understanding the right 
moment, let it but co-ordinate itself with the occasion, lie in th’ interpretation of 
the time, and then the power that is most alone in being merely to itself commend- 
able hath no Tombe and epitaph, not a monument, as it were, so ready with praise 
of past achievements as it has a Chaire, or throne for them which shall be a new 
seat of life and honor. Aufidius is moralizing as to Martius with himself in mind. 
He is applying the virtue that in Martius turned banishment into a new sort of 
triumph for him, to his own present crisis, due to Martius, when he must await 
the ripe moment to turn the present obscuration, practically the Tombe, of his 
ability into a new exposition, or throne, of it. As Martius had the strength to 
strangle, as it were, in its utterance the sentence against himself, and make it 
recoil on those who pronounced it, so he would do. Only let. his virtue come out 
in the interpreting of the time or right occasion, and his power, most commendable 
now unto itself alone, will have not dead and gone honors so obviously as a new 
seat of homage. This passage has generally been accounted extremely obscure 
and difficult. . . . To us it seems not corrupt, but introspective. It is character- 
istic of Shakespeare’s most darkly brooding impersonations. The creature of his 
dramatic scheme in this case is suffering from a self-caused depreciation of him- 
self. It stings him to mental processes born of competition with a nature his own 
different nature emulates, and understands while plotting to surmount.—Gorpon: 
The meaning is, that power, which is naturally most pleasing to itself, is never 
so obviously near its grave as when (speech succeeding to action) the time comes 
to pronounce a laudation of its achievements. ‘Chair’ means a chair of state 
from which official pronouncements are made. Most editors that I have seen go 
wrong on this passage. They have a picture of self-satisfied ‘power’ openly 
extolling itself, and are naturally puzzled to see how this can apply to Coriolanus, 
who notoriously hated brag. But ‘unto itself most commendable’ does not mean 
that power is self-satisfied; it means that power always seems more satisfactory 
to the person who possesses it than to those who do not. And it is nowhere said 
that power extols ‘itself.’ The passage must be taken in connexion with what 
goes before, or the sense is lost. Aufidius has just said that no matter what your 
merits and achievements may be, everything depends on how your contemporaries 
take them. He goes on to add that there is nothing more risky for a man who has 
done great things than when the time comes to have them proclaimed. People 
may take such praise either way. If they take it one way, he’s a hero, and the 
saviour of the state; if they take it the other, he’s a traitor and a tyrant. The 
application to Coriolanus is plain—S. P. Saerman (Tudor Sh.): The meaning 
is that we cannot be judges of our own virtues; they must be stamped with the 
approval of the society in which we live before they can become current. Shake- 


490 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vil. 


[53-55. And power . . . what it hath done] 
speare seems much interested in what we may call the social sanctions of virtue 
in Tro. & Cress. In the mood of Aufidius Troilus asks, ‘What is aught, but as 
*tis valu’d’ (II, ii, 52). Hector replies (II, ii, 53-56): 


‘But value dwells not in particular will; 
It holds his estimate and dignity 
As well wherein ’tis precious of itself 
As in the prizer.’ 


Later in the play (III, iii, osff.) Ulysses and Achilles discuss the same point. 
[Further]: A person who possesses power, though it merit commendation, cannot 
more speedily terminate its effectiveness than by praising what he has accom- 
plished by it—DrrcuHTon: It is doubtful whether this means ‘our virtues depend 
(for their efficacy) upon the way in which they are regarded by those among 
whom we live’ or ‘our virtues depend (for their efficacy) upon the manner in which 
we interpret, and adapt ourselves to, surrounding circumstances.’ The latter 
view agrees better with the explanation I have given of ll. 50, 51 [g. v.], but it is 
doubtful whether ‘the interpretation’ can mean ‘the interpretation we put.’ 
If the reading of ll. 51-55 is genuine, the meaning probably is, ‘and power (i. ¢., 
a man in high position), however much it may consider itself deserving of praise, 
has no such certain grave of its reputation as a chair from which it pronounces its 
own eulogy.’—Casr (Arden Sh.): I am inclined to interpret this passage in close 
connection with the beginning of the speech, and to regard it as a general reflection 
referring quite as much, or more, to the Tribunes as to Coriolanus, to whom it is 
always confined. Aufidius has declared that the people will recall Coriolanus as 
eagerly as they expelled him, and after a digression as to the causes of his over- 
throw and a tribute to his merit, he proceeds to this effect. Thus the light in 
which our virtues are regarded depends upon the time (the fluctuation of popular 
opinion which then denounced Coriolanus and will now acclaim him), and power, 
however self-justified, finds a grave in the very seat of authority whence it extols 
its actions. What Aufidius describes had, in fact, happened in the last scene, when 
the grave of their power opened before the Tribunes at the very height of their 
self-congratulations, and ‘the interpretation of the time’ begins to change rapidly 
under the face of circumstances. So, too, the proverbs that follow refer to the 
former reverse and that in progress; perhaps also to the final reverse of all, but 
Aufidius does not take up that subject till he has ended his reflections and pre- 
pared to go. Then, still thinking first of Coriolanus’s triumph, he says, ‘When, 
Caius, Rome is thine,’ etc.—TuckER Brooke (Yale Shakespeare): Power, though 
(when considered absolutely) most worthily attained, is never so near its grave as 
when the successful man, seated in the chair of authority, seeks to justify the 
means by which he has risen. [I am somewhat loath to add any words of mine 
to this long note. I wish, however, to call attention to the Text. Notes, wherein 
it will be noticed how negligible has been the influence of any of the proposed 
alterations of the original, on subsequent texts. Singer’s alteration, hair, had but 
one follower, who later recanted, and Collier’s MS. correction, cheer, but two— 
Collier himself and White in his second edition. As to the many interpretations 
and paraphrases of this passage as in the Folio it may, I think, be said that no 
elucidator has materially bettered that issued originally by Warburton nearly 
one hundred and eighty years ago.—Eb.] 


ACT IV, SC. vii.] 


CORIOLANUS 491 


One fire driues out one fire; one Naile,one Naile ; 56 
Rights by rights fouler, ftrengths by ftrengths do faile. 


57. Rights by rights fouler] Right’s by 
right fouler Pope, Varr. Ran. Right’s 
by right foiled Han. Right's by right 
fouled Warb. Rights by rights founder 
Johns. conj. Var. ’21, Hal. Sta. Ktly, 
Hunter, Coll. iii, Chambers, Case. 
Rights by rights foul are Ritson. Rights 
by rights suffer Coll. ii. (MS.), Huds. i. 


Rights by rights foil’d are Sing. ii. 
Rights by rights falter Dyce, Wh. Del. 
ii, Glo. Leo, Words. Wh. ii, Craig, Neils. 
Beeching, Herford, Verity, S. Wood, 
Gordon, Dtn, Tucker Brooke. Rights 
by rights fail and Ktly conj. 

57. firengths by firengths do] strength 
by strength doe Hunter. 


56. One fire driues out one fire; one Naile, one Naile] MaLone: So in King 
John, ‘And falsehood, falsehood cures, as fire cures fire,’ [ITI, i, 277]. Again in 
Two Gentlemen, ‘Even as one heat another heat expels, Or as one nail by strength 
drives out another,’ [II, iv, 192]. Again in Jul. Ces., ‘As fire drives out fire, so 
pity, pity,’ [III, i, 171].—ANpERs (p. 83) compares ‘And as out of a planke a nayle 
a nayle doth drive So novell love out of the minde the auncient love doth rive,’ 
Brooke, Tragicall Historye of Romeus and Iuliet, 207, 208. 

57. Rights by rights fouler] WarBuRTON: This has no manner of sense. We 
should read ‘Right’s by right FOULED. Or, as it is commonly written in English, 
foiled, from the French fowler, to tread or trample under foot.—HEatu (p. 426): 
Mr Warburton ought at least to have given us the English word foiled, for fouled 
is certainly not English.—Jounson: I believe ‘rights,’ like ‘strengths,’ is a plural 
noun. ‘Rights by rights founder.’ That is, by the exertion of one right another 
right is lamed.—CapELL: The first two of these rimes have no sort of connexion 
with what goes before, and but little with what comes after them, but they have 
some. Aufidius is ruminating how he shall get rid of Marcius, and his reverie 
breaks out into saws, as Shakespeare’s age would have called them; after which 
he apostrophizes his competitor, bidding him expect a like issue in the contention 
between them with that express’d in those saws. The contested word, ‘fowler,’ 
signifies more boisterous; and ‘rights,’ legal rights, and the claims of them, which 
are often urg’d boisterously enough—Monck Mason (Comments, etc., p. 260): 
I think the present reading affords as good sense as any of the proposed amend- 
ments. ‘Right’s by right fouler’ may well mean, ‘That one right or title, when 
produced, makes another less fair.’ All the short sentences in this speech of 
Aufidius are obscure, and some of them nonsensical. [It will be noticed that the 
reading which Mason commends is that of Pope; it is to be feared that he had not 
examined the original, and so was unaware that he was commending and explain- 
ing Pope and not Shakespeare—Ep.]—MatoneE (Variorum of 1821): There can, 
I think, be no doubt that these words relate to the rivalship subsisting between 
Coriolanus and Aufidius, and not to the preceding observations concerning the ill- 
effects of extravagant encomiums. It is manifest that Aufidius would never 
represent his own cause or rights as fouler, or less worthy than the rights of Corio- 
lanus, and that what he here means to say is, ‘As one fire cures another fire, 
and one nail by strength drives out another, so the rights of Coriolanus shall 
yield to be overpowered by my rights, and his strength be subdued by mine’; and 
this meaning is furnished by the word founder, which, I am confident, was intended 
by the author, and is now placed in the text instead of ‘fouler,’ the original cor- 
rupted reading. Though a strenuous advocate for adhering to the ancient copies, 


492 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vii. 


[57. Rights by rights fouler] 
except in cases of manifest errors of the press, I have not hesitated to admit this 
emendation, the text being certainly corrupt; the change so slight as the substi- 
tution of two letters for one; and the word now adopted so little dissimilar from 
the corrupted reading that they might easily have been confounded both by the 
eye or the ear. Thus one part of the line corresponds and is in opposition with the 
other; and, instead of no sense, a clear and consistent meaning is obtained. [It 
is to be deplored that Malone hesitated to admit that this emendation is Johnson’s, 
and not his own. It is hardly credible that Malone was unaware of this; Johnson’s 
note is given in both the Variorum of 1773 and of 1778, as well as in his own 
edition—Ep.] This verb [founder] is used precisely with the same metaphorical 
signification in a passage in Henry VIIT., which fully supports the present emenda- 
tion in this point, ‘All his tricks founder; and he brings his physic After his pa- 
tient’s death,’ [III, ii, 40]. The notions suggested in the text were extremely familiar 
to Shakespeare, and occur in various places in his works. Thus in Venus & Adonis, 
‘Strong-tempered steel his stronger strength obeyed,’ [l. 111]. Again in Henry V: 
‘Think we King Henry strong And, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him,’ 
{II, iv, 48]. Again in King John, ‘Controlment for controlment; so answer France,’ 
[I, i, 20]. Again in Venus & Adonis, ‘The iron bit he crusheth ’tween his teeth, 
Controlling what he was controlled with,’ [ll. 269, 270]. Again, in Richard III, 
‘rights for rights Hath dimm’d his infant morn to aged night,’ [IV, iv, 15. Malone 
concludes this rather long note with a verbose repetition of his reluctance to admit 
innovations into the original text, urging as an extenuating reason that, as his 
predecessors had frequently done so, he feels that he should, at least, be accorded 
a like privilege where the text is manifestly corrupt—Ep.]—STEEVENS: ‘Rights 
by rights fouler.? Thus the old copy. Modern editors, with less obscurity, ‘Right’s 
by right fouler,’ &c., z. e., what is already right, and is received as such, becomes 
less clear when supported by supernumerary proofs. Such appears to me to be the 
meaning of this passage, which may be applied with too much justice to many of 
my own comments on Shakespeare. Dr Warburton would read fouled. There 
is undoubtedly such a word in Sidney’s Arcadia, ed. 1633, p. 441, but it is not 
easily applicable to our present subject, ‘Thy all-pervading eye foul’d with the 
sight.’ The same word likewise occurs in the following proverb, ‘York doth foul 
Sutton,’ z. e., “exceeds it on comparison, and makes it appear mean and poor.’— 
Ritson: I am of Dr Warburton’s opinion that this is nonsense; and would read, 
with the slightest possible variation from the old copies, ‘Rights by rights fowl are,’ 
etc.—BosweE LL: I should not consider myself as dealing fairly by the reader if 
I had not laid before him Mr Malone’s emendation and the reasons he has as- 
signed for it; although I can by no means acquiesce in either the one or the other — 
SINGER: I could wish to read, ‘Rights by rights foiled,’ &c., an easy and obvious 
emendation. [Singer wrongly assigns the reading, fownder, to Malone, and quotes 
in full Steevens’s explanation as though it applied to the Folio reading, which, as 
will be noticed, Steevens distinctly hesitated to attempt on account of its obscurity. 
His interpretation refers to Pope’s amendments in the line. As to Singer’s reading, 
foiled, it will be seen that Hanmer anticipated him.—Ep.]—Knrcur: Malone sub- 
stitutes founder, and the emendation has provoked three pages of controversy 
amongst the commentators. We may understand the meaning of the original 
expression if we substitute the opposite epithet, fairer. As it is, the lesser rights 
drive out the greater—the fairer rights fail through the fowler. In Taming of the 


ACT IV, SC. vii.] CORIOLANUS 493 


[57- Rights by rights fouler] 
Shrew, fouler is not used in the sense of more polluted; we have, ‘The fouler for- 
tune mine, and there an end,’ [V, ii, 98. As the perspicacious reader may see for 
himself Malone’s appropriation of Johnson’s emendation so far from provoking 
controversy, was greeted with complete silence by Steevens and Ritson. Boswell 
merely remarks faintly that he does not ‘acquiesce.—Ep.]—Dertrus: The verb 
‘fail’ belongs to ‘rights’ as well as to ‘strengths’—Rights weaken other rights, 
the first ones become weaker or worse, and strengths weaken other strengths. 
Thus ‘fouler’ is to be understood, not the emendation founder which Malone places 
in the text. Other emendations are equally unnecessary.—Corimr (Notes and 
Emendations, etc., p. 362): Most editors have seen that ‘Rights by right fouler’ 
must be wrong, and have proposed various changes, though none so acceptable as 
that given [by the MS. Corrector, suffer]. The last couplet requires no elucidation 
when suffer is substituted for ‘fouler,’ an error that may, in part, have been occa- 
sioned by the letter f having been employed instead of the long /. It is difficult 
to say how far some independent authority may, or may not, have been used in 
this emendation.—T. MommseEn (Der Perkins Folio, p. 103): The commentators have 
rightly been doubtful of the extraordinary construction as well as the extraordinary 
choice of the word fowl; the aphorism lacks a verb. At the same time objection 
may be taken to [the MS. correction] suffer on the ground that it is too weak a 
word. If the spelling in the original manuscript were a half French form, foufer, 
then the misprint fouler is not far out—SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, etc., p. 225): 
For ‘rights by rights fouler’ I substitute ‘rights by rights foil’d are,’ which, as 
anciently written, might easily be mistaken for ‘fouler.’ The passage may then 
be found to convey the sense of the poet without any violent departure from the 
old text.—Dycr: That a verb lies concealed under the corruption ‘fouler’ is 
indubitable; as to the word I have introduced [falter], it was frequently spelt 
‘faulter’ (so in Shelton’s Don Quixote, pt first, p. 372, ed. 4to, ‘who when they 
perceiue their Ladies to faulter,’ &c.), and therefore might easily have been mis- 
taken for ‘fouler.’ [Kinnear likewise makes the same suggestion—Ep.]—C. & 
M. Cowpen Crarke (Shakespeare): ‘Fouler’ has been changed under the idea 
that a verb is required in this place, but it appears to us that Shakespeare, in this 
line as elsewhere, makes one verb do double duty in a sentence; and here the 
meaning is, ‘Rights by rights fouler do fail, strengths by strengths do fail.’ See a 
very similar passage in Timon, IV, iii, 28, ‘This much of this will make black, 
white; foul, fair; wrong, right; base, noble; old, young; coward, valiant’; where 
the verb ‘make’ before ‘black’ gives ‘make’ to be understood as repeated before 
‘foul,’ ‘wrong,’ ‘base,’ ‘old,’ ‘coward,’ thus doing multiplied duty in the sentence. 
In the present passage the word ‘fouler’ bears the sense of less fair or more unfair, 
as Shakespeare more than once uses the common expression ‘foul play’ for unfair 
practice, and uses the word ‘foully’ for unfairly in All’s Well, V, ili, 154, ‘I am 
afeard the life of Helen, lady, Was foully snatched.’—Scumipr (Coriolanus): 
Certain editors have altered ‘fouler’; but why should Shakespeare not have said 
that wrong comes to pass through wrong, and often the better through the worse?— 
WuitELAw: ‘Fouler’ has been altered in a variety of ways, but may, after all, be 
right, and is at least as good as the conjectures. The meaning seems to be, 
‘Rights yield to rights—often the fairer to the fouler—when strength yields to 
strength. It is the superior strength not the better right that wins.’ Aufidius 
(as in I, ii.) confesses his own baseness.—Hunson (ed. i.) accepts Collier’s MS. cor- 


494 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. vii. 


(57. Rights by rights fouler] 
rection as ‘seeming, on the whole, preferable to the others; though founder strikes 
us as a very plausible emendation.’ [Hudson, following his predecessors, gives 
it to Malone. In his ed. ii. Hudson adopts the original text, whereon he has this 
note: ‘The meaning of this line expressed in full, probably is that the better 
rights succumb to the worse, and the nobler strengths to the meaner, the sense of 
fail being anticipated in the first clause, and that of fowler continued over the 
second. Here, as elsewhere, Aufidius is fully conscious of the foulness of his pur- 
poses. The only thing he cares for is to get a sure twist on his antagonist. . . . 
Dyce observes “That a verb lies concealed under fowler is undubitable.” But 
this is far from being indubitable to me; I believe the old text to be right.’— 
HALLIweELL: The only emendations worth noting are founder, suggested by John- 
son, and falter, proposed and adopted by Dyce. On the whole I prefer the first 
suggestion, believing that Shakespeare intended something more intensitive than 
faltering —R. G. Wuite: I accept here, though not with entire confidence, Mr 
Dyce’s emendation as the best of the many that have been proposed for this 
passage. The extreme corruption of this play warrants, in fact, requires, unusual 
freedom of conjecture in regulating the text. [White in his enumeration of the 
various readings assigns to Malone the emendation founder.—Ep.]—W. A. WRIGHT: 
By taking ‘right’ in the sense of legal claim, title, ‘fouler’ as simply equivalent to 
less fair, worse, the sense of the passage may very well be, ‘just titles have to yield 
to those that are worse in point of law.’ Shakespeare uses ‘foul’ for bad more 
than once, ‘fouler’ for worse. See Tam. of Shrew, V, ii, 98. So also ‘foulest’ 
for worst in Tro. & Cress., I, iii, 359, ‘Let us, like merchants, show our foulest 
wares.’—Ro.rFe: The Folio reading makes sense, indeed, but it is clear that ‘rights 
by rights’ is the full counterpart in the antithesis to ‘strengths by strengths,’ 
and that a verb is required to balance ‘fail.’ Falter, proposed by Dyce, seems to 
us the best of the various emendations—WorpswortH (Historical Plays, i, 127): 
If I might venture to add one more to the many corrections offered on the reading 
of the Folio, ‘fouler,’ I would suggest ‘foul, and,’ z. e., become weak and corrupt. 
‘A foul’ in rowing is when one boat knocks against another; and if this is done in 
a race, a fresh start is rendered necessary. Shakespeare might have picked up 
the word from barge-men on the Avon. [This last supposition is quite impossible; 
‘foul,’ in the sense suggested by Wordsworth, is unknown before the middle of 
the nineteenth century.—Ep.]|—Pacre: Taking the passage as it stands the verb 
‘fail’ must be understood from the end of the line, ‘better rights give way to worse 
ones’; but this interpretation does not preserve intact the antithetical reasoning 
of the lines.—BrErcuinc (Henry Irving Sh.): The principle here laid down is more 
general [than as given by Wright]. ‘One nail drives out another nail,’ not a worse 
nail a better one. We have, therefore, adopted Dyce’s emendation—E. K. 
CHAMBERS (Warwick Sh.): Aufidius continues in an excited strain, ‘Reputations 
rise and fall, each pushing another out of the way. SomayI push away Coriolanus.’ 
The excitement is shown by the rhyme, so rare in this play. Clearly a verb is 
wanted, and neither Dyce’s nor any other of the numerous emendations proposed 
is as good [as Johnson’s].—Miss C. PorTER (First Folio Sh.): The forcing of rights 
is under discussion here, hence the fitness of fowler rights, more violence causing 
rights first established to be superseded. So strength, that placed the first, by 
other strengths is made to faile. He is thinking of himself as made to faile, 
adopting these proverbs to the force Martius has applied to meet the situation, 


ACT V, SC. i] CORIOLANUS 495 


Come let’s away : when Caius Rome is thine, 58 
Thou art poor’ft of all; then fhortly art thou mine.exeunt 


A tus Quintus. 
[Scene I. | 


Enter Menenius, Cominius, Sicinius, Brutus, 2 
the two Tribunes, with others. 


59. Thou art] Thou’rt Pope, Theob. Ran. Rome. A publick Place. Cap. 
Han. Warb. Johns. Dyce, Words. ebcel: 


Huds. ii. 3. the two Tribunes] Ff, Cam. Cla. 
1. Actus Quintus.] Act V. ScENE 1. Om. Rowe et cet. 
Rowe et seq. with] Ff, Rowe,+, Cam. Cla. 


Rome. Pope, Han. A publick Place Neils. and Cap. et cet. 
in Rome. Theob. Warb. Johns. Varr. 


and which he now proposes to apply himself to force the situation Martius has 
forced, and so force it out again—A. E. TuHIsELTon (Notes & Queries, 3 March, 
1900, p. 164): It seems probable that ‘fouler’ represents ‘foulter’ in the manu- 
script. The latter word may be found in Florio’s Montaigne, Bk ii, ch. viii, 
‘If you be wise, the horse growne-old betimes cast off Lest he at last fall lame, 
foulter, and breed a scoffe.’ [This word does not appear to be known to any of 
the lexicographers or compilers of dialect dictionaries. I am inclined to think it 
a misprint for the form faulter, given by Dyce for falter—Ep.|—Casr (Arden 
Sh.): The Folio reading is not indefensible because an awkward ellipse of some 
word like grow or become is conceivable; but founder, as the nearest suggestion, is 
here adopted because the idea of complete overthrow is needed. The fire, the 
nail, strengths are each totally overpowered; so too must rights be, and not merely 
weakened.—Gornon: These general reflections close, according to Shakespeare’s 
habit, in a proverbial couplet. All the proverbs convey one meaning: that power 
falls by stirring up inevitably another power to oppose it. So Coriolanus has 
fallen once, at the height of his achievement, by the opposition of the people; so 
he will fall again, at the height of his new achievement, by the opposition of 
Aufidius-—DrIGHTON: Rights give way to other and better rights; power, how- 
ever great, has to yield when it meets greater power. [As Deighton adopts Dyce’s 
conjecture in his text, the foregoing is an explanation and justification of Dyce 
rather than an attempt to explain Shakespeare’s text. I cannot convince myself 
that any change inthe Folio is either necessary or desirable. As the Cowden 
Clarkes so ably demonstrate, this elliptical form of expression is eminently char- 
acteristic of Shakespeare, particularly in the later plays; besides, the sentiment 
is also characteristic of Aufidius. In I, x. he had declared that nothing should 
restrain him in the satisfying of his hatred for Marcius. The rights of host to 
guest, the prayers of priests which ordinarily restrain fury, shall be by him dis- 
regarded. For Aufidius to make such a general statement that rights falter or 
founder by other rights is both inconsistent to the situation and weakening to his 
character.—Ep.] 

1. Actus Quintus. [Scene I.]] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): The part of the 
Act now marked Scene I. was shown on the fore-stage, and, as we may guess, the 


496 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act v, SC. i. 


Menen. No, Ile not go : you heare what he hath faid 
Which was fometime his Generall : who loued him 5 
In a moft deere particular. He call’d me Father : 

But what o’that ? Go you that banifh’d him 

A Mile before his Tent, fall downe, and knee 

The way into his mercy : Nay, if he coy’d 

To heare Cominius {peake, Ile keepe at home. IO 


5. Which was] To one Coll. MS. A_ mile...tent, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
7. Go you] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Warb. him; A mile...tent Knt, Dyce, 
Go you, Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. Cam.+. him, A mile...tent Han. et cet. 
Go, you Cap. et cet. 8. knee] kneele or kneel Fi, Rowe, 
7, 8. him A Mile...Tent,] Fi. him, Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Hal. 


entry of the group was made from the end of the outer-stage (either right or left of 
the rear-stage compartment). This entrance stands all through the play for most of 
the Roman localities, as the ‘Cyprus grove’ side, opposite, stood, all through, for 
the open country and the out-of-Rome localities. When Menenius goes on his 
errand (l. 73) perhaps he made his exit through the ‘Cyprus grove.’ The dia- 
logue, after he leaves, gives space of time enough for the audience to suppose him 
on his way, and when the Roman group goes off (1. 86) as it had entered, then, at 
the point marked now as Scene II, Menenius appeared again from the ‘Cyprus 
grove’ side, and, approaching the rear-stage or tent of Coriolanus, held his parley 
with the two men on guard who barred his progress (see Folio stage-direction II, i.). 

5. Which was] CoLtrer (ed. ii.): That is, ‘You hear what he hath said, who was 
formerly general to Coriolanus.’ The old annotator of the Folio, 1632, did not under- 
stand the passage when he altered it, ‘To one sometime his general’; ‘he’ refers 
to Cominius, not to Coriolanus. 

6. In a most deere particular] W. A. Wricut: That is, with the strongest 
private friendship. Cominius loved him not only as his general for his soldierly 
qualities, but with the most affectionate personal regard. The use of the word 
‘particular’ is suggested by the word ‘general’ in the line before; and the two are 
frequently contrasted. Compare IV, vii, 16.—Casr (Arden Sh.): The NV. E. D. 
gives an excellent instance of ‘particular’ under ‘personal relation, . . . personal 
interest, regard or favour,’ from Weever, Ancient Funeral Monuments, 1631, p. 
797, ‘Out of his particular to their Towne, hee procured of Queene Elizabeth a 
Charter of Incorporation.’ 

8. knee] W. A. Wricut: That is, go on your knees. The later folios have 
corrupted it to ‘kneel.’ In a slightly different sense the word occurs in Lear, II, 
iv, 217, ‘I could as well be brought To knee his throne.’ Similarly Shakespeare 
uses the verbs ‘to lip,’ ‘to mouth,’ ‘to tongue,’ ‘to nose,’ ‘to foot,’ ‘to arm’? = 
to take into the arms. 

g. if he coy’d] W. A. Wricut: That is, if he disdained. The adjective is used 
by Shakespeare more in the sense of disdainful, scornful, than in that of shy, which 
it has at present. Compare Venus & Adonis, 112, ‘Yet was he servile to my coy 
disdain.’ And Two Gentlemen, I, i, 30, ‘To be in love, where scorn is bought with 
groans; Coy looks with heart-sore sighs.’ Cotgrave has: ‘Mespriseresse: f. A 
coy, a squeamish or scornfull dame.’ [The VV. £. D. quotes the present line as the 
sole example of the verb ¢o coy in the sense of to disdain ——Ep.]—Case prefers to 


ACT V, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 497 


Com. He would not feeme to know me. II 
Menen. Do you heare ? 
Com. Yet one time he did call me by my name : 
I vrg’d our old acquaintance, and the drops 
That we haue bled together. Coriolanus I5 
He would not anfwer too : Forbad all Names, 
He was a kinde of Nothing, Titleleffe, 
Till he had forg’d himfelfe a name a’th’fire 
Of burning Rome. 


Menen. Why fo : you haue made good worke : 20 
A paire of Tribunes, that haue wrack’d for Rome, 
To make Coales cheape : A Noble memory. 22 
16. too] to Ff. 21. wrack’d for] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 


18. ath’] o’th’ Fy, Rowe, Pope, Sing. ii. sack’d fair Han. reck’d for 
Theob. Han. Warb. 7th’ Johns. o’the Warb. wreck’d for Coll. Ktly, Huds. i. 
Cap. Coll. Del. Dyce, Cam.+, Words. wreck’d fair Mason, Dyce ii, Huds. ii, 
Huds. ii, Craig, Neils. 7’the Var. ’73 Words. Neils. wrack’d poor Long MS. 
et cet. (ap. Cam.). wrack’d fair Wh. ii. 

20. you haue] you've Pope, Theob. wrecked your Kinnear. sacked all Wray 
Han. Warb. Johns. Dyce ii, Huds. ii, conj. rack’d for Johns. et cet. 

Words. 


interpret ‘coy’d’ here, as if he showed reluctance rather than disdained, since ‘we 
know from what follows that Coriolanus both heard Cominius speak and answered 
him.’ 

21. that haue wrack’d for Rome] WARBURTON: We should read reck’d, i. e., 
been careful, provident for. In this insinuation of their only minding trifles he 
satirises them for their injustice to Coriolanus, which was like to end in the 
ruin of their country. [Theobald, in a letter to Warburton dated Sep. 26, 1726 
(Nichols, ii, 616), proposed this reading and interpretation, though he did not 
adopt it in either of his editions. Warburton has appropriated it without the 
slightest acknowledgment.—Ep.]—HEatx (p. 426): Why is not the ancient reading 
[sic] ‘vack’d for Rome’ full as good [as Warburton’s]? ‘That is, A pair of Tribunes, 
that have tortured their brains for Rome’s welfare, only to fall the price of coals; 
insinuating that the citizens would soon have an opportunity to warm themselves 
by the fire of their own houses.—STEEVENS: ‘Rack’d for Rome’ is surely the 
right reading. To rack means to harass by exactions, and in this sense the poet 
uses it in other places. ‘The commons hast thou rack’d; the clergy’s bags Are 
lank and lean with thy extortions,’ [2 Henry VI: I, iii, 131]. I believe it here 
means in general, You that have been such good stewards for the Roman people, 
as to get their houses burned over their heads, to save them the expense of coals,— 
Monck Mason (Additional Comments, etc., p. 48): I cannot understand this 
passage notwithstanding Mr Steevens’s explanation of it, which appears to me to 
be forced and unnatural. I should read it thus, ‘—that have wreck’d fair Rome.’ 
It has been supposed that Shakespeare dictated some parts of his plays to an 
amanuensis; in that case the words wreck and rack might easily have been mis- 
taken for each other, as they agree precisely in sound. [W. W. Williams, in The 


32 


498 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. i. 


[2t. that haue wrack’d for Rome] 


Parthenon, May 3, 1862, p. 19, makes the same suggestion, though he does not 
offer the like fanciful reason for the supposed error, and is quite unaware that he 
was anticipated in this emendation. Dyce, in his ed. ii, and the Cambridge 
Editors in both editions assign the reading ‘fair Rome’ to Williams.—Ep.]— 
CoLurER: The meaning of this passage seems to have been hitherto mistaken, 
and therefore always printed ‘A pair of tribunes that have rack’d for Rome.’ 
Menenius intends to say that the tribunes have wrecked a noble memory for Rome 
by occasioning its destruction. Mr Amyot concurs in this new interpretation. 
In the old copies it is printed ‘wrack’d,’ the old orthography of the time for 
wreck’d, and not for rack’d. [Mr Amyot was the erudite antiquarian, founder of 
the Camden Society, who, according to the D. NV. B., ‘largely aided the Percy, the 
Shakespeare, and other literary Societies.,—Ep.]—Dyce (Remarks, etc., p. 163): 
In spite of Mr Amyot’s approbation I cannot but think that Mr Collier has pointed 
and interpreted this passage most erroneously. The First Folio gives it literatim 
thus, ‘A paire of Tribunes, that have wrack’d for Rome’ where (as the other modern 
editors rightly understand the word) ‘wrack’d’ is merely the old (and not very 
unusual) spelling of ‘rack’d’; so in Lear, V, iii, 313, ‘he hates him That would 
upon the wracke of this tough world Stretch him out longer.’ In Beaumont and 
Fletcher’s Faithful Friends, I, i, according to the MS. (now before me) from which 
Weber published that play, ‘My Soules wrackt,’ 7. e., ‘My soul is rack’d’; and 
in the 4to, 1640, of Fletcher’s Bloody Brother, I, i, ‘—and I Not set upon the 
wracks?’ where the 4to, 1639, and the Folio, 1679, have ‘rack.’ . . . ‘A noble 
memory!’ is spoken ironically, ‘memory’ meaning here memorial, as in IV, v, 
73 of the present play, and in innumerable passages of early writers besides the 
following one, ‘Turn all the stories over in the world yet, And search through all 
the memories of mankind,’ Fletcher, Mad Lover, V, iv. Besides, is not Mr 
Collier’s ‘new interpretation’ inconsistent with the feelings of an ancient Roman, 
who would have scorned the very idea of Rome’s ‘memory’ being ‘wreck’d,’ even 
if the Volscians had burned the city to the ground? [For ‘memory’ in the sense 
of memorial see also V, vi, 188, ‘Yet he shall haue a noble memory.’—Ep.]— 
BapuaM (The Text of Sh., p. 290): Mr Dyce has very properly objected to the 
alteration by which ‘a noble memory’ is made the case after ‘wracked.’ There 
is so much propriety in the exclamation, and so very little in the expression of 
wracking a noble memory, that the punctuation must not be disturbed. But Mr 
Dyce is not so successful in defending the old reading, nor, as I think, in inter- 
preting ‘wracked’ as equivalent to racked in our modern orthography; for though 
his note is conclusive as to the old practice of confounding the spelling of the two 
words, it is impossible to attach any sense to the expression, who have racked for 
Rome. A transposition restores the only meaning which Menenius can be con- 
ceived to intend, ‘A pair of tribunes that have wracked Rome, for To make 
coals cheap.’—VERPLANCK: That is, a pair of magistrates who have wrecked, or 
destroyed, the noble reputation of Coriolanus (now become ‘nothing, titleless’) 
which once belonged to Rome; and all this only to make coals cheap in the burning 
city. The annotators explain [the more common reading] rack’d, ‘who have har- 
assed by exaction’; from which I can extract no satisfactory meaning in this 
connexion.—LxEo (Coriolanus): Perhaps we should read work’d, for that is the 
sense: The Tribunes have won a noble memory (ironically) by caring for the public 
interest (as they ought to do as tribunes), and making coals cheap, just as Publius 


| 
f 


eS 


f- ye 


ACT V, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 499 


[21. that haue wrack’d for Rome] 


and Quintus had the merit to have brought the best water by conduits to Rome.— 
Hupson (ed. i.) characterizes Steevens’s explanation of rack’d as ‘very obscure 
and far-fetched.” He adds: ‘It is true, as alleged in favour of the common read- 
ing, that rack also was often spelt wrack; but this does not shake us from that given 
by Mr Collier.’—[Dyce, as usual, caused Hudson to waver in his faith, see Text. 
Notes.—Ep.]—W. A. Wricut: That is, that have strained every effort, exerted 
yourselves to the utmost, for Rome. To ‘rack’ as a transitive verb signifies to 
strain, or stretch, as in Much Ado, IV, i, 122, ‘That which we have we prize not 
to the worth, . . . but being lack’d and lost, Why then we rack the value.’ And 
Mer. of Ven., I, i, 181, ‘Try what my credit can in Venice do: That shall be rack’d 
even to the uttermost.—BEEcuING (Henry Irving Sh.): It is not at all impossible 
that Steevens may be right in taking the metaphor from a ‘racking steward.’ 
That expression occurs in a passage of Sidney’s Arcadia, quoted by Richardson, 
‘The court of affection, held by that racking steward, remembrance’; we still 
speak of ‘rack-rents.—PERRING: ‘Wracked’ is the word which is set down in the 
Folios, and, inasmuch as our word ‘wrecked,’ wherever it occurs, is almost invari- 
ably spelt in the original copies with an ‘a’ and not with an ‘e,’ the presumption 
is that ‘wrecked’ is the word which is here authorized by the Folios. The meaning 
would be that the tribunes had (to borrow words from Macbeth) ‘laboured in their 
country’s wreck.’ The preposition ‘for,’ coming after ‘wreck,’ would be abnormal, 
but not necessarily un-Shakespearian. It might be illustrated by such expressions 
as the following: ‘Revenge the heavens for old Andronicus,’ Titus And., IV, i, 
129; ‘How unluckily it happened, that I should purchase the day before for a little 
part, and undo a great deal of honour!’ Timon, III, ii, 52; ‘Spare for no faggots,’ 
I Henry VI: V, iv, 56. [Perring mentions with scant respect the two emenda- 
tions ‘ Recked for’ and ‘Racked for,’ giving as a third ‘wreaked for,’ which may be 
shrewdly suspected to be his own contribution, as he takes pains to elucidate this 
new reading thus: ‘They had wreaked their vengeance on Coriolanus by expatriat- 
ing him, under colour that it was for the public good; but what had they effected? 
They had cheapened coals! and cheap enough they would be when the city was, 
as it were, the colliery to supply the fuel for its own conflagration; the allusion, of 
course, is to Coriolanus having refused to be called by any title, ‘Till he had forged 
himself a name o’the fire Of burning Rome.” ’—Ep.]—Veriry (Student’s Sh.): That 
is, striven, strained. Menenius ridicules the net result of their strenuous efforts on 
behalf of the common weal, viz., a fall in the price of coals. The metaphor is 
‘to strain, wrest,’ as by means of a rack or instrument.—Miss C. PorTtER (First 
Folio Sh.): That is, wrought vengeance for themselves on Coriolanus’s name, as 
her representative, with ruinous results, to make charcoal cheap when Rome is 
burned. Menenius makes words suit his meaning in their suggestive sense. Here 
in ‘wrack’d’ he seems to have combined the sense of wrought ruin, and wreaked 
vengeance in a way according with the usage of ‘wrecked’ and ‘wreake’ (see IV, 
vi, 90). And the words used by Plutarch at this stage of the story are again in 
point here, ‘In this while, all went still to wrack at Rome.’ As before explained 
by editors, merely in the sense of ‘laboured’ or ‘wrought’ the entire meaning con- 
veyed by the passage seems not to be covered.—DeicuTon: No instance has been 
cited of the verb [to rack] in the neuter sense [strained for], or of its being coupled 
with for. I have therefore followed Dyce in accepting Williams’s conjecture 
wrecked fair. 


500 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT v, SC. i. 


Com. 1 minded him, how Royall ’twas to pardon 23 
When it was leffe expected. He replyed 
It was a bare petition of a State 25 
To one whom they had punifh’d. 

Menen. Very well, could he fay leffe. 27 

24. it was leffe] it was least Pope, 25. bare] base Mason. rare Dyce ii, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Coll. iii. Huds. ii, Words. 
(MS.), Wh. Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 26-28. Two lines, ending: well... 
least it was Varr. Ran. regard Johns. et seq. 


25. a bare petition] WARBURTON: ‘Bare,’ for mean, beggarly—Jounson: I 
believe rather, a petition unsupported, unaided by names that might give it influ- 
ence.—STEEVENS: ‘A bare petition,’ I believe, means only a mere petition. Corio- 
lanus weighs the consequence of verbal supplication against that of actual punish- 
ment.—Monck Mason (Comments, etc., p. 260): I have no doubt but we should 
read ‘a base petition,’ meaning that it was unworthy the dignity of a state to peti- 
tion a man whom they had banished. [Sir William Blackstone (Shakespeare 
Society Papers, 1844, p. 99) makes the same suggestion, but without further com- 
ment.—Ep.]—Matone: In r Henry IV: [I, iii, 108], and in Timon, [IV, iii, 220], 
the word ‘bare’ is used in the sense of thin, easily seen through, having only a 
slight superficial covering. Yet, I confess, this interpretation will hardly apply 
here. In the former of the passages alluded to the editor of the First Folio sub- 
stituted base for bare improperly. In the passage before us perhaps base was the 
author’s word.—Dettus: Coriolanus, in the report of Cominius, elucidates that 
however royal an unexpected pardon may be, it amounts to no more than a bald 
request, a naked petition of a state, extended to one whom the state had punished. 
‘Bare’ expresses the disregard such a request deserves—W. W. WittiAms (The 
Parthenon, 3 May, 1862, p. 19): I hope I may be excused for suspecting that Corio- 
lanus had replied scornfully to Cominius that ‘It was a rare petition of a state.’ 
‘Rare’ and ‘strange’ were used by Shakespeare interchangeably in the sense of 
extraordinary—as indeed they still are; and, in the first scene of this drama, 
Coriolanus had displayed similar temper and in similar terms when describing 
the exultation of the mob at having ‘a petition granted them a strange one.’ In 
the present passage he appears to have remarked sarcastically that it was a rare 
(z. é., strange or extraordinary) proceeding that a banished man should be petitioned 
for mercy by the very men who had banished him.—Kricuttey (Expositor, 
p. 371): I do not well understand ‘bare’ here. Mason’s reading is not quite 
satisfactory—BuLLocu (p. 188): In I, ix. the speech of Cominius, beginning at 
l. 66, gives the history of the hero being named Coriolanus. His after banish- 
ment and what followed explain the passage and emendation, ‘It was a rebaptizing 
of estate To one whom they had Race ati rep (Warwick Sh.): That is, 
a bare-faced petition. Rome had not pardoned Coriolanus; yet Rome had the 
face to ask pardon from him.—Orson: That is, a petition made by one who 
comes bare-headed, cap in hand. Compare Dekker’s Gull’s Hornbook, ch. i, 
‘Antiquity puts off his cap, and makes a bare oration in praise of the virtues of 
it.’—[The explanation given by Steevens is, to me at least, quite sufficient. For 
this figurative use of ‘bare’ compare ‘uttering bare truth,’ Sonnet lxix, 1. 4; 
‘they live by your bare words,’ Two Gentlemen, I, iv, 46—Ep.] 


=e) re 
a 
Re 

h 


ACTIV SCe te] CORIOLANUS 501 
Com. I offered to awaken his regard 28 

For's priuate Friends. His anfwer to me was 

He could not ftay to picke them, in a pile 30 


Of noyfome mufty Chaffe. He faid, ’twas folly 
For one poore graine or two, to leaue vnburnt 
And {till to nofe th’offence. 
Menen. For one poore graine or two ? 
I am one of thofe : his Mother, Wife, his Childe, 35 
And this braue Fellow too : we are the Graines, 
You are the mufty Chaffe,and you are {melt 
Aboue the Moone. We muft be burnt for you. 
Sicin. Nay,pray be patient : If you refufe your ayde 
In this fo neuer-needed helpe, yet do not 40 
Vpbraid’s with our diftreffe. But fure if you 
Would be your Countries Pleader, your good tongue 
More then the inftant Armie we can make 
Might ftop our Countryman. 44 


29. For’s] For his Cap. Varr. Ran. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. 


Hal. Ktly, Wh. i. 


32. leaue] leave’t P. A. Daniel, Huds. 


ii, Words. 


33-36. Lines end: graine...Wife... 
Graines Han. Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Sing. 


pela: 
35. I am] I’m Pope,+ (—Var. ’73). 
his Childe] and child Var. ’85. 


36. too: we are] we’re Han. Bell. 

40. fo newer-needed| so-never-needed 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. (Er- 
rata), Craig. so never-heeded Steev. 
Varr. Sing. i, Knt i, Sta. Hal. Hunter. 

41. Vpbraid’s] Ff, Rowei, Han. Coll. 
Dyce, Sta. Wh. Cam.+, Huds. Craig, 
Neils. Upraid us Pope i. (misprint). 
Upbraid us Rowe ii. et cet. 

42. Countries] country’s Rowe et seq. 


28. I offered] W. A. Wricut: That is, I attempted, endeavored. So in Mid. 
N. Dream, IV, i, 216, ‘But a man is but a patched fool, if he will offer to say what 
methought I had.’ And Pericles, IV, ii, 116, ‘Ay, he: he offered to cut a caper 
at the proclamation; but he made a groan at it.’ [This sense of the word still 
survives, as many others also, in the current speech of Ireland, for example, 
‘Don’t offer to do it,’ which is either a warning or a piece of advice.—Eb.] 

32. to league vnburnt] P. A. Danrer: Qy. read, ‘leave ’¢ unburnt,’ 7. e., the 
pile of musty chaff. You may ‘nose’ an offence, but you can only burn that which 


produces it. 


33. to nose] Compare Hamlet, IV, iii, 38, ‘You shall nose him as you go up 


the stairs.’ 


38. Aboue the Moone] De tus calls attention to a like hyperbole in Hamlet, III, 
iii, 36, ‘O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven.’ [Compare also, ‘There were no 
living near her; she would infect to the north-star,’ Much Ado, I, i, 258.—Ep.] 

40. so neuer-needed helpe] VeRPLANCK: This is the original text, which has 
the clear meaning of ‘help never so much wanted.’ There is, therefore, no pro- 
priety in the alteration of ‘never-heeded help.’ For other examples wherein short 
phrases, mostly containing participles, are compounded into epithets see ABBort, 


§ 434. 


502 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Vv, Sc. i, 
<Mene. No: Ile not meddle. 45 
Sicin. Pray you go to him. 

Mene. What fhould I do ? 
Bru. Onely make triall what your Loue can do, 

For Rome, towards Martius. 

Mene. Well, and fay that Martius returne mee, 50 

As Cominius is return’d, vnheard: what then ? 

But as a difcontented Friend, greefe-fhot 

With his vnkindneffe. Say’t be fo ? 53 


46. Pray] I pray Cap. Steev. Var. 
loge 113% 
you] you now, Dyce ii, Huds. ii, 
Words. 
47. What] Why? what Han. 
do?) do there? Ktly. 

49. towards] tow’rds Pope,+ (—Var. 
73). 

50, 51. As three lines, ending: Mar- 
tius...return’d...then? Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Coll. Del. Dyce, Hal. 


kindness: and what then? Sic. Say it 
be so...will, Menenius, Han. (ending Il. 
50, 51 asin Popeand ll. 52-54: Friend... 
then... Menenius,) unheard,—what then? 
—a discontented friend...unkindness? 
Say’t be so? Sic. Say it be so...will, 
Menenius, Cap. (ending Il. 50, 51 as 
Pope; ll. 52-54: friend...so Menenius,). 
Unheard; what then? or not unheard, 
but...Unkindness? Sic. Say’t be so... 
will, Badham, Huds. ii. (ending Il. 50, 
51 as Pope, and ll. 52-54: as...his... 


will.). 

51. then?] then? how then should I 
return Ktly. then, oblige me to come 
back Words. 


Ktly, Wh. Cam.+, Huds. i, Craig, 
Neils. 
51. ts return’d) return’d F,, Rowe. 
51-54. unheard ...unkindneffe... for 
Sicin. Yet...will] Unheard,  but...un- 


50-53. Well, and... Say’t be so] Bapwam (Criticism Applied to Sh., p. 16): 
There are several reasons for doubting the soundness of this passage. The half- 
line by itself would excite no suspicion, for there is a natural pause after the words 
‘what then?’ [This half-line, ‘Unheard; what then?’ is due to Pope, see Text. 
Notes.| When, however, we find the next line beginning with ‘but,’ a conjunction 
which has nothing to do with the preceding clause, we cannot help suspecting that 
there is an hiatus to be supplied with some such words as these, ‘not as a joyful 
herald, But as a discontented friend,’ &c. If this be thought too bold, ‘But’ 
must be at once discarded; and we are the more inclined to adopt this alternative 
because it will also enable us to change the expression of ‘discontented friend,’ which 
is somewhat unusual in the sense of a friend who has had his request denied, and 
to get rid of the Alexandrine in the following line. We propose, therefore, to read: 


“As a discountenanc’d friend grief-shot with his 
Unkindness. 
Sic. Say’t be so; yet your good will,’ &c. 


[Ten years later, that is, in 1856, Badham returns to the question of the proper 
arrangement of these lines. In that interval he has evidently repaired his omission 
of consulting either an original folio, or Vernor and Hood’s reprint of 1807, since 
he transcribes the lines as there given, and so makes no mention of the half-line 
due to Pope. He likewise discards his emendation for ‘discontented.’ Of the 
passage as a whole he says: ‘“‘Say’t be so” ought to be given to Sicinius; as for 


ACT V, SC. 1.] CORIOLANUS 503, 


Sicin. Yet your good will 
Muft haue that thankes from Rome, after the meafure 55 
As you intended well. 
Mene. Ile vndertak’t : 
I thinke hee’! heare me. Yet to bite his lip, 
And humme at good Cominius, much vnhearts mee. 
He was not taken well, he had not din’d, 60 


57. undertak’t] Ff, Dyce, Sta. Rowe et cet. 
Cam.+, Words. Neils. undertake it 60-67. Mnemonic Warb. 


the metre, it might be safely left to the ear of any judicious reader. But there is 
a special reason for arranging the passage as it ought to stand: 


“Men. Well and say that Marcius 
Return me, as Cominius is return’d, 
Unheard; what then?—but as 
A discontented friend, grief-shot with his 
Unkindness.”’ 


The verse of six syllables [I. 51] may be thought by some to be purposely defective; 
but, in the first place, there is no pause in the sense after the word “as,” and 
pauses of this kind are generally catalectic, or ending in the middle of a foot; and, 
in the second place, the sense is as defective as the metre, for, as the words now 
stand, Menenius is made to suppose that Marcius may return him unheard, but 
as a discontented friend—that is, without listening to him, but without granting 
his request. Read 


“Unheard, what then? or not unheard, but as 
A discontented friend,” &c.’ 


50. returne mee] W. A. Wricut: That is, send me back. In this transitive 
sense ‘return’ is now used of things, but not of persons. Compare Timon, III, 
vi, 40, ‘I hope it remains not unkindly with your lordship that I returned you an 
empty messenger.’ 

51. vnheard: what then?] KricuTtry (Expositor, p. 372): I would supply, 
How, then, should I return? [As before noted, in the case of Badham, Keightley 
is here supplying words to round out a half-line for which Pope is responsible-—En.] 

55, 56. that thankes ...As you intended] For other examples of this con- 
struction, wherein ‘as’ approaches the meaning of a relative pronoun, see ABBOTT, 
§ 280. 

59. humme at good Cominius] Brercuinc (Henry Irving Sh.): Compare 
Macbeth, II, vi, 41, ‘The cloudy messenger turns me his back And hums’; also, 
1 Henry IV: III, i, 158, ‘I cried “hum,” and “‘well, go to,” But mark’d him not a 
word.’ Palsgrave has, ‘I humme, I make a noyse like one that lysteth not speake, 
je fays de muet.’ 

60. He was not taken well, he had not din’d] Warpurton: This observation 
is not only from nature, and finely expressed, but admirably befits the mouth of 
one who in the beginning of the play had told us that he loved convivial doings.— 
SrEEVENS: Mr Pope seems to have borrowed this idea. See Hpist., I, ver. 127, 
‘Perhaps was sick, in love, or had not din’d.’ 


504 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACrav,iscans 


The Veines vnfill’d, our blood is cold,and then 61 
We powt vpon the Morning, are vnapt 

To giue or to forgiue; but when we haue ftufft 

Thefe Pipes,and thefe Conueyances of our blood 

With Wine and Feeding, we haue fuppler Soules 65 
Then in our Prieft-like Fafts : therefore Ile watch him 


63. we haue] we've Pope, Theob. Words. 
Han. Warb. Johns. Dyce ii, Huds. ii, 64. our] Om. Pope,+, Coll. MS. 


60. He was not taken well] W. A. Wricut: That is, the time for the interview 
with him was not chosen wisely. Compare Mid. N. Dream, III, ii, 16, ‘Where 
I did him at this advantage take.’ So Hamlet, III, iii, 80, ‘He took my father 
grossly, full of bread.’ 

61. The Veines vnfill’d, our blood is cold] THEOBALD: Lord Bacon somewhere 
in his Essays makes this very remark concerning the Seasons of Sollicitation. 
[A diligent reading of all of Bacon’s Essays has been unproductive in identifying 
this vague reference by Theobald. The Essay Of Negotiating gives various meth- 
ods of approaching the person solicited, but there is not any reference to a pro- 
pitious season. Spedding’s exhaustive Index to the Works of Bacon does not 
contain any reference to seasonable solicitation. Menenius is evidently familiar 
with the offices of the veins; see his reference to them and the function of the Belly 
in his apologue, I, i, 136-142.—Eb.] 

64. these Conueyances] W. S. WALKER (Vers., p. 243) has collected a large 
number of examples wherein ‘the plurals of Substantives ending in s, in certain 
instances; in se, ss, ce, and sometimes ge; . . . are found without the usual addi- 
tion of s or es—in pronunciation at least, although in many instances the plural 
affix is added in printing, where the metre shows that it is not to be pronounced.’ 
Walker, on p. 259, quotes the present line as an example. See also ABBOTT, 
§ 471; compare III, i, 46 swpra—Ep. 

66. our Priest-like Fasts] SrrEveNS: I am afraid that when Shakespeare intro- 
duced this comparison the religious abstinence of modern, not ancient, Rome was 
in his thoughts.—C. (ap. Steevens, 1793): Priests are forbid, by the discipline of 
the church of Rome, to break their fast before the celebration of mass, which must 
take place after sun-rise and before mid-day. [This note, without further identi- 
fication than the single letter C. as here given, is repeated in the subsequent 
Variorum editions. As the information imparted is not of great intrinsic value, 
let us be content, and allow the modest commentator to retain his anonymity.—Eb.] 

66. Ile watch him] W. A. Wricut: The figure is taken from the language of 
falconry, although the treatment prescribed by Menenius is different from that 
practised by Petruchio. See Tam. of Shr., IV, i, 206-210: 


“Another way I have to man my haggard, 
To make her come and know her keeper’s call, 
That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites 
That bate and beat and will not be obedient.’— 


Rotre: ‘Watch’ in that technical sense means to keep one from sleep (see 
Othello, III, iii, 23), while here all that Menenius intends to say is that he will 
watch for the opportunity of making his appeal to Coriolanus when he is dieted 


ACT V, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 505 


Till he be dieted to my requett, 67 
And then Ile fet vpon him. 
Bru. You know the very rode into his kindneffe, 
And cannot lofe your way. 70 
Mene. Good faith Ile proue him, 
Speed how it will. I fhall ere long, haue knowledge 
Of my fucceffe. Exit. 
Com. Hee’l neuer heare him. 
Sicin. Not. 75 
Com. I tell you, he doe’s fit in Gold, his eye 


69. rode] Fi, Rowe i. road Rowe ii. 488). You Han. Heath, Mason, Ran. 


et seq. ; Coll. MS., Huds. ii. 
71, 72. him,...will.| him....will, Del. 75. Not.| No? Cap. 
Sta. Ktly. 76. fit in Gold] sit engall’d Black- 


72. I] ye Theob. conj. (Nichols ii, stone. 


to it, that is, put in good humour for it by a good dinner.—DEIGHTON: Wait for 
the moment when he will be in the mood to listen to my request. [Deighton like- 
wise suggests that ‘watch’ is here used in its technical sense as in falconry.—Ep.]— 
Case: Observe him or wait for him. LEither of these Shakespearian uses gives 
sound sense here. Those who suspect an allusion to falconry in which hawks 
were watched are going out of their way, and also suggesting the very opposite 
of Menenius’s methods. [Which is also the opinion of the present Ep.] 

72. I shall ere long] MAtone: That Menenius at some time would have knowl- 
edge of his success is certain; but what he asserts is that he would ere long have 
that knowledge.—STEEVENS: All Menenius designs to say may be, ‘I shall not 
be kept long in suspense as to the result of my embassy.’ [For this use of ‘success’ 
in the indeterminate sense of fortune, result, compare I, vi, 9 supra. Malone 
appears to have taken it in the more restricted sense of prosperous termina- 
tion —Ep.]—Brrcutne (Henry Irving Sh.) for the thought here compares Jul. 
Ces., V, 3, 123-120: 

‘O that a man might know 
The end of this day’s business ere it come! 
But it sufficeth that the day will end 
And then the end is known.’ 


76. he doe’s sit in Gold] Jounson: He is enthroned in all the pomp and pride 
of imperial splendor—xpvadOpovos “Hpn, Homer.—Hratn (p. 427): What can 
possibly be meant by sitting in gold which is pertinent to the present circumstances 
of Coriolanus? I conceive the poet probably might have written, ‘he does sit 
engoal’d’; that is, He is surrounded by the Volscian chiefs, as if he were their 
prisoner, so that there is no getting at any private conference with him. This 
agrees very well with what is said just afterwards, that he had sent in writing after 
Cominius the conditions on which alone he would condescend to treat with Rome, 
which seems to imply that he had first taken the opinion of the Volscians after 
Cominius had left him. So Aufidius testifies for him that he had ‘Never admitted 
private whisper, no Not with such friends that thought them sure of him.’— 


506 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT Vv, SC. i. 


Red as ’twould burne Rome : and his Iniury 77 


The Gaoler to his pitty. 


I kneel’d before him, 


’Twas very faintly he faid Rife: difmift me 


Thus with his fpeechleffe hand. What he would do 80 
He fent in writing after me * what he would not, 
Bound with an Oath to yeeld to his conditions: 82 


78. Gaoler] goaler Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Var. ’73,’78. jailer Cap. 

80, 81. What he...he would not] What 
he would do, What he would not, he sent 
in writing after me; S. Jervis. 

81-83. He fent...vaine] And what he 
would not, being bound by oath To yield 


writing: so all hope is vain, Words. 
81. me] Om. Pope,+ (—Var. 73). 
not,| Ktly and Wh. here mark an 
omission. 
82. to yeeld to his] not yield to new 
Han. Warb. to yield no new Johns. 
conj. 


to his conditions—after me He sent in 


[‘Engoal’d’ is a word of Heath’s own coinage, and therefore its interpretation is 
quite as fanciful as its origin. The substantive goal if made into a verb could by 
no possibility be interpreted as surrounded, imprisoned. The only meaning of the 
word is the terminus or end of a race or contest. It is just possible that Heath’s 
word has been misprinted and that it should be engaol’d, since he interprets his 
suggestion as imprisoned. Note also, that in |. 78 ‘Gaoler’ was misprinted goaler 
by Pope, and passed several successive editors without correction.—Ep.]—CAaPELL: 
That is, sit enthron’d in pomp and in the terror of majesty; the expression is 
doubly figurative, for we are only to understand by it that his approach was as 
difficult as a king’s, and his presence as awful.—STEEVENS: So, in the old trans- 
lation of Plutarch, ‘—he was set in his chaire of state, with a marvellous and 
unspeakable majestie.’ Shakespeare has a somewhat similar idea in Henry VIII: 
I, i, 19, ‘All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods.’ The idea expressed by 
Cominius occurs also in the J/zad, bk viii, 1. 442, in the translation of which 
passage Mr Pope was perhaps indebted to Shakespeare, ‘Th’ eternal Thunderer 
sat throned in gold.—KerIGHTLEY (Expositor, p. 372): For ‘in gold’ we might read 
a god, ‘He sits amongst men, like a descended god,’ Cymbeline, I, vi, 169. But 
it may be his chair of state that is meant. 

82. Bound with an Oath to yeeld to his conditions] HratH (p. 427): As 
specious as the emendation of Sir Thomas Hanmer appears [see Text. Notes], 
it cannot possibly be right unless we suppose Coriolanus to have violated his oath 
out of regard for the old Menenius. For he himself afterwards (V, iii, 17-19) 
expressly tells us that he had yielded to new conditions. I conjecture the poet 
might possibly have written, ‘Bound with an oath, if you yield to his conditions,’ 
that is, To remove the apprehension and terror the city might be under from his 
resentment he declared what he would not do, and bound himself to it by an oath 
if it accepted the conditions he had offered——Caprrt: To make any sense at all 
of these lines [82-84] it was necessary to adopt the word ‘from’ [in 1. 83]; and that 
done, the hemistich became necessary likewise; but what to do with the lines that 
precede it the editor could not see at that time; all he then saw was an appear- 
ance of meaning that pleas’d him better than any change he had seen of them; 
but coming now to put thoughts upon paper, he perceiv’d they were wrong, and 
a little further reflection discover’d the true seat of this error, the hemistich guiding 


ACT V, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 507 


[82. Bound with an Oath to yeeld to his conditions] 

him to it. Other words besides ‘from’ have slip’d through the compositor’s fingers, 
and we must read the lines thus, ‘What he would do, | He sent in writing after 
me; what he would not, | Except we yield to his conditions, | Bound with an oath. 
So that,’ &c. Here were conditions offered and conditions refused; it is useless 
to guess at the first, ’tis sufficient that we suppose them humiliating enough; the 
latter, it is probable, were a cessation of arms in the country, and a removal 
of his siege from the town; for he does these things afterwards, and is made to 
break his ‘oath’ by his mother—JouNnson: The whole speech is in confusion, 
and I suspect something out. I should read: 


‘—What he would do, 
He sent in writing after; what he would not, 
Bound with an oath. To yield to his conditions.’ 


Here is, I think, a chasm. The speaker’s purpose seems to be this: ‘To yield to 
his conditions is ruin, and better cannot be obtained, so that all hope is vain.’— 
FarMER: I suppose Coriolanus means that he had sworn to give way to the 
conditions into which the ingratitude of his country had forced him.—Moncx 
Mason (Comments, etc.): This passage as it stands is evidently wrong, for it is 
absolutely unintelligible, and the question is how to amend it; none of the amend- 
ments hitherto suggested appear satisfactory; that which I have to propose is a 
very slight deviation from the text—the reading ‘zm his conditions’ instead of 
‘to his conditions.’ To ‘yield,’ in this place, means to relax, and is used in the 
same sense in scene iii. by Coriolanus in speaking of Menenius: 


‘—to grace him only 
That thought he could do more, a very little 
I have yielded to.’ 


What Cominius means to say is ‘That Coriolanus sent in writing after him the 
conditions on which he would agree to make a peace, and bound himself by an 
oath not to depart from them. The additional negative which Hanmer and 
Warburton wish to introduce is not only unnecessary, but would destroy the sense; 
for the thing which Coriolanus had sworn not to do was to yield in his conditions. — 
HeEntey: ‘What he would do,’ 7. ¢., the conditions on which he offered to return, 
he sent in writing after Cominius, intending that he should carry them to Menenius. 
‘What he would not,’ z. e., his resolution of neither dismissing his soldiers nor 
capitulating with Rome’s mechanics in case the terms he prescribed should be refused, 
he bound himself by an oath to maintain. If these conditions were admitted the 
oath, of course, being grounded on that proviso, must yield to them and be cancelled. 
That this is the proper sense of the passage is obvious from what follows in V, iii: 


‘—if you’ld aske, remember this before; 
The thing I have forsworne to graunt may neuer 
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me 
Dismisse my soldiers, or capitulate 
Again, with Romes mechanickes,’ [ll. 89-93].— 


Matone: I believe two half lines have been lost; that ‘Bound with an oath’ was 
the beginning of one line, and ‘to yield to his conditions’ the conclusion of the next. 
Perhaps, however, ‘to yield to his conditions’ means to yield only to his condi- 


508 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. i. 


[82. Bound with an Oath to yeeld to his conditions] 
tions, referring these words to ‘oath’; that his oath was irrevocable, and should 
yield to nothing but such a reverse of fortune as he could not resist.—SINGER 
(ed. i.): None of the explanations or proposed emendations satisfy me. Perhaps 
we might read, ‘to yield to xo conditions.’ The sense of the passage would then 
be: ‘What he would do he sent in writing after me; the things he would not do, he 
bound himself with an oath to yield to mo conditions that might be proposed. It 
afterwards appears what these were (see V, iii, 890-93).—Knicut: The commen- 
tators suspect some omission here, but it appears to us that they have mistaken 
the passage. They conceive that ‘what he would not’ is the matter especially 
‘bound with an oath.’ Coriolanus sends ‘in writing’ both ‘what he would do’ 
and ‘what he would not’; and in justification of the harshness of his demands he 
adds that he is ‘bound with an oath to yield to his conditions,’ that is, to make his 
sole law the ‘conditions’ in which he had become placed—his duty to the Volcians; 
to yield himself up entirely to the guidance of those ‘conditions.’—CoLiEeR: 
The meaning appears to be that Coriolanus bound himself by an oath that Rome 
should yield to his conditions. Various changes of the text have been proposed, 
but none seems absolutely necessary —VERPLANCK: Coriolanus sends his ulti- 
matum (to use the language of diplomacy) in writing, stating both what he would 
and what he would not consent to, and binding all with an oath that these are 
the conditions to which Rome must yield. This line [82] is elliptically expressed, 
but the sense is sufficiently explicit. But the editors have not been satisfied, and 
propose various emendations, of which ‘to yield to no conditions’ is far the most 
probable.—De ius: It has been thought that there is here an omission of either 
a half or a whole line. Such an ellipsis and anacoluthon is, however, quite in 
Shakespeare’s style. The sense is: He sent after me in writing what he would do, 
what he would not do (Z. e., what he would grant to us and what not); he bound 
me with an oath to submit to his conditions. ‘Bound,’ which the editors take for 
a participle, is rather of the same order as ‘sent,’ and out of ‘after me’ me is to be 
supplied. We may construe this, without ellipsis: he sent in writing after me 
what he would do (and) what he would not; and bound me with an oath to yield 
to his conditions. Cominius is thus made ambassador to the Romans.—STAUNTON: 
The sense of this passage we conjecture to have been destroyed by the misprint 
‘his’ for no; ‘his’ being inadvertantly caught by the transcriber from the next 
line. If we read ‘Bound with an oath to yield to xo conditions’ the meaning is 
clear enough—what he would consent to he sent in writing; what he would not, 
he bound himself by oath to yield on no conditions.—R. G. Wutre: This passage 
is incomprehensible. None of the many explanations or emendations proposed 
for it (the more important of which are to be found in the Variorwm of 1821) 
appear worthy of attention. I believe that a line has been lost, or perhaps two, 
after ‘what he would not.’—Lro (Coriolanus): In his writing he said what he 
would do, and what not; and that an oath given to the Volscians bound him in this 
way. The First Guard says, ‘you are condemned, our general has sworn you 
out of reprieve and pardon,’ [Il. 51, 52], and Coriolanus himself says, ‘my remission 
lies in Volscian breasts,’ [Il. 85, 86], and ‘the thing I have forsworn to grant.’ 
Just before going to press Professor Solly suggested to me as a new reading hold 
for ‘yield.—Hvupson (ed. ii.): I more than suspect this latter to be the true read- 
ing.—C. & M. CowpEN Crarke: We think this passage condensedly expresses 
the stipulations made by Coriolanus and the proposals made by the Romans as 


ay 


ACT V, SC, i.] CORIOLANUS 509 


[82. Bound with an Oath to yeeld to his conditions] 


stated more fully in North’s Plutarch; and that here ‘what he would do’ refers to 
what Coriolanus would grant as expressed in the articles ‘sent in writing after’ 
Cominius; while ‘what he would not’ refers to the proposals made by the Romans, 
which Coriolanus would not grant unless under certain conditions that he bound 
himself by oath to make them yield to. In the text the concise phraseology scarcely 
makes evident that there are two sets of articles, one drawn up by Coriolanus 
and sent in writing, the other submitted by the Romans to him, which he vows to 
grant only upon his own conditions; but that so it is clearly intended we think 
is shown by the account of the incident in Plutarch as well as by the expression ‘it 
was a bare petition of a state’ in the present scene, indicating a proposal made on 
their part—Hupson (ed. i.): A passage hard to be understood at best, and still more 
obscure as commonly pointed, thus: ‘What he would do, he sent in writing after 
me; what he would not, bound with an oath, to yield to his conditions’; which is 
severing ‘what he would do’ from ‘bound with an oath,’ and ‘what he would not’ 
from ‘he sent in writing after me.’ As now given the sense may be rendered 
thus: ‘He sent in writing after me both what he would do, and what he would 
not; binding the whole with an oath that we should yield to his conditions.’— 
K&IGHTLEY indicates in his text that a line is lost between ll. 8: and 82.— DANIEL 
(p. 65): Query read: 
‘What he would do, 
What he would not, he’d send in writing after me: 
He was bound with an oath to yield to no conditions. ’— 


Rey. JonN Hunter: His conditions were expressed in the writing previously 
referred to, and ‘what he would not’ he ‘bound with an oath’ to be determined 
by those conditions. The meaning simply is that he wrote conditions, and swore 
to allow nothing but what was expressed therein. The phrase ‘to his conditions’ 
has been suspected by the commentators, but no alteration is wanted. Shakespeare 
judiciously avoids specifying the conditions stated in Plutarch—WzuitTELAw: 
Sent after me, in writing, what he would, what he would not, consent to do; con- 
firming this with an oath which only our acceptance of his terms can cancel. With 
the construction ‘an oath to yield’ compare ‘a merit, to choke it,’ ‘a chair to 
extol. —Scumipt (Coriolanus): There is ample foundation for suspecting that 
there is some corruption between the words ‘What he would do’ and ‘his condi- 
tions,’ and the most probable explanation is that something has been omitted 
(which is corroborated by the incomplete line ‘So that all hope is vain’), [due, how- 
ever, to Johnson, not Shakespeare.—Ep.], wherein the conditions of Coriolanus. 
would be demonstrated as unacceptable. If all is, however, in proper order this 
line can only be well interpreted thus: that he was bound by an oath to submit 
to his conditions, that is, the conditions which he made in the name of the Volscians, 
to make them as his own, according as they were decided on in war-council.— 
W. A. WricuT: Unless this line is corrupt, or something has fallen out of the text, 
it can only mean that Coriolanus was bound by an oath to the Volscians to adhere 
to the conditions which he imposed; but this is very forced. Many emendations 
have been suggested, only showing that the text is probably corrupt, as it cer- 
tainly is obscure—RotreE: A perplexing passage, perhaps corrupt or incomplete. 
As it stands it appears to mean that Coriolanus was bound by an oath as to what 
he would not, unless the Romans should yield to his conditions, whatever those 


510 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT v, SC. i. 


[82. Bound with an Oath to yeeld to his conditions] 


may have been. Whitelaw’s interpretation is not perfectly satisfactory, but, to 
our thinking, it is the best that has been offered—KiINNEAR (p. 330): ‘What he 
would He sent in writing after me: he would not, Bound with an oath, aught 
yield to his conditions.’ ‘What’ in l. 81, as both the sense and metre indicate, 
being caught from ‘what’ just above in the preceding line. The folio has ‘to 
yeeld to,’ the compositor being confused by ‘to’ which follows, ‘to his conditions,’ 
Z. €., in addition to, as in II, i, 163, ‘With fame a name to Caius Martius.’ Com- 
pare further V, vi, 83, ‘—making a treaty where There was a yielding, this admits 
no excuse.’—PERRING (p. 310): I can see no corruption, no obscurity in this line. 
Coriolanus specified in his written despatch what concessions he was willing to 
make, adding, as a proviso, that in everything else Cominius should bind himself 
by oath to submit to /is (Coriolanus’) conditions. In the last clause the subject 
is changed from Coriolanus to Cominius. The grammar may lack completeness, 
but it should be remembered that here we have a brief and hurried summary of 
a short and curt interview—a sort of running conversational comment; say there 
is a little looseness, there is no obscurity; the Romans who heard would not be 
slow to apprehend what was meant; their fears had already anticipated the sinister 
tidings. Brevity here is surely a merit—BrxEcHING (Henry Irving Sh.): The 
desired meaning is that Coriolanus was bound by an oath to the Volscians to 
impose certain conditions, or to make the Romans yield to his conditions; but it 
must be confessed that the text does not say this. Or the meaning may be that 
the message was affirmed by an oath, viz., that his conditions must be yielded to. 
Various punctuations have been proposed, and numerous emendations, none of 
them satisfactory. [Beeching, a few years later in the Falcon Sh., says: ‘His 
declaration was confirmed with an oath to yield only to his conditions, to retire 
from Rome only if his conditions were complied with.’ He compares for this 
V, ili, 15-17, ‘I have . . . once more offered The first conditions which they did 
refuse And cannot now accept.’—Enp.]—E. K. Caampers (Warwick Sh.): I have 
put a comma for the colon after ‘me,’ and explain: ‘He sent me an offer of con- 
cessions, strictly limited, and dependent on an oath to observe the conditions laid 
down.’ Coriolanus has already begun to waver. He repeats to Menenius in V, 
ii, 91 the offer made to Cominius——CHoLMELEy: The text is corrupt, but can be 
made tolerable by transposing the two parts of |. 81; ‘his conditions’ are the terms 
of his service with the Volscians, and the words ‘Bound with an oath,’ etc., give 
the cause of his behaviour; he had sworn not to discuss the situation ——HERFORD 
(Eversley Sh.): The transaction is obscurely described. Apparently it is thus: Corio- 
lanus indicates what he will concede, and binds himself by oath to concede nothing 
more.—VERITY (Student’s Sh.): The passage is undoubtedly corrupt. The diffi- 
culty is this: Two later passages (V, ii, so—-52; V, iii, 89-91) show that ‘bound with 
an oath’ refers to Coriolanus and qualifies ‘what he would not’ (do). Coriolanus 
would not do certain things (V, iii, 92, 93) because he had sworn not to. But 
‘to yield to his conditions’ ought to refer to the Romans; that is the natural inter- 
pretation, and it is substantiated by the parallel passage in Plutarch. Coriolanus 
told the Roman Ambassadors that ‘they had no other means to end this war, if 
they did not grant these honest and just conditions of peace,’ which he had just 
laid before them. Through some omission in ]. 82 the words in 1. 81 which refer 
to Coriolanus have got tacked on to the words which refer to the Romans. John- 
son’s is clearly the right method of interpretation; the assumption being that 1. 82 


ACT V, SC. i.] CORIOLANUS 511 


[82. Bound with an Oath to yeeld to his conditions] 
commenced with some such words as Were utter shame. The simplest emendation 
is hold for ‘yield’—Coriolanus had sworn to hold to, not to relax, the terms he had 
offered. But hold could hardly be corrupted into ‘yield’; moreover, yield occurs 
twice in North’s Plutarch in a later paragraph referring to the same ‘articles’ and 
‘conditions’ of peace. Of the passage as it stands the best paraphrase seems [to 
be that by Beeching in Falcon Sh.]. But to speak of a man ‘yielding’ to his own 
terms is obviously forced. It simplifies the text to substitute a comma for the 
semicolon after ‘me’ in |. 81.—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.) does not refer to 
the interpretation by Delius, and thus evidently arrived at the same conclusion 
independently that if ke be understood before ‘Bound’ and me after ‘Bound’ 
the sense is clear. Of Henley’s paraphrase Miss Porter remarks: ‘To prove that 
“this is the proper sense of the passage” Henley cites the words of Coriolanus 
to his mother later as to ‘‘the things he has forsworne to grant.’ But the text 
reads “‘the thing,” not ‘“‘the things,” as Henley quotes it, nor does it there appear 
that the two things designated as by treaty forsworn are so exactly specified. He 
seems rather to be thinking of what he has forsworn to the Volscians, to show the 
Romans no favor. Nor does he speak to his mother of any formal treaty. Instead 
of binding himself with an oath to yield anything to the Romans, he has bound 
the Romans to yield him beforehand, as the very ground of any agreement, their 
acceptance of what he would not do, making what he would do entirely conditional. 
That is, he bases any concessions upon their sworn agreement to his conditions. 
He will not treat with them, will not agree under such or such conditions to lay 
down arms, until they have sworn beforehand to yield these preliminaries. What 
he would not do, being Bound with or safeguarded by an Oath from them to yeeld 
to his conditions. ‘This accords with what Plutarch states to be his answer to the 
ambassadors of Rome.’ [See Appendix: Source of Plot, ad loc.| Later Plutarch 
shows again that these preliminary conditions were exactly the bone of contention, 
balking any treaty to follow, for ‘another ambassade’ proposed ‘the remove of 
the Volsces . . . that afterward they might with better leisure fall to such agree- 
ments together, as should be thought most meete and necessary .. . all the 
[Volsces] would reasonably aske should be graunted unto by the Romaines, who 
would willingly yield to reason, conditionally, that they did lay downe armes.’ 
This was precisely what Marcius would not do until they had bound themselves 
as already stipulated, delivering up the articles agreed upon which he had first 
delivered them. Or otherwise, that he would not assure their safe-conduct 
‘againe to his campe with such vaine and frivolous messages.’ These much dis- 
puted lines of Shakespeare’s are obviously based on these facts—Gorpon: What 
he would not do he bound with an oath that we must yield to his conditions. 
Cominius had come as an ambassador from Rome to plead for terms. Coriolanus 
refused to treat with him. The conditions he offered (‘what he would do’) were 
final; to discuss them was useless; they should be sent after in writing. Cominius’s 
proposals (‘what he would not’) he refused, and clinched his refusal with an oath 
that we must yield to his conditions. It was to be his conditions or nothing.— 
DercuTon: If genuine, this passage may mean he would send in writing after I 
had been dismissed a statement of what he would do, and what he would not do, 
he being bound by an oath to fulfil the terms on which he had made alliance with 
the Volscians. ‘Bound’ seems to be an instance of the participle with the pronoun 
implied—Casr (Arden Sh.): This passage readily suggests a meaning most 


512 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. i. 
So that all hope is vaine, vnleffe his Noble Mother, 83 
And his Wife, who (as I heare) meane to folicite him 

For mercy to his Countrey : therefore let’s hence, 85 


And with our faire intreaties haft them on. 


83, 84. So...Wife] As two lines, end- 
ing: vaine...Wife Johns. et seq. (ex- 
cept Sta. Ktly). 

83. his Noble] his Pope, Theob. 
Warb. from’s Han. from his noble 
Cap. in his Heath. in’s Steev. conj., 
Wh. Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 


Exeunt 


84. his] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. 
who] do Mitford (Gentlemen’s 
Maga., Nov., 1844). 
85. For] Force Warb. Bell. 
let’s|} Om. Pope, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. 


probably intended, but its precise difficulties are insoluble because something 
appears to be lost, perhaps after ‘conditions’ (as Johnson supposed) or perhaps 
after ‘oath’ (as Malone), and also, possibly, after ‘country,’ []. 85]. The tinkering 
of the passage . . . serves no useful purpose, the only tolerable suggestion being 
Solly’s, to alter the word ‘yield’ to hold. With this change the passage affords 
a grudging sense as it stands: What he would do he sent in writing after me, [and] 
what he would not, [being] bound by an oath to hold to his conditions. So that 
all hope is vain unless [Z. ¢., if we except] his noble mother and his wife, who, etc. 
I cite Mr Chambers’ view with much sympathy with his desire to avoid assumptions 
and alterations; but as we know Coriolanus was bound by an oath (V, iii, 92) 
it is as difficult to turn this phrase over to the Romans and their acceptance of 
the conditions as it is to deprive them of ‘yield’ by substituting hold as above— 
G, Jotcry (Notes & Queries, 28 Nov., 1891, p. 423): It is most likely that, either 
in transcribing or printing, ‘he would’ immediately under the same words in the 
line above has led to the insertion of a second ‘what,’ and that ‘yield’ has by some 
mischance fallen into the line below. If these emendations are made the passage 
becomes quite clear, seeing that, according to V, iii, 16, conditions were offered to 
the Romans. ‘What he would He sent in writing after me; yield he would not; 
Bound with an oath to his conditions. —TucKER Brooke (Yale Sh.): He sent a 
written statement of what he would and would not do, requiring an oath of un- 
conditional acceptance of these conditions. 

83-85. vnlesse his Noble Mother... to his Countrey] WARBURTON: Unless 
his mother and wife—do what? The sentence is imperfect. We should read, 
‘Force mercy to his country’—and then all is right —Heratu (p. 428) rationally 
objects to Warburton’s unnecessary change, remarking: ‘The ancient reading 
certainly ought not to have been altered, since both the sense and construction 
might be much easier and better restored by the following slight correction, ‘‘So 
that all hope is vain, unless im his mother And wife,”’’ etc—STEEVENS: Dr War- 
burton’s emendation is surely harsh, and may be rendered unnecessary by printing 
the passage thus, ‘—mean to solicit him For mercy to his country—Therefore,’ 
&c. This liberty is the more justifiable, because, as soon as the remaining hope 
crosses the imagination of Cominius, he might suppress what he was going to add 
through haste to try the success of a last expedient. It has been proposed to me 
to read ‘Unless in his noble mother,’ &c. In his, abbreviated in’s, might have been 
easily mistaken by such inaccurate printers—Moncx Mason: No amendment 
is wanting, the sense of the passage being complete without it. We say every day 
in conversation: You are my only hope—He is my only hope, instead of —My 


ACT V, SC. i.] CORIOLA NUS 513 


(83-85. vnlesse his Noble Mother . . . to his Countrey] 

only hope is in you, or in him. The same mode of expression occurs in this sen- 
tence, and occasions the obscurity of it—MAaLonr: That this passage has been 
considered as difficult surprises me. Many passages in these plays have been 
suspected to be corrupt merely because the language was peculiar to Shakespeare, 
or the phraseology of that age, and not of the present; and this is surely one of 
them. Had he written, his noble mother and his wife are our only hope, his 
meaning could not have been doubted; and is not this precisely what Cominius 
says? So that we have now no other hope, nothing to rely upon but his mother 
and his wife, who, as I am told, mean, &c. ‘Unless’ is here used for except.— 
Dyce (ed. i.): Such an explanation [of ‘unless’ used for except as by Mason and 
Malone] to me is far from satisfactory, and I think it very probable that (as some 
one suggested to Steevens) our author wrote ‘Unless in’s noble mother,’ etc.; 
in the present play contractions of that kind are frequent—R. G. Waite: The 
folio reading has been hitherto retained, with the explanation that ‘unless’ here 
means except in. But such a use of ‘unless’ is unparalleled, and, what is of more 
consequence, absurd. [The reading in’s] is so appropriate and so natural, the con- 
traction is so much in the style of this play, and the supposed misprint so easy, 
that I accept it with little doubt—VERPLANCK: ‘Unless’ is here used in the sense 
of except—we have no hope except his noble mother, etc—Hupson: That is, 
‘unless there be hope im his noble mother and his wife,’ or perhaps the construction 
should be thus, ‘Unless his noble mother and his wife solicit him for mercy to his 
country; who, as I hear, mean ¢@o do so.’—LEo includes the words ‘Who as I hear’ 
in a parenthesis, remarking thus the sense is, ‘Unless his noble mother and his 
wife mean—as I hear they intend—to solicit,’ etc-—C. & M. CowpEN CLARKE 
(Shakespeare): Were in is elliptically understood between ‘unless’ and ‘his.’— 
Rotre: That is, unless it be his mother, etc. If any change is necessary ‘unless 
in’s’ is to be preferred; but as the passage stands it is no unnatural inversion of 
‘His mother and wife are our only hope.’ [Rolfe adds that if there is any corruption 
it is probably in the imperfect line ‘So that all hope is vain,’ possibly therein misled 
by Schmidt, who makes the same observation, unaware that this half line is due 
to Johnson, and for which Shakespeare, at least, is not responsible-—Ep.]— 
CHOLMELEY: ‘Unless’ sc. can do anything. Better put a comma after ‘wife,’ 
and break off the sentence at ‘country.’—G. Jotcey (Notes & Queries, 28 Nov., 
1801, p. 423): Should not these lines be punctuated so as to bring the nominative 
‘mother and his wife’ into closer relation to the verb ‘solicit’? ‘Who as I hear 
mean to (do so)’ seems to be a parenthesis: 

‘Unless his noble mother and his wife— 

Who as I hear mean to—solicit him 

For mercy,’ etc.— 


R. M. Spence (Notes & Queries, 6 Feb., 1892, p. 104): Can Mr Joicey seriously 
think that this abominable Yankeeism, ‘mean to,’ new to this country even in our 
day, had already crossed the Atlantic in Shakespeare’s time? Better accept 
any ellipsis than accept this. [Spence accordingly proposes that this passage 
read, ‘Unless his noble mother and his wife prevail Who, as I hear, mean to solicit 
him,’ etc.—Ep.]—Veriry (Student’s Sh.): An obvious simplification would be: 


‘Unless his noble mother and his wife, 
Who, as I hear, mean to, solicit him,’ etc. 


33 


514 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Vv, SC. ii. 


[Scene II.] 


Enter Menenius to the Watch or Guard. I 
1.Wat. Stay: whence are you. 
ScENE 11. Rowe et seq. Sentinels on Guard. Cam.+, Neils. 


A Camp. Rowe, Pope. The Volscian An outpost of the Volscian Camp be- 
Camp. Theob.+, Varr. Ran. An ad- fore Rome. The Sentinels on Guard. 
vanc’d Post of the Volcian Camp before Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. An ad- 
Rome. Certain of the Guard upon vanced Post of the Volcian Camp be- 
Duty. Cap. The Volscian Camp be- fore Rome. The Guard at their Sta- 
fore Rome. The Guard at their Sta- tions. Mal. et cet. 
tions. Coll. Del. Entrance to the 1. ...Menenius...Guard.] ...to them, 
Volscian Camp before Rome. Two Menenius. Cap. Dyce ii, Cam.+-. 


[Of the proposals by Leo, Joicey, and Verity to remedy these lines, that by Joicey— 
as it is the simplest—is to be preferred. Spence’s objection is trifling; in fact, 
that the phrase ‘I mean to’ is an Americanism at all is quite open to question.— 
Ep.]—Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): This is a colloquial, unbookish expression 
natural to a speaker, and a slight transposition will make this clear enough. 
Cominius declares that unless his Noble Mother solicit him, and his wife, who (as 
I hear) means to, all hope is vain—Dricuton: This is probably elliptical for, 
unless we may consider the intended intercession of his mother and his wife in the 
light of hope.—PERRING (p. 312): Where, it has been asked, is the verb that should 
follow ‘unless’? To which I reply, where is it in Richard II: V, iii, 32, ‘My 
tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth, Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak’? 
Where is it in All’s Well, IV, i, 5, ‘We must not seem to understand him, unless 
some one among us whom we must produce for an interpreter’? Where is it in 
Othello, I, i, 23, 24, ‘Nor the division of the battle knows More than a spinster, 
unless the bookish theorie’? It may be an open question with some whether in 
the above passages ‘unless’ should be parsed as a conjunction or should be held 
to partake rather of the nature of a preposition; but none can fail to be struck with 
the remarkableness of the coincidence that in all the passages the same particle is 
found without a finite verb actually following it. For my own part I hold that 
in the passage before us it is most certainly a conjunction, and that in all probabil- 
ity the verb that belongs to it, and that should be mentally supplied after it, is 
the verb that occurs in the relative clause which follows—yes, the same verb, but 
not used in exactly the same sense; for, whereas in the relative clause ‘solicit? means 
‘to earnestly entreat,’ in the principal clause, where we say ‘that’ is understood, it 
can only mean ‘to prevail by entreaty,’ one verb (as is not uncommon) serving 
for two clauses, which in its strict acceptation suits only one of them. There is 
surely no maze here to hinder us from treading out the way readily. 

85. therefore let’s hence] BAYFIELD (p. 190): ‘Let’s’ occurs as a false form 
with considerable frequency throughout the plays. [In the present line] ‘There- 
fore’ is undesirably stressed. If we restore Jet ws and a divided quadrisyllabic we 
get a rhythm at once Shakespearian and much superior to that of the Folio’s line: 

‘For | mercy | to his | country. ‘Therefore, | let us | hence.’ 

Scene II.] Verrry (Siudent’s Sh.): There is a pleasant grimness in the Sentinels’ 
translation of Menenius’s self-praise into the mere vernacular. And Menenius’s 
assurance as to his influence with Coriolanus lends the humour inseparable from 
vanity. But, as ever, humour’s twin brother pathos is not far off. 


ACT V, SC. ii.] CORIOLANUS 515 


2.Wat. Stand,and go backe. 3 
Me. You guard like men, ’tis well. But by your leaue, 

I am an Officer of State,& come to {peak with Coriolanus 5 
1 From whence ? Mene. From Rome. 


1 You may not paffe, you muft returne : our Generall 

will no more heare from thence. 
2 You’l fee your Rome embrac’d with fire, before 

You’! {fpeake with Coriolanus. fe) 
Mene. Good my Friends, 

If you haue heard your Generall talke of Rome, 

And of his Friends there, it is Lots to Blankes, 


My name hath touch’t your eares : it is Menenius. 14 
2, 3. 1 Wat., 2 Wat.] Fi, Rowe,+, 5, 6. I am...Rome] As verse, ending 
Varr. Ran. First Sen., Second Sen. lines: come...Rome. Pope et seq. 
Cam. 1. G.,-2. -G. Cap. et cet. 6. From whence] Whence Pope,+ 
(throughout). (—Var. ’73). 
3. backe] back again Steev. conj. 8. will...thence] As verse Pope et seq. 


2.1. Wat. Stay: whence are you.] Detius (Die Prosa in Sh’s Dramen; Jahrbuch, 
Vv, p. 269): The two Sentinels for the most part repulse Menenius in blank verse; when 
they first begin to lose patience through his importunity they become provoked 
and speak in prose, which in the mouth of one of them is not lacking in a certain 
strength and fineness of speech. The entrance of Coriolanus calls forth from Mene- 
nius a moving heartfelt tone, which, moreover, by its light humour calls to mind his 
original nature, and therefore rightly takes on the form of eloquent prose. To this 
supplication of his former friend Coriolanus replies, aloof and cold, in blank verse. 

13. it is Lots to Blankes] Jonnson: A ‘lot’ here is a prize—CApELL: What he 
would here say is, ’Tis odds but my name has been heard by you; now ‘lots’ 
can have no other sense than fortunate lots, prizes; and certainly the odds never 
lay on their side in a lottery, but there is a waggery in supposing the contrary, and 
therefore it is done by Menenius.—S[TEPHEN] W[EsTON]: Lot in French signifies 
prize. Le gros lot: The capital prize—Matone: I believe Dr Johnson here mis- 
takes. Menenius, I imagine, only means to say that it is more than an equal 
chance that his name has touched their ears. ‘Lots’ were the term in our author’s 
time for the total number of tickets in a lottery, which took its name from thence. 
So in the Continuation of Stowe’s Chronicle, 1615, p. 1002: ‘Out of which lottery, 
for want of filling, by the number of lots, there were then taken out and thrown 
away three score thousand blanks, without abating of any one prize.’ The lots 
were, of course, more numerous than the blanks. If ‘lot’ signified prize, as Dr 
Johnson supposed, there being in every lottery many more blanks than prizes, 
Menenius must be supposed to say that the chance of his name having reached 
their ears was very small, which certainly is not his meaning.—Rurrson (Cursory 
Criticism, p. 80): A lot here, Dr Johnson says, is a prize. It certainly is so; 
though our sagacious Hibernian [Malone] believes him mistaken. Menenius, he 
imagines, only means to say that it is more than an equal chance that his name 
had touch’d their ears, which is precisely the effect of Dr Johnson’s explanation. 
. . . Menenius says it is prizes to blanks, something to nothing, 20,000 1. to a 


516 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. ii. 


1 Beit fo,go back : the vertue of your name, 15 
Is not heere paffable. 

«Mene. I tell thee Fellow, 
Thy Generall is my Louer : I haue beene 
The booke of his good Acts, whence men haue read 


His Fame vnparalell’d, happely amplified : 20 
17. thee Fellow} the Fellow F3. thee, 20. happely| happily Rowe, Pope, 
Fellow Fy. Theob. Warb. Johns. hapily Var. ’78, 


85, Mal. haply Han. et cet. 


piece of waste paper, &c. A lot is what one gains in the lottery; and our learned 
editor, no doubt, if he got a blank would say he had gain’d a loss. Neither 
Shakespeare, however, nor Menenius was an Irishman.—STEEvENS: ‘Lots to 
blanks’ is a phrase equivalent to another in Richard III: ‘all the world to noth- 
ing,’ [I, ii, 238]—-W. A. Wricut: This must, as Steevens says, be equivalent to 
the proverbial phrase in Richard III. Menenius means that the chances are 
greatly in favour of his name having been mentioned, the comparison being not 
of the number, but of the relative value of the lots and blanks.—Casr: Mr Craig 
explained, ‘any odds, a thousand to one,’ but retained the reckoning by numbers, 
not values, as he added ‘literally, lottery tickets which bring a prize to the drawer 
to those which bring no prize,’ and avoided the dilemma pointed out by Malone 
by stating, ‘It is clear that in the lotteries of Shakespeare’s day the lots [prizes] 
exceeded the blanks.’ But this deduction seems quite unwarranted. The N. E. D. 
also explains ‘lot’ as prize, and ‘It is lots to blanks’ as = It is a thousand to one; 
but in its first example the lots clearly include prizes and blanks, and in only one 
example is there really a distinction made between them.—([Ritson, in his maley- 
olent zeal to show Malone at fault, has quite overshot the mark; Malone’s quota- 
tion shows quite clearly that the words ‘lot’ and prize are not synonymous, and 
that herein Johnson is mistaken. As a further corroboration of the technical 
meaning of the word the following extract from the tract The Great Frost of January, 
1608 may be quoted: ‘Countryman: I remember that, as I take it, in the eleventh 
year of Queen Elizabeth, a lottery began here in London; in which, if my memory 
fail not, there were four hundred thousand lots to be drawn. Citizen: You say 
right. So much still lies in my memory. Countryman: Marry, that lottery was 
only for money, and every lot was ten shillings’ (ed. Arber, p. 94). Again, in the 
same a little farther on, the Citizen says: ‘—to every prize there are put in forty 
blanks. . . . There are 7,600 prizes and 42,000 blanks’ (Ibid., p. 95). This is 
in reference to a lottery which was held, among other shows and festivals, on the 
occasion of the Thames being frozen over in that year. There is, perhaps, here 
another slight hint of internal evidence that this play was written in either 1608 
or 1609. The great popularity of this lottery would make the phrase used by 
Menenius readily understood by his auditors.—Ep.| 

18. my Louer] For examples of this use of ‘lover’ in the sense of one kindly dis- 
posed see Scumupt (Lew.), s. v. I. 

19. The booke . . . whence men haue read] Stervens: So in Pericles, ‘Her 
face the book of praises, where is read,’ &c., [I, i, 15]. Again in Macbeth, 


‘Your face, my thane, is as a book where men 
May read strange matters,’ [I, v, 63]. 


ACT WV;,,SCssil4| CORIOLANUS 517 
For I haue euer verified my Friends, 21 


21-26. For...Leafing.] Om. Bell. Cartwright. amplified Huds. ii. (Lett- 
21. verified] magnified Han. Coll. ii, som conj.ap. Dyce ii.). certified Jervis. 
iii. (MS.), Ktly, Wh. Dyce ii, Huds. vivified Bulloch. glorified Craig (Leo 
Words. Neils. xarrified Warb.  noti- conj.). 
fied Sing. ii. rarified Sta. conj. deified 


21. I haue ever verified] WARBURTON: Shakespeare’s mighty talent in painting 
the manners is especially remarkable in this place. Menenius here and Polonius 
in Hamlet have much of the same natural character. The difference is only acci- 
dental. The one was a senator ina free state, and the other a courtier and minister 
to a king; which two circumstances afforded matter for that inimitable ridicule 
thrown over the character of Polonius. For the rest, there is an equal complaisance 
for those they follow; the same disposition to be a creature, the same love of prate, 
the same affectation of wisdom, and forwardness to be in business. But we must 
never believe Shakespeare could make either of them say, ‘I have verified my 
friends with all the size of verity’; nay, what is more extraordinary, verified them 
beyond verity. Without doubt he wrote, ‘For I have ever narrified my friends,’ 
i. e., made their encomium. ‘This too agrees with the foregoing metaphors of 
book, read, and constitutes a uniformity amongst them. From whence the Oxford 
Editor [Hanmer] took occasion to read magnified, which makes the absurdity 
much worse than he found it; for to magnify signifies to exceed the truth; so that 
this critic makes him say he magnified his friend within the size of verity, that is, 
he exceeded truth even while he kept within it—Jounson: If the commentator 
had given any example of the word narrify the correction would have been not 
only received but applauded. Now, since the new word stands without authority, 
we must try what sense the old one will afford. To verify is to establish by testi- 
mony. One may say with propriety he brought false witnesses to verify his title. 
Shakespeare considered the word with his usual laxity, as importing rather ¢esti- 
mony than truth, and only meant to say, I bore witness to my friends with all the 
size that verity would suffer. I must remark that to magnify signifies to exalt or 
enlarge, but not necessarily to enlarge beyond the truth.—Epwarps (p. 98): 
‘Verified’ here is certainly wrong, as Mr Warburton in a long note has shown. To 
mend it he gives us a word which, if it is not his own, I doubt he can find no better 
authority for than the Dictionary of N. Bailey, Philolog., who has taken care to 
preserve all the cant words he could pick up. However, he gives the honor of it 
to Shakespeare, and says, ‘without doubt he wrote “I have ever narrified my 
friends,” z.e., made their encomium.’ I suppose Menenius read his encomiums out 
of a book, or at least learned them there, and then narrified by rote. But though 
Mr Warburton makes no doubt of Shakespeare’s writing narrified, I must own I 
do; and if it were lawful for one, who is not a critic by profession, to make a con- 
jecture after him, which yet I would not venture to thrust into the text without 
authority, I should imagine that possibly Shakespeare might have written, ‘I 
have ever varnished my friends . . . with all the size that verity Would without 
lapsing suffer.’ That is, I have laid on as much praise as would stick. It is an 
allusion either to painting or white-washing; and the word varnish (or vernish, 
as it is sometimes spelt) agrees with the following metaphor of size, at least as well 
as narrify does with book before. The only misfortune is that the uniformity is 


518 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. ii. 


[2t. I haue euer verified] 
broken; but that is of the less consequence, because otherwise it would be knocked 
to pieces by the ‘bowls’ which come in the very next line. Whether this be right 
or no, I doubt xarrifying with size will pass on nobody but a professed critic.— 
Hears (p. 428): If I had not learned from the Canons of Criticism that the word 
narrified is to be found in Bailey’s Dictionary I should scarce have believed it author- 
ized by any one writer.in the English language. If it be not a cant word, as most 
probably it is, it conveys so ridiculous an idea that it can find no place in any 
other than burlesque writing. But varnishing with size [as Edwards suggests], 
and with all the size that verity would suffer, seems little less exceptionable than 
narrifying. I think Sir Thomas Hanmer’s correction, magnified, bids fair for being 
the true reading. The word verity at the end of the next line might strike the 
eye of the transcriber or printer, and hang upon his imagination sufficiently to 
occasion the blunder. But Mr Warburton objects, that ‘to magnify signifies to 
exceed the truth’; and so makes an impotent effort to pass this expression on the 
reader for a bull. His very prayers might have taught him better. To magnify 
signifies to extol the greatness of anything in some respect or other, whether the 
praise exceed the truth, or keep within the strict bounds of it. The word size 
doth not here signify the composition otherwise called paste, as the author of the 
Canons of Criticism seems to misapprehend it, but dimension. [Heath, by thus 
treating with mock seriousness the jeu d’esprit of Edwards in regard to ‘varnish,’ 
‘size,’ and ‘white-wash,’ places Warburton’s emendation in the same ridiculous class. 
—Ep.]—Cape tz (vol. I, pti, p. 99): This unlucky word—‘verified’—has been tum- 
bled and tossed about strangely and has chang’d its quarters for narrify’d, magnify’d, 
varnish’d, &c.; but, after all its peregrinations, here it is again, and here it should 
be. For, in the name of goodness, where is the impropriety of saying, When I 
have undertaken to give my friend his due praise, I have sometimes given him 
more than his due? Yet this is the amount of what is said by Menenius, but he says 
it in his manner. ‘Size’ is proportion, dimension——STEEVENS: Dr Johnson’s 
explanation of the old word verify renders all change unnecessary. To verify 
may, however, signify to display. Thus in an ancient metrical pedigree in the 
possession of the late Duchess of Northumberland, and quoted by Dr Percy in 
The Reliques of Ancient English Poetry, vol. i, p. 279, 34 edit., ‘In hys scheld 
did schyne a mone veryfying her light.’ [The WV. E. D. does not include to display 
under the various senses in which ‘verify’ is used. In the line quoted by Steevens 
the word may, perhaps, be interpreted as therein given under 2. d., ‘To demonstrate 
or prove (oneself) to be of a certain character,’ with this example, ‘Fortune . . . 
Turned her selfe, as shee away would flie, . . . As what she was, her selfe to verifie.’ 
1596. Drayton: Leg., Dk. Normandie, cxxxiv. Under 1. c. ‘To support or back 
up by testimony,’ the present line is quoted as the only example.—Ep.]|—MatoneE: 
The meaning (to give a somewhat more expanded comment) is: ‘I have ever spoken 
the truth of my friends, and in speaking of them have gone as far as I could go 
consistently with truth. I have not only told the truth, but the whole truth, and 
with the most favourable colouring that I could give to their actions without trans- 
gressing the bounds of truth. —Coriimr regards as indisputable the reading of 
his MS. Corrector, magnified, but fails to call attention to the fact that this is the 
reading of Hanmer’s text.—SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, p. 225) is equally at fault in 
commenting upon this reading, and says in conclusion: ‘If any change is neces- 
sary, which seems doubtful, notified could hardly be distinguished, when written 


ACTHY; SCe il] CORIOLANUS 519 


[21. I haue euer verified] 
or printed as of old, from werified. Magnified has little similarity with it’—Dvycr 
(ed. i.): Here ‘verified’ is a most suspicious reading, and perhaps crept into the 
text in consequence of the transcriber’s or compositor’s eye having rested on the 
word ‘verity’ in the next line—Sraunton: Perhaps the true word is rarefied, 
that is, stretched out. See Love’s Labour’s, IV, ii, 125, where, for ‘Here are numbers 
ratified’ we should also probably read rarefied. [Had Staunton no judicious friend 
who should have pointed out to him the somewhat ludicrous idea of Menenius 
making a boast of his constant occupation of stretching out his friends? The only 
possible meaning of rarvify is to make rare or less dense. As to the word ‘ratify’ 
in Love’s Labour’s, Staunton is the sole editor or commentator who has suspected 
its validity—Ep.]—R. G. Waite: The senseless reading of the folio seems to 
be the result either of looking to ‘verity’ at the end of the next line to assist in 
deciphering obscure manuscript, or of an anticipative remembrance of that word 
by a compositor who undertook to set the whole clause from a single reading. 
‘Amplified’ in the previous clause, and ‘all the size’ in this, seems to me to fully 
justify the change of ‘verified’ to magnified which was made in Hanmer’s edition 
and in Collier’s folio—Lro (Coriolanus): This seems almost to be nonsense. 
What I propose is not much better than magnified, except that the expression is 
somewhat more distinct, and the word contains one letter more, corresponding 
with the letters in ‘verified’; I propose to read glorified —Hupson (ed. i.): Some 
corruption of the text has long been suspected, and various changes proposed, but 
none so good as magnified, which falls in perfectly with the meaning and position 
of amplified and size-—KEIGHTLEY (Expositor, p. 373): As ‘verified’ would seem 
to have been suggested by the following ‘verity,’ we might read, with Hanmer, 
magnified, or perhaps repeat ‘amplified.’ [See Text. Notes..—WHITELAW: That 
is, I have always told the truth about my friends’ good acts—always the whole 
truth—sometimes perhaps a little more than the truth. [This, it will be noticed, 
is little more than an abstract of Malone’s interpretation, and to this Schmidt 
takes exception, saying that here ‘verify’ means rather, ‘I have always maintained 
the credit of my friends,’ which is the meaning he also attaches to this word in his 
Lexicon.—Ep.|—W. A. Wricut: [Johnson’s, Malone’s, and Schmidt’s] are all 
forced explanations of a word which is most likely corrupt, and they none of them 
fit in with ‘size’ in the next line. Perhaps ‘amplified’ might be repeated from the 
preceding line—E. K. Caampers (Warwick Sh.): That is, spoken up for, borne 
witness to. Numerous emendations have been suggested. Most of these assume 
that a word implying exaggeration is wanted, but that does not come until ll. 
23-26.—BEECHING (Henry Irving Sh.): Can this be a coinage of Menenius like 
‘conspectuities,’ fidius’d, as if it were very-fy in the sense of magnify, with a play on 
‘verity’ below? This clearly is the meaning intended. [Beeching did not repeat 
this in his Falcon Ed. a year later, but accepted Johnson’s explanation of this phrase. 
—Ep.]—Veritry (Student’s Sh.): The Century Dictionary gives as one of the sig- 
nifications of ‘verify,’ ‘to second or strengthen by aid; to back; to support the 
credit of,’ being an extension of the common meaning ‘to confirm the truthfulness 
or authenticity of.’ Compare King John, U, i, 277, ‘To verify their title with 
their lives,’ 7. e., to confirm, support. In speaking of his friends Menenius has 
always backed them up to the very limits of veracity. The word cannot, I think, 
be taken exactly in the sense ‘been true, loyal to,’ though some so interpret it.— 
PERRING (p. 314): The occurrence of ‘verity’ in the succeeding line seems to me 


520 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. ii. 


(Of whom hee’s cheefe) with all the fize that verity 22 
Would without lapfing fuffer : Nay, fometimes, 
Like to a Bowle vpon a fubtle ground 
I haue tumbled paft the throw : and in his praife 25 
Haue (almoft) ftampt the Leafing. Therefore Fellow, 
I muft haue leaue.to paffe. 

1 Faith Sir,if you had told as many lies in his behalfe, 
as you haue vttered words in your owne, you fhould not 
paffe heere : no, though it were as vertuous to lye, as to 30 
liue chaftly. Therefore go backe. 


22. with] to Han. 25. I haue] I’ve Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 


to indicate that ‘verify’ was the verb used. From the same circumstance others 
may draw an inference the very reverse. But this I would say, we must not expect, 
as a matter of course, to find in Shakespeare duplicates of what I may call Shake- 
spearian curiosities. Many of his strange and strangely used words occur but once, 
proving how careful he was not to adulterate with too liberal an admixture of alloy 
the pure gold of the English tongue——Casr (Arden Sh.): Different meanings have 
been extracted out of ‘verified,’ but Johnson has probably given as good an unforced 
sense as can be obtained. .. . Possibly Shakespeare in this line thinks of Coriolanus’s 
fame as it exists outside the record which men have read in ‘the book’ Menenius, 
and of Menenius as authenticating that fame by his testimony. Mr Craig was very 
doubtful of the word, and seems at one time to have thought of substituting ampli- 
fied in the text.—TucKER Brooke (Yale Sh.): The Folio reading gives a reasonable 
sense, I have shown my friends to be my friends. 

24. a subtle ground] STEEVENS: ‘Subtle’ means smooth, level. So Jonson, in one 
of his Masques, ‘Tityus’s breast, that (for six of the nine acres) is counted the sub- 
tlest bowling-ground in all Tartary,’ [Chloridia, ed. Gifford, viii, 105. This quota- 
tion as given by Steevens contained one or two verbal inaccuracies; they are here 
corrected.—Ep.] ‘Subtle,’ however, may mean artificially unlevel, as many bowling- 
greens are.—MALonE: May it not have its more ordinary acceptation, deceitful — 
W. A. Wricut: A ground that is so smooth and deceitful that the bowl moves 
over it more rapidly than the bowler intends and goes beyond the mark. There is 
another reference to the game of bowls in III, i, 78.—C. T. Ontons (N. E. D., s. v. 
10.c.): Of ground: Tricky. [The present line, and that from Chloridia above, quoted 
as only examples.] 

26. stampt the Leasing] Hreniey: That is, given the sanction of truth to my 
very exaggerations. ‘This appears to be the sense of the passage from what is 
said afterwards by the 2 Guard, ‘Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say 
you have.’ ‘Leasing’ occurs in our translation of the Bible. See Psalm iv, 2, 
[‘how long will yee love vanity, and seeke after leasing?’]—MAatone: I have almost 
given the /ze such a sanction as to render it current.—W. A. WricuT: ‘Leasing’ 
is the Anglo-Saxon leasung, falsehood. Compare Twelfth Night, I, v, 105, ‘Now 
Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou speakest well of fools!’ And Psalm v, 
6, ‘Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing.’ 


NOACTAV,cSCs 115] CORIOLANUS 521 


Men. Prythee fellow,remember my name is Menenius, 32 
always factionary on the party of your Generall. 

2 Howfoeuer you haue bin his Lier, as you fay you 
haue, I am one that telling true vnder him, muft fay you 35 
cannot pafle. Therefore go backe. 

Mene. Ha’s he din’d can’ft thou tell? For I would not 
{peake with him, till after dinner. 

I You are a Roman,are you ? 

Mene. lamas thy Generall is. 40 

1 Then you fhould hate Rome, as he do’s. Can you, 
when you haue pufht out your gates, the very Defender 
of them, and in a violent popular ignorance, giuen your 
enemy your fhield, thinke to front his reuenges with the 


eafie groanes of old women, the Virginall Palms of your 45 
32-36. Om. Bell. 42. out] out of Rowe,+, Cap. Varr. 
32, 33. As verse, omitting 7s, 1. 32 Ran. Mal. 

Ktly. 44. front] ’front Cap. 

33- on] of Rowe ii, Pope,+. 45. eafie] queasy Coll. ii, iii. (MS.). 
38, 39. As verse Ktly. wheezy Sta. conj. 

39-60. Om. Bell. Palms] pasmes or pames Warb. 
40. I amas] I am, as F,, Rowe, Coll. conj. gualms Sing. ii. conj. (Becket). 


Del. Wh. Cam.-+, Craig, Neils. 


42. pusht out your gates] Apporr (§ 183): Out (out from) is used as a preposi- 
tion like forth. 

45. easie groanes] STEEVENS: That is, slight, inconsiderable. So in 2 Henry VI: 
‘—these faults are easy, quickly answer’d,’ [III, i, 133].—ScuHmipT (Lew., s. v. 
3.): Requiring no great labour or exertion, soon done. ‘With very easy arguments 
of love,’ King John, I, i, 36. 

45. the Virginall Palms] Warsurton: By ‘virginal palms’ may be indeed 
understood the holding up the hands in supplication. Therefore I have altered 
nothing. But as this sense is cold and gives us even a ridiculous idea; and as the 
passions of the several intercessors seem intended to be represented, I suspect 
Shakespeare might write pasmes or pames, that is, swooning fits, from the French 
pasmer or pamer. I have frequently used the liberty to give sense to an unmeaning 
passage by the introduction of a French word of the same sound, which I suppose 
to be of Shakespeare’s own coining. And I am certainly justified in so doing by 
the great number of such sort of words to be found in the common text.—JOHNSON: 
It is not denied that many French words were mingled in the time of Elizabeth 
with our language, which have since been ejected, and that many which are known 
then to have been in use may be properly recalled when they will help the sense. 
But when a word is to be admitted, the first question should be, by whom was it 
ever received? in what book can it be shewn? If it cannot be proved to have been 
in use, the reasons which can justify its reception must be stronger than any critic 
will have to bring —Epwarps (p. 99): Mr Warburton must sure have a very hard 
heart if the idea of virgins holding up their hands in supplication for their lives and 
honor can seem to him either cold or ridiculous, and nothing will satisfy him but 


522 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AGT VeeSCw ss 


daughters, ‘or with the palfied interceffion of fuch a de- 46 
cay’d Dotant as you feeme to be? Can you think to blow 
out the intended fire, your City is ready to flame in, with 
{uch weake breath as this? No, you are deceiu’d, therfore 


backe to Rome, and prepare for your execution : you are 50 
condemn’d, our Generall has fworne you out of repreeue 
and pardon. 52 


os see 


making them swoon that he may have an opportunity of bringing in a French 
word.—Heatu (p. 429): The author of the Canons of Criticism hath very justly 
exposed Mr Warburton’s most ridiculous emendation, . . . though the word 
[pasms or pdmes] as a noun is as unknown to the French as it is to the English 
language, and probably to every language that is human. I do indeed admit 
that ‘a great number of French words are incorporated in our language, and used 
by Shakespeare in common with other writers’; but that there are a great number 
of such words to be met with in his writings which are of his own coining, and 
peculiar to himself, is a circumstance which, I must confess, hath escaped my 
observation. But granting the fact to be true; is that a sufficient justification for 
over-loading him with such words by wholesale for mere fanciful conjecture 
only, in defiance of the authority of all his editions, and that too when their text 
expresses his meaning in English full as well, and frequently much better, and with 
more force and elegance? To detect the weakness and insufficiency of Mr War- 
burton’s defence we need but apply the reasoning on which it is founded to a 
similar instance. Whoever hath but dipped into Shakespeare must have observed 
a certain obscurity, which may be considered as one of the characteristic peculiar- 
ities of his style, arising in great measure from the grandeur, the strength, and the 
exactness of his conceptions, which he could not equal by the force of his expression, 
though his powers even of this kind were never excelled by any other writer. It 
is the business of a critic to illustrate these obscurities, but he would be justly 
laughed at and exploded if he should set about multiplying their number under 
the pretext that he was strictly adhering to Shakespeare’s manner.—STEEVENS: 
The adjective ‘virginal’ is used in Woman is a Weathercock, 1612, ‘Lav’d in a bath 
of contrite virginal tears,’ [III, ii, Hazlett-Dods., p. 53]. Again in Spenser, 
Faerie Queene, ‘She to them made with mildnesse virginall,’ Bk ii, cant. ix, [v. 20, 
]. 4]—Matone: So in 2 Henry VI: ‘—tears virginal Shalt be to me even as the 
dew to fire,’ [V, ii, 52].—SINcER (Sh. Vindicated, p. 226): It is possible that for 
‘virginal palms’ we should read ‘virginal qualms’; the words would be easily mis- 
taken for each other in old manuscript. ‘Virginal palms’ may, however, mean 
the palms or hands of the maidens joined in supplication—R. G. Waite (Sh’s 
Scholar, p. 366): Indeed, Mr Singer! may it? Is it possible? Can such an obvious 
and simple construction of a plain but beautiful passage be dreamt of in your 
philosophy? I must ask pardon for noticing such attempts on Shakespeare’s text, 
and for noticing them as I do; for, in truth, I should as soon expect an intelligent 
reader, not to say a competent editor of Shakespeare, ‘to expostulate . . . Why 
day is day, night, night, and time is time,’ as thus to raise a question on what it 
would seem impossible to misunderstand. 


ACT V, SC. ii.] CORIOLA NUS 523 
Mene. Sirra, if thy Captaine knew I were heere, 53 
He would vfe me with eftimation. 
I Come, my Captaine knowes you not. 55 
Mene. I meane thy Generall. 


I My Generall cares not for you. 


Back I fay, go: leaft 


I Jet forth your halfe pinte of blood. Backe, that’s the vt- 


moft of your hauing, backe. 
Mene. 


Nay but Fellow, Fellow. 60 


Enter Cortolanus with Auffidius. 


Corio. What’s the matter ? 


Mene.Now you Companion : Ile fay an arrant for you : 


you fhall know now that I am in eftimation : 


you fhall 


perceiue, that a Iacke gardant cannot office me from my 65 


53, 54. As prose Pope et seq. (ex- 
cept Ktly). 
53. thy] the Ff. 
knew] knew that Ktly. 


55. z] 1 Wat. Rowe,+. 2 Watch. 
Varr. Ran. Sec. G. Dyce. First Sen. 
Cam.+, Huds. ii, Words. 2 G. Mal. 
et cet. 


58, 59. blood. Backe, that’s...backe] 


blood;—that’s..—back. Var. ’73 et cet. 
60. Fellow.) Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
fellow,— Theob. et cet. 
61. with] and Mal. et seq. 


63. Companion] champion, Rowe, 
Pope. 
arrant] errant F,, Rowe. errand 
Pope et seq. 


65. Lacke gardant] Jack—gardant F,, 


Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Johns. blood, Rowe, +. Jack guardant Cap. et 
that’s...back, back. Warb. Han. cet. 


58, 59. halfe pinte of blood. Backe...hauing] WarsBurton: As _ these 
words are read and pointed, the sentence ‘that’s the utmost of your having’ 
signifies, you are like to get no further. Whereas the author evidently intended 
it to refer to ‘the half pint of blood’ he speaks of, and to mean that that was all 
he had in his veins. The thought is humorous, and to disembarrass it from the 
corrupt expression we should read and point thus, ‘Lest I let forth your half pint 
of blood; that’s the utmost of your having. Back, back.’—Jonnson: I believe 
the meaning never was mistaken, and therefore do not change the reading.— 
HEATH (p. 432): Mr Warburton has taken upon him to alter the text in order, as 
he says, to preserve the humour. But the common reading gives exactly the same 
sense, is fully as intelligible, and by interposing the word ‘back’ in the middle of 
the sentence gives more humour and spirit to the expression. Let the reader 
judge. ‘Back, I say, go; lest I let forth your half pint of blood—back—that’s 
the utmost of your having.—Back.’ 

63. Companion] See IV, v, 15 and note. 

63. Ile say an arrant for you] WHITELAW: You shall hear how I can say what 
I was sent to say.—Scumipt (Coriolanus): Certainly not as Whitelaw interprets, 
but rather, I will perform a commission for you, your general shall now learn 
all—W. A. Wricut: I’ll tell him a story about you. [Of these, Schmidt’s is, I 
think, the best. Menenius means that he will take upon himself the office of 
messenger which properly belongs to the Guard.—Ep.] 

65. Iacke gardant] STEEVENS: This term is equivalent to one still in use— 


524 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. ii. 


Son Coriolanus, gueffe but my entertainment with him:if ~ 66 
thou ftand’ft not i’th ftate of hanging, or of fome death 
more long in Spe¢tatorfhip,and crueller in fuffering, be- 
hold now prefently, and fwoond for what’s to come vpon 
thee. The glorious Gods fit in hourely Synod about thy 70 
particular profperity, and loue thee no worfe then thy old 
Father Menenius do’s. O my Son, my Son! thou art pre- 
paring fire for vs : looke thee, heere’s water to quench it. 
I was hardly moued to come to thee : but beeing affured 
none but my felfe could moue thee,I haue bene blowne 75 
out of your Gates with fighes : and coniure thee to par- 
don Rome, and thy petitionary Countrimen. ‘The good 
Gods affwage thy wrath, and turne the dregs of it, vpon 78 


66. but] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 69. /woond] F.F;, Del. fwoon F, et 
Ward. Johns. by Han, Cap. Var. ’73, Cet: 
78,785. but by Mal. Ran. Coll. MS. 76. your] our F,, Rowe,+, Ran. 
et cet. Ktly, Wh. Dyce ii, Jervis, Coll. iii, 
67. v’th) Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 7the Huds. ii, Words. Neils. the Anon. conj. 
Cap. et cet. ap. Cam. yon Ktly conj. 


Jack in office, i. e., one who is as proud of his petty consequence as an excise- 
man. 

66. guesse but my] JOHNSON proposes, but does not adopt in his text, the 
reading ‘guess by my,’ wherein he is anticipated by Hanmer.—STEEVENS remarks 
that this reading is also suggested by Edwards in his MS. notes.—MAatone duly 
credits it to Hanmer, and in regard to this change of ‘but’ to by adds: ‘It is much 
more probable that by should have been omitted at the press than confounded 
with but.’ See Text. Notes —Ep. 

73. looke thee] ABBott (§ 212): Verbs followed by thee instead of thou have 
been called reflexive. But though ‘haste thee’ and some other phrases with 
verbs of motion, may be thus explained, and verbs were thus often used in Early 
English, it is probable that ‘look thee,’ ‘hark thee’ are to be explained by euphonic 
reasons. Thee thus used follows imperatives which, being themselves emphatic, 
require an unemphatic pronoun. The Elizabethans reduced thou to thee. We 
have gone further, and rejected it altogether. 

76. your Gates] Ritson (Remarks, p. 142): ‘Your’ cannot be right. If the 
speaker mean to call the gates Coriolanus’s, which would seem very absurd, he ought 
to say thy. It must be either our or theiy—Lro (reading with F,): Menenius 
cannot call the gates ‘your,’ since Coriolanus afterwards says ‘your,’ 1. 90. Per- 
haps we ought to read yond.—Scumupr retains the folio reading, taking it as an 
example of the ethical dative, which is, I think, hardly defensible; his second 
reason is the better: ‘Perhaps Menenius wishes to bring more nearly home to 
Coriolanus that it is his own (Coriolanus’s) native city from which he comes.’— 
CasE gives substantially this same reason for retaining the reading ‘your gates.’— 
Ep.—WALKER (Cyrit., ii, ch. xlvi.) gives many examples of the confusion between 
your and our not only in the pages of the Folio, but in works by other writers and 
printers. 


ACT V, SC. ii.] CORIOLA NUS 525 


this Varlet heere : This, who like a blocke hath denyed 
my acceffe to thee. 80 
Corio. Away. 
Mene. How? Away ? 
Corio. Wife, Mother, Child, I know not. My affaires 
Are Seruanted to others : Though I owe 
My Reuenge properly, my remiffion lies 85 
In Volcean brefts. That we haue beene familiar, 
Ingrate forgetfulneffe fhall poifon rather 


Then pitty : Note how much,!therefore be gone. 88 
80. thee.] thee— Rowe, +. 87. poifon] prison Theob. Han. Cap. 
85. my remifion] Remission Rowe ii. poise down Bailey. 

86. Volcean] F.F;. Volcian Cap. 88. pitty: Note...much,] pity: note... 


Var. 778, ’85, Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. much— Rowe, Pope. pity note..much.— 
Sing. i, Knt. Volfcian F,, Rowe et Theob. et seq. 
cet. 


709, 80. This, who. . . to thee] BEEcHING (Falcon Sh.): A burst of humour which 
was meant to be irresistible. But the wrangling with the sentinels has upset 
Menenius, and he is not equal to himself. 

84. Seruanted] Apsort (§ 294): A participle formed from an adjective means 
‘made (the adjective’), and derived from a noun means ‘endowed (with the noun’). 
{Abbott explains ‘servanted’ here as made subservient, and thus takes servant as 
the adjectival form of the word, as ‘stranger’ is used in Lear, I, i, 207, ‘stranger’d 
with our curse,’ z. e., made a stranger by our curse.—Numerous other examples of 
this construction are given.—Ep.] 

84-86. Though I owe My Reuenge properly, etc.] Jonnson: Though I have 
a peculiar right in revenge, in the power of forgiveness the Volcians are conjoined. 
[For this use of ‘remission’ in the sense of pardon compare, ‘My penance is to 
call Lucetta back And ask remission for my folly past,’ Two Gentlemen, I, i, 65.] 

87, 88. Ingrate forgetfulnesse shall poison .. . Then pitty: Note how much] 
THEOBALD: We cannot desire a more signal instance of the indolent stupidity of 
our editors. Forgetfulness might poison in not remembering a conversation of 
Friendship, but how could it, in such an action, be said to pity too? The pointing 
is absurd, and the sentiment consequently sunk into nonsense. As I have reg- 
ulated the stops both Dr Thirlby and Mr Warburton saw with me they ought to 
be regulated. I have still ventured beyond my ingenious friends in changing 
‘poison’ into prison, which adds an antithesis by which the sense seems clearer 
and more natural, vz., That forgetfulness will rather keep it a secret that we have 
been familiar, than pity shall disclose how much we have been so.—HEatu (p. 432): 
Mr Theobald, by a very ingenious and, in my opinion, a very probable conjecture, 
would substitute prison for ‘poison,’ but Mr Warburton would not hearken to 
him.—Dvce: It is at least certain that elsewhere the Folio has by mistake ‘poy- 
sons’ for prisons, [Love’s Labour’s, IV, iii, 305], and ‘poyson’d’ for prison’d, [1 Henry 
VI: V, iv, 121], but there is something forced in Theobald’s reading here.— 
R. G. Wuire: Although the old text may be accepted as meaning, Ingrate for- 
getfulness shall poison the memory of our old friendship, it must yet be admitted 


526 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Vv, SC. ii. 


Mine eares againft your fuites, are ftronger then 
Your gates againft my force. Yet for I loued thee, go 
Take this along, I writ it for thy fake, 
And would haue fent it. Another word Menenius, 
I will not heare thee fpeake. This man Auffidius 
Was my belou’d in Rome : yet thou behold’ft. 
Auffid. You keepe a con{ftant temper. Exeunt 95 
Manet the Guard and Menenius. 
1 Now fir, is your name Menenius ? 
2 ’Tisa {pell you fee of much power : 
You know the way home againe. 
1 Do you heare how wee are fhent for keeping your 100 
greatneffe backe ? 
2 What caufe do you thinke I haue to fwoond? 
Menen. I neither care for th’world, nor your General: 103 


ot. [Gives him a letter. Pope et seq. 96. Manet] Manent Ff, Rowe,+. 

92-95. Another...temper] Om. Bell. 98-102. Om. Bell. 

94. behold’ft.| Ff, Cam. behold’st! 98, 99. As verse Ff, Rowe, Varr. 
Dyce ii, Glo. Cla. Huds. ii, Words. Ran. As prose Pope et cet. 
Craig, Neils. behold’st— F;F,, Rowe 102. fwoond] F.F;, Del. fwoon F, 
CUCCE. eL cet. 

95,96. Exeunt...Menenius.] Exeunt 103. th’world] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 


Coriolanus and Aufidius. Cap. et seq. the world Cap. et cet. 


that this accords ill with the alternative clause of the sentence, ‘rather than pity 
note how much,’ and it is not improbable that poison is a corruption. [White char- 
acterises Theobald’s reading as ‘not very happy.’—Ep.]—Lro (Coriolanus): 
‘Ingrate forgetfulness’ is here subject; rather than pity shall note the fact how 
familiar they have been, the ingrate forgetfulness of the Roman people shall poison 
this thought.—Casr (Arden Sh.): It is Coriolanus who admits no appeal to old 
friendship, and therefore it is Ais forgetfulness that will ungratefully poison the 
remembrance rather than his pity will recall how great that familiarity was. Hence 
the idea of some that ‘ingrate forgetfulness’ may refer to the conduct of the 
countrymen of Coriolanus, the ‘dastard nobles,’ seems improbable. 

87. poison] W. A. Wricut: That is, destroy, stifle. So in Love’s Labour’s, 
IV, iii, 305, ‘Why, universal plodding poisons up The nimble spirits in the arteries.’ 
[This, it will be noticed, is the passage cited by Dyce above in support of Theo- 
bald’s change, prisons, in the present line. To Theobald is also due the change 
in the line in Love’s Labours. For a discussion as to this change see the latter play, 
this ed., p. 194.—Eb.] 

go. for I loued thee] Because I loved thee. Compare III, i, 14; and for other 
examples see, if needful, ABBorT, § 151. 

roo. shent] W. A. Wricut: Scolded, reproved. See Twelfth Night, IV, ii, 112, 
‘I am shent for speaking to you.’ The original meaning of the word is ‘to dis- 
grace, put to shame,’ from the Anglo-Saxon scendan. In the earlier Wicliffite 
translation of z Sam., xx, 34, instead of what in the Authorised Version is ‘be- 


ACT V, SC. iii] CORIOLANUS 527 
for fuch things as you, I can fcarfe thinke ther’s any, y’are 
fo flight. He that hath a will to die by himfelfe, feares it 105 
not from another : Let your Generall do his worft. For 
you, bee that you are, i long; and your mifery encreafe 
with your age. I fay to you, as I was faid to, Away.Exit 

I A Noble Fellow I warrant him. 

2 The worthy Fellow is our General.He’s the Rock, 110 
The Oake not to be winde-fhaken. Exit Watch. 


[Scene IIT.| 


Enter Coriolanus and Auffidius. I 


Corio. We will before the walls of Rome to morrow 


Set downe our Hoaft. My partner in this Action, 3 


104. y’are] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. Wh. i. +you’re Cap. 
Neils. ye’re Dyce, Sta. Cam.+, Huds. 
ii, Words. Craig. you are Var. ’73 et 
cet. 

1og-111. Om. Bell. 

110, 111. Lines end: 
winde-fhaken Cap. Neils. 
et cet. 

110. He’s] He is Cap. 


General... 
As prose F, 


111. Exit Watch.] Exeunt. Cap. et 
seq. 

SCENE m1. Pope et seq. (Scene con- 
tinued Ff, Rowe, Theob.). 

No locality given Pope,+. A Tent. 
Var.’78,’85. Tent of Coriolanus. Cap. 
eticet, 

1. Enter] Re-enter Pope,+. 

and Auffidius.]} Aufidius, and 
others. Cap. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 


Knt, Coll. Del. Dyce, Sta. Hal. Ktly. 


cause his father had done him shame,’ we find ‘forthi that his fader hadde 
shent hym.’ 

tos. by himselfe] MALONE: That is, by his own hands. 

107. bee that you are, long] W. A. Wricutr: Menenius plays upon the two 
meanings of the word—tedious in talk, long-tongued, and long-lived. 

Scene III.] E. K. Coampers (Warwick Sh.): This is perhaps the finest scene in 
the play. It is also one of the most important. Two mighty kindred spirits clash 
together, and in the clash Coriolanus’ second failure is determined. The powerful 
individuality of Volumnia, kept in the background hitherto and only suggested, 
now dominates the action, and, by contact with her, Coriolanus too rises to a 
pitch of higher dignity than he has yet reached.—Sroprorp BROOKE (p. 241): 
We find Coriolanus worshipped as a leader, not as a man, by the Volscian soldiery; 
apparently on the peak of fortune. But he is really more lost, more alone than 
ever. No one loves him. He can have no communion with his comrades. It is 
almost pitiable to hear his appeals to Aufidius, who hates him, to tell him what 
to do. Then, in his solitude, his affections, the best part of him, which his pride 
had smothered, awake again. Though he repulses Menenius, who comes to im- 
plore grace tor Rome, we feel that he loves him. He longs to see his mother, his 
wife, and son, but his position is such that he dare not satisfy his longing. It is 
a piteous case, for if we add to his vast loneliness this intense and silent emotion 
of natural affection, whose indulgence is forbidden, he becomes (as Shakespeare’s 
sympathy with sorrow meant him to become) an object of noble pity to the audi- 
ence—and, perhaps, to the gods. 


528 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT V, SC. iii. 


You muft report to th’Volcian Lords, how plainly 


I haue borne this Bufineffe. 
Auf. 


Onely their ends you haue refpected, 


Stopt your eares againft the generall fuite of Rome : 
Neuer admitted a priuat whifper, no not with fuch frends 


That thought them fure of you. 


Corio. This laft old man, 


se) 


Whom with a crack’d heart I haue fent to Rome, 

Lou’d me, aboue the meafure of a Father, 

Nay godded me indeed. Their lateft refuge 

Was to fend him : for whofe old Loue I haue 

(Though I fhew’d fowrely to him) once more offer’d 15 
The firft Conditions which they did refufe, 

And cannot now accept, to grace him onely, 17, 


4. Volcian] Volfcian F,, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Coll. Del. 
Dyce, Sta. Hal. Ktly, Wh. Cam.+, 
Huds. Words. Craig, Neils. 

5-8. Lines end: ends...again/t...ad- 
mitted...frends. Cap. Var. ’78 et seq. 

5. I haue] I’ve Pope. I still have 
Cap. 

6, 7. Onely...Stopt] 
Rowe,+. 

6. ends] end Ran. 


As one line 


8, 9. Lines end: no...of you Pope,+. 
8. a privat] private Pope,+. 

11. I haue fent] I’ve sent back Words. 

15. fowrely] sow’ry Rowe i. sow’rly 
Rowe ii, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. sourly Cap. et cet. 

16. refuse] refuge F 2. 

17, 18. accept,...more:] accept;...more, 
Sing. ii, Dyce, Cam.+, Huds. Coll. iii, 
Words. accepi,...more. Coll. i, ii, Craig. 
accept....more, Neils. 


4, 5. how plainly ... this Businesse] Jounson: That is, how openly, how re- 
motely from artifice or concealment. 

5. Businesse] WALKER (Versification, p. 171) and Apsorr (§ 479) note that 
this word is pronounced as a trisyllable here and in other places; but is not its 
dissyllabic pronunciation comparatively modern?—Ep. 

8, 9. such frends That thought] Compare, for this construction, ITI, ii, 71, ‘such 
words That are but roated in your tongue.’ See Asxort (§ 279) for other examples. 

13. godded] W. A. Wricut: That is, made a god of me, worshipped, idolized me. 
—Brantey (NV. E. D., s. v. God, 1. a. trans.): The present line quoted; also: 1668. 
Glanvill Plus Ultra (1688), 93: ‘In those days .. . men Godded their Benefactors.’ 

14. whose old Loue] STEEVENS: We have a corresponding expression in King 
Lear, ‘—to whose young love The vines of France,’ etc., [I, i, 85]. 

16-19. The first Conditions . . . yeelded too] Hear (p. 433): If Coriolanus 
had barely offered the first conditions again, and nothing more, with what pro- 
priety could he add that he had yielded to a very little? I apprehend the passage 
should be thus pointed: 


‘The first conditions, which they did refuse, 
And cannot now accept: To grace him only, 
(That thought he could do more) a very little 
I’ve yielded to.’ 


17. And cannot now accept] CAsr (Arden Sh.): Apparently this means that 


ACT V, SC. iii.] CORIOLA NUS 529 
That thought he could do more : A very little 18 
I haue yeelded too. Frefh Embaffes,and Suites, 

Nor from the State, nor priuate friends heereafter 20 


Will Tlendeare to. Ha?what fhout is this ? Shout within 
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow 
In the fame time ’tis made? I will not. 
Enter Virgilia Volumnia , Valeria, yong Martius, 
with Attendants. 25 


19. I haue] I’ve Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 
ioo] to Fi, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. Sing. Dyce, Sta. 
Ktly, Cam.+, Huds. Words. Craig, 
Neils. 
Frefh| Frifh F.. 
Embaffes] F.F;. embassie Rowe, + 


23. not.) Ff, Rowe, Dyce, Cam.-. 
not do’t. Anon. ap. Cam. not, I. 
Lettsom. mnot—Ha! Dyceconj. not— 
Pope et cet. 

24, 25. Enter...Attendants.] Ff, 
Rowe, Pope. Enter...Attendants, all 
in mourning. Theob.+, Varr. Ran. 
Enter, in neglected and mourning 


(—Var. 73). embaffies F,, Cap. et Habits, Virgilia, Volumnia, leading in 


cet. her hand young Marcius, Valeria, and 
20. from] for Rowe, Pope. other Ladies. Cap. Enter in mourning 
21. fhout] sight Han. habits, Virgilia, Volumnia, leading 


Shout within] Om. Han. young Marcius, Valeria, and Attend- 


ants. Mal. et seq. 


pride or shame will prevent acceptance. It cannot refer to the thirty days’ respite 
which accompanied the first conditions because these conditions are now once more 
offered. 

19. I haue yeelded too] Capett (vol. I, pt i, p. 99 ): ‘Too’ is not an unimportant 
amendment taken from the First Folio, for it shows us more plainly than the common 
word éo that the favour he had shown to Menenius was double: one, a permission to 
make a fresh tender of the first-offer’d articles; the other, a slight mitigation of 
some of the heavy ones. 

19. Fresh Embasses] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Shakespeare skips one 
embassy described in Plutarch, an embassy of the Roman Priests and Soothsayers. 
Plutarch says nothing either of Menenius or Cominius by name as ambassadors. 
Shakespeare chose to invent their personal missions on the strength of Plutarch’s 
statement that ‘The ambassadours that were sent were Martius’ familiar friends 
and acquaintances, who looked at the least for a courteous welcome of him as their 
familiar friend and kinsman.’ 

21. what shout is this] Capett (vol. I, pti, p. 99): The Oxford editor [Hanmer] has 
not shown his judgment in changing ‘shout’ in this place into sight. Should a pro- 
cession, like that which comes presently, make its entry without any announcement? 
or could the Volcians, though enemies, see the mother and wife of their general, 
together with a large train of ladies, approach the door of his tent without notice 
or some mark of respect to them? and what properer in camps than a ‘shout’? 

23. In the same time] For examples wherein ‘in’ is thus used, meaning at or 
during, as applied to a period of time, and for the etiology of such phrases, see 
ABBOTT, § 161. 

24, 25. Enter Virgilia, Volumnia, Valeria, etc.] Bercuinc (Falcon Sh.): No 

34 


530 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. ili. 


My wife comes formoft, then the honour’d mould 26 
Wherein this Trunke was fram’d, and in her hand 

The Grandchilde to her blood. But out affection, 

All bond and priuiledge of Nature breake ; 


Let it be Vertuous to be Obftinate. 30 
26-40. Mnemonic Warb. 29. Nature breake;| nature break! 
28. out] our F3F,, Rowe i. out, Theob.+, Knt, Ktly, Coll. iii. mature, 

Theob. et seq. break: Cap. nature, break! Var. 78 

affection,| Ff, Rowe, Han. affec- et cet. 

tion; Cap. affection! Pope et cet. 30. [Virgilia courtesies. Johns. Var. 

"73: 


explanation is offered in the play of how the ladies were more successful than 
Menenius in passing the outposts. It is doubtless to be found in these words of 
Plutarch: ‘They went in troupe together unto the Volsces camp, whom, when they 
saw, they of themselves did both pity and reverence her, and there was not a man 
among them that once durst say a word unto her. But in Plutarch Coriolanus re- 
ceives every one who comes from Rome. 

28. But out affection, etc.] A. C. Brapitry (Coriolanus, p. 13): To me this 
scene is one in which the tragic feelings of fear and pity have little place. Such 
anxiety as I feel is not for the fate of the hero or of any one else; it is, to use re- 
ligious language, for the safety of his soul. And when he yields, though I know, 
as he divines, that his life is lost, the emotion I feel is not pity; he is above pity 
and above life. And the anxiety itself is but slight; it bears no resemblance to the 
hopes and fears that agitate us as we approach the end in Othello or King Lear. 
The whole scene affects me, to exaggerate a little, more as a majestic picture of 
stationary figures than as the fateful climax of an action speeding to its close. 
And the structure of the drama seems to confirm this view. Almost throughout 
the first three acts—that is, up to the banishment—we have incessant motion, 
excited and resounding speech, a violent oscillation of fortunes. But after this 
the dramatic tension is suddenly relaxed, and though it increases again, it is never 
allowed to approach its previous height. If Shakespeare had wished to do so in 
this scene he had only to make us wait in dread of some interposition from 
Aufidius, at which the hero’s passion might have burst into a fury fatal even to 
the influence of Volumnia. But our minds are crossed by no shadow of such 
dread. From the moment when he catches sight of the advancing figures, and the 
voice of nature—what he himself calls ‘great nature’—begins to speak in his heart 
long before it speaks aloud to his ear, we know the end. And all this is in har- 
mony with that characteristic of the drama which we noticed at first—we feel but 
faintly, if at all, the presence of any mysterious or fateful agency. We are wit- 
nessing only the conquest of passion by simple human feelings, and Coriolanus is 
as much a drama of reconciliation as a tragedy. That is no defect in it, but it is 
a reason why it cannot leave the same impression as the supreme tragedies, and 
should be judged by its own standard. 

29. All bond...of Nature breake] Brrecutnc (Falcon Sh.): It is worth 
while at this point to recollect to what it was that Coriolanus proposed to sacrifice 
all natural ties, because there might be conditions under which such a course would 
be justifiable. 


ACT V, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 531 


What is that Curt’fie worth? Or thofe Doues eyes, 31 
Which can make Gods forfworne ? I melt, and am not 

Of ftronger earth then others: my Mother bowes, 

As if Olympus to a Mole-hill fhould 

In fupplication Nod : and my yong Boy 35 


31. Doues] dove’s Rowe,+, Cap. 33. [Volumnia bows. Johns. Var. 73. 
Varr. Mal. Ran. doves’ Steev. et seq. 


31. those Doues eyes] STEEVENS: So in the Canticles, v. 12, ‘—his eyes are 
cion of the Names of Goddes and Goddesses, &c., Printed by Wynkyn de Worde: 
He speaks of Venus, ‘Cryspe was her skyn, her eyen columbyne.’ 

32, 33. I melt, and am not Of stronger earth] SroprorD BROOKE (p. 242): 
This is Coriolanus at his best, thrilled by those natural affections which last longest, 
and which in their natural working are the best medicine for the selfish heart. 
Coriolanus fights against them; his promise to Aufidius, his vow of revenge beat 
back his yielding and forgiveness. But when his mother finally turns from mere 
arguing the question to her ancient way with him, and claims his reverence for his 
motherhood; and then, when he is still silent, breaks into scorn of him, and bids 
him, repudiating him, seek his family among the Volscians—why then Coriolanus 
can bear no more. His lonely pride is shattered by the dominance of what is tender, 
good, and natural in him. For the first time in his life he is truly unselfish. He 
gives up his most passionate desire—revenge. He puts away pride and anger, 
the tyrannic qualities of his nature; and he does this knowing, at least suspecting, 
that this means his death—and it does mean it. The man is redeemed. The 
repentence is not too late for honour, not too late for moral greatness; for thus 
conquered, he is at last great, having won by renouncing all that he once thought 
were the sources of his fame, immortal fame. But he is not freed from the results 
of his long wrong-doing. Repentence is too late to save his life, and that he knows 
he is doomed makes his act the nobler. Thus Shakespeare veils the perishing man 
with tenderness, pity, and admiration. We forgive what we hated in him in the 
past. His wife and mother, knowing he is lost, yet went home with peace in their 
heart, and Rome remembered only his fame as a warrior. Over his dead body 
the patricians and the tribunes came to respect each other more. The dead 
Coriolanus was greater than the living. 

34. Olympus to a Mole-hill] StErveNns: This idea might have been caught 
from a line in the first book of Sidney’s Arcadia, ‘What judge you doth a hillocke 
shew, by the lofty Olympus?’ [Poems, ed. Grosart, ii, p. 21, 1. 75]—Casre (Arden 
Sh.): See also Massinger, Virgin Martyr, I, i, ‘An humble modesty that would not 
match A molehill with Olympus,’ [ed. Gifford, p. 20]; The Roman Actor, III, i, 1-4: 
‘if you but compare What I have suffered with your injuries (Though great ones, I 
confess) they will appear Like molehills to Olympus.’ 

35-40. and my yong Boy. . .no other kin] KruEGER (Jahrbuch, xxxviii, p. 237) 
suggests as a more consistent and natural arrangement of these lines the following: 


‘and my young boy 
Hath an aspect of intercession which 
Great nature cries, Deny not. [But] I’ll never 
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand 


532 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Vv, SC. ili. 


Hath an Afpect of intercefsion, which 36 
Great Nature cries, Deny not. Let the Volces 

Plough Rome, and harrow Italy, Ie neuer 

Be fuch a Gofling to obey inftin¢ét; but ftand 


As if a man were Author of himfelf,& knew no other kin 40 
Virgil. My Lord and Husband. 
Corio, Thefe eyes are not the fame I wore in Rome. 42 


Virg. The forrow that deliuers vs thus chang’d, 
Makes you thinke fo. 

Corio. Like a dull Actor now, I haue forgot my part, 45 
And I am out, euen to a full Difgrace. Beft of my Flefh, 


37. Volces] Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Mal. 40, 41. Linesend: him/elf...Husband. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt i. Volcies F3. 40. As if] And if Rowe ii. 
Volfcies F,, Rowe. Volscians Pope,+. 44-46. Lines end: now...out...Flefh 
Volcians Cap. Volsces Coll. et cet. Rowe ii. et seq. 

38, 39. Ile neuer Be fuch a Gofling] Pl 45-54. Mnemonic Warb. 
ne’er be A gosling Lettsom (ap. Dyceii.). 45, 46. Like...Difgvace Om. Bell. 


As if a man were author of himself 
And knew no other kin. Let the Volsces 
Plough Rome and harrow Italy!’ 


Thus Coriolanus is made to struggle against the melting mood and ends his speech 
with the resolve to Jet things take their course instead of interjecting this as a 
parenthesis in the middle of his attempt to stifle the yielding to the cry of great 
nature.—[But few, I think, will commend this attempt to improve on Shake- 
speare.—Ep.] 

36-39. Aspect .. . instinct] With the accent on the last syllable as always in 
Shakespeare. See, if needful, ABBort, § 490. 

38-40. Ile neuer... no other kin] Mrs Grirrira (p. 444): Coriolanus has 
here carried his sternness and the strained principles of stoical pride, whose throne 
is only in the mind, as far as they could go; and now great nature, whose more 
sovereign seat of empire is 7m the heart, takes her turn to triumph; for, upon the 
joint prayers, tears, and intreaties of his family, he becomes @ man at last, crying 


Our: ‘Not of a woman’s tenderness to be, 


Requires nor child, nor woman’s face to see.’ 


43. The sorrow ... Makes you thinke so] JoHNsON: Virgilia makes a volun- 
tary misinterpretation of her husband’s words. He says, ‘These eyes are not the 
same,’ meaning that he saw things with other eyes or other dispositions. She 
lays hold on the word ‘eyes’ to turn his attention on their present appearance.— 
W. A. Wricut: Virgilia interprets her husband’s speech literally, as if it referred 
to the altered appearance of the suppliants, which was caused by their sorrow. 
Coriolanus merely says that in his banishment he saw everything in a different 
light—Tucker Brooke (Yale Sh.): Virgilia purposely misconstrues her hus- 
band’s words. The great alteration, she says, which sorrow has caused in our 
appearance makes you think you can’t believe your eyes. 

45, 46. Like a dull Actor . . . I am out] MatLone: So in our author’s Sonnet. 


ACT V, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 533 


Forgiue my Tyranny: but do not fay, 47 
For that forgiue our Romanes. Oa kiffe 
Long as my Exile, {weet as my Reuenge ! 


Now by the iealous Queene of Heauen, that kiffe 50 

I carried from thee deare ; and my true Lippe 

Hath Virgin’d it ere fince. You Gods, I pray, 52 
50. Heauen] Heav’n Rowe,+ (—Var. 52. I pray] I pray to you Rowe. I 

73) prate Theob. Pope ii. et seq. 


xxiii, “As an imperfect actor on the stage Who with his fear is put beside his part,’ 
{ll. 1, 2]. ‘Of his [Shakespeare’s] profound knowledge of the actor’s art there can 
be no question. No other dramatist of that age has written such keen and subtle 
criticism of it, or alluded to it in his plays more frequently. It is often a source of 
vivid illustration,’ Percy Simpson, Actors and Acting; Shakespeare’s England, 
vol. ii, p. 248. 

50. by the iealous Queene of Heauen] Jounson: That is, by Juno, the guardian 
of marriage, and consequently the avenger of connubial perfidy. 

50-52. that kisse ... Virgin’d it ere since] Three dramatists subsequent to 
Shakespeare’s Coriolanus have substantially this same phraseology in regard to a 
kiss, whether taken from this source, or independently invented, it is needless to 
enquire. These are thus given in Some 300 Fresh Allusions to Shakespeare, ed. 
Furnivall. Fletcher, Queen of Corinth, ‘Beliza. . . . by my life, The parting kiss 
you took before your travel Is yet a virgin on my lips preserv’d,’ I, 11; Works, v, 
403. Massinger, The Bondman, ‘Cleora. I restore This kiss, so help me goodness! 
which I borrow’d When I last saw you,’ IV, iii; Works, ii, 86. Shirley, The Corona- 
tion, Arcadius, ‘Thou art jealous now; Come, let me take the kiss I gave thee 
last; I am so confident of thee, no lip Has rauish’d it from thine,’ II, i, ed. Gifford 
and Dyce, iii, 474.—Eb. 

52. You Gods, I pray] THEOBALD (Sh. Restored, p. 181): I dare say an old 
corruption has possess’d this passage for two reasons. In the first place, whoever 
consults this speech will find that he is talking to his wife, and not praying to 
the Gods at all. Secondly, if he were employ’d in his devotions, no apology would 
be wanting for leaving his mother unsaluted. The Poet’s intention was certainly 
this: Coriolanus, having been lavish in his tendernesses and Raptures to his wife, 
bethinks himself on the sudden, that his fondness to her had made him guilty of 
ill manners in the neglect of his mother. Restore, as it certainly ought to be, 
‘You Gods! I prate, And the most noble mother of the world Leave unsaluted.’— 
Mr Dennis (than whom, in my opinion, no man in England better understands 
Shakespeare) in his alteration of this play [The Invader of His Country], whether 
he made the same correction I now do, certainly understood the passage exactly 
with me. An undeniable proof of this is an appeal to the change in expression which 
he has put upon it: ‘But Oh! ye Gods, while fondly thus I éalk, see, the most 
noble mother of the world Stands unsaluted.’ I question not, but his reason for 
varying the expression was because prate is a term ill-sounding in itself, and 
mean in its acceptation. Our language was not so refin’d, tho’ more masculine, 
in Shakespeare’s days; and therefore (notwithstanding the cacophony) when he 
is most serious he frequently makes use of the word. In this very play we again 
meet with it, ‘yet here he lets me prate Like one i’ th’ stocks,’ [l. 170 below. 


534 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. iii. 


And the moft noble Mother of the world 53 
Leaue vnfaluted : Sinke my knee i’th’earth, Kneeles 
Of thy deepe duty, more imprefsion fhew 55 


Then that of common Sonnes. 
Volum. Oh ftand vp bleft ! 


Whil’ft with no fofter Cufhion then the Flint 58 
54. v’th’] the Cap. et seq. 57-68. Om. Bell. 
55. thy] the Rowe, Pope. 57. [Raising him. Cap. 


Theobald gvies five other passages wherein the words prate and prattiling occur; 
but the word prate is used more often than that by Shakespeare. Bartlett gives 
fifteen examples. This play alone furnishes three others besides that quoted by 
Theobald. See I, i, 45; III, iii, 106; and IV, v, 47. For prattling see II, i, 221. 
This note, omitting all reference to Dennis, Theobald adopted in his own edition. 
The Text. Notes show with what unanimity it has been accepted.—Ep.]—Miss 
C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Shakespeare changes the order of his salutations 
from that given by Plutarch and makes him show his love for his wife first and 
irresistibly; but he causes him to make amends for this by excusing himself for 
keeping his mother unsaluted while thus he prays Virgilia to forgive him, begs 
her not to urge him to forgive the Romans, and then, pleading for a kiss, prays 
the goddess of marriage to bear witness to its purity. All this justifies the word 
‘pray’ in the text, which Pope has changed to prate. Surely Coriolanus does not 
call this true emotion ‘prating.’? Although he must be meant to ask pardon of 
his mother for leaving her unsaluted during all this, he cannot be meant to excuse 
himself by a word uncomplimentary to his wife. Shakespeare has very delicately 
done the right thing, and the fact of his altering Plutarch shows it to be peculiarly 
his touch. Pope has spoiled it. [I know not why Miss Porter assigns this reading 
to Pope. The Cambridge Text. Notes plainly show by the parenthesis containing 
Theobald’s name, following the reading of Pope’s ed. ii, that prate is Theobald’s 
suggestion adopted by Pope.—Eb.] 

55. deepe duty, more impression shew] CHoLMELEy: There is a play upon 
‘deep’ and ‘impression,’ and a confusion between showing a duty deeper than 
that of common sons, and showing duty by a deeper impression than common. 

57-62. Volum. Oh stand vp blest, etc. In Some 300 Fresh Allusions to Shake- 
Speare, p. 61, the Editor quotes the following passage from Beaumont and Fletcher, 
A King and no King, 1611: 


‘Arane {the penitent Queen-mother of King Arbaces kneels to him]. 
As low as this I bow to you; and would 
As low as to my grave, to shew a mind 
Thankful for all your mercies. 
Arbaces. Oh, stand up 
And let me kneel! the light will be asham’d 
To see observance done to me by you. 
Arane. You are my king. 
Arbaces. You are my mother, rise,’ III, i, ed. Dyce, ii, 275. 


The note on this passage, by Theobald, calls attention to the similarity of situa- 
tions.—Ep. 


ACT V, SC. iii] CORIOLANUS oR) 


I kneele before thee, and vnproperly 
Shew duty as miftaken, all this while, 60 
Betweene the Childe,and Parent. 
Corio. What’s this? your knees to me ? 
To your Corre¢éted Sonne ? 
Then let the Pibbles on the hungry beach 
Fillop the Starres : Then, let the mutinous windes 65 
Strike the proud Cedars ’gainft the fiery Sun : 


60. duty as miftaken,| duty as mis- Sonne? Pope et seq. 


taken Rowe, Pope. duty, as mistaken 62. What’s] Ff, Rowe, Neils. What 
Theob. et seq. is Pope et cet. 
miftaken] mistaking Coll. MS. [Preventing her. Cap. 
this] the Rowe,+, Varr. Ran. 64. Pibbles] Pebbles F,. 
Wate 02), -13,/°21,,01mg..1, Hal. Huds: i. hungry] angry Mal. conj., Huds. 
61-63. As two lines, ending: this?... il. 


59. vnproperly] Apgort (§ 442): ‘Un-’ seems to have been preferred by Shake- 
speare before and 7, which do not allow im- to precede except in the form un-. 

63. Corrected Sonne] WHITELAW: That is, rebuked by the sight. [DrEtrus takes 
this in the more literal sense, thy son subject to thy control, but, as Schmidt 
remarks, Whitelaw’s is the more rational explanation here.—ED.] 

64. hungry beach] Matone: The beach hungry, or eager, for shipwrecks. 
Such, I think, is the meaning. So in Twelfth Night, ‘mine is all as hungry as the 
sea,’ [II, iv, 103]. I once idly conjectured that our author wrote, the angry 
beach.—STEEVENS: The ‘hungry beach’ is the sterile, unprolific beach. Every 
writer on husbandry speaks of hungry soil and hungry gravel; and what is more 
barren than the sands on the sea shore? If it be necessary to seek for a more 
recondite meaning, the shore on which vessels are stranded is as hungry for ship- 
wrecks, as the waves that cast them on the shore. Litus avarum [Atneid, iii, 45]. 
Shakespeare, on this occasion, meant to represent the beach as a mean, and not 
as a magnificent object—R. G. WuitE: I must avow that I see no fitness (espe- 
cially none of the Shakespearian kind) in the epithet as explained [by Steevens]. 
The context, ‘your corrected son’ and ‘the mutinous winds,’ seems to me to give 
almost sufficient support to [Malone’s ‘idle conjecture’] to warrant its reception 
into the text. Were I to print a Shakespeare for myself I should print ‘angry 
beach’—the beach angered by the lashing of the waves.—Hupson, ed. i, accepts 
Steevens’s note and explanation, even going so far as to copy Steevens’s misprint 
littus, but in his ed. ii. he adopts Malone’s idle conjecture, with the following note: 
‘As an epithet of beach, taken by itself, hungry may well pass, but that sense has 
no coherence with the context here.—W. A. WricuT: That is, sterile, unproductive; 
not, greedy for shipwrecks.—Murray (NV. £. D.,s. v. 6.): Lacking elements which 
are needful or desirable, and therefore capable of absorbing these to a great extent; 
‘more disposed to draw from other substances than to impart them’ (Johnson); 
especially of land, etc. Not rich or fertile, poor. 1577. B. Googe, Heresbach’s 
Husbandry, I. (1586), 24: ‘The land ... which is nought and yeeldes not his 
fruite, is called leane, barren, hungry.’ 

66. Strike the proud Cedars] Rotre: It is singular that the critics who think it 
necessary to tone down the hyperbole in IV, v, 112 have not ‘emended’ this line. Is 


536 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. iii. 


Murd’ring Impoffibility, to make 67 
What cannot be, flight worke. 
Volum. Thou art my Warriour, I hope to frame thee 


Do you know this Lady ? 70 
Corio. The Noble Sifter of Publicola ; 

The Moone of Rome : Chafte as the Ificle 72 
67. Impoffibility, to] impossibility to 69. hope] holp Pope et seq. 

Rowe, Pope. 71-73. Mnemonic Warb. 
69, 70. Lines end: Warriour...Lady? 71. Publicola] Poplicola Rowe,+. 


Rowe ii. et seq. 


scarring the moon a more preposterous rhetorical achievement than striking against 
the sun? 

67. Murd’ring Impossibility] W. A. Wricut: After this violation of the order 
of nature, nothing can be unnatural or impossible. 

69. I hope to frame thee] Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): Here possibly 
Pope’s change to holp is right. It is appropriate. Yet it should be noticed that it 
is generally and not particularly appropriate. It suits what has been said by 
Coriolanus (ll. 26, 27), but gives us no new word. And since Coriolanus has just 
shown a son’s acknowledgment to the full of even a mother’s desire, it seems 
now particularly appropriate to suppose that Volumnia’s acceptance of this now 
would be marked by more than a reassertion of the fact that she is his mother. 
Does she not exclaim joyfully and triumphantly accepting his filial homage, 
‘Thou art my Warrior’?—and then, because of that recognition, does she not ex- 
press more than the same thing again in another form—this further, ‘I hope to 
frame thee’? That is, mould thee to the end for which I came. 

71. The Noble Sister of Publicola] Jonnson: Valeria, methinks, should not 
have been brought only to fill up the procession without speaking.—STEEVENS: 
It is not improbable but that the poet designed the following words of Volumnia, 
{. 75-77], for Valeria. Names are not unfrequently confounded by the player- 
editors; and the lines that compose this speech might be given to the sister with- 
out impropriety. It may be added that though the scheme to solicit Coriolanus 
was originally proposed by Valeria, yet Plutarch has allotted her no address when 
she appears with his wife and mother on this occasion. [On Steevens’s conjecture 
regarding the assignment of ll. 75-77 to Valeria Wright pertinently remarks: 
‘But it is Volumnia who first presents Valeria and then young Marcius whom she 
holds by the hand.’ Rann is Steevens’s sole follower in this assignment.—Ep.] 

72. The Moone of Rome] Bosweti: Menenius uses the same complimentary 
language to the ladies, H, i, 91, ‘How now, my fair as noble, ladies, and the moon, 
were she earthly, no nobler.’ 

72. Chaste as the Isicle] SrervENs: I cannot forebear to cite the following beau- 
tiful passage from Shirley’s Gentleman of Venice, in which the praise of a lady’s 
chastity is likewise attempted: 


‘—thou art chaste 
As the white down of heaven whose feathers play 
Upon the wings of a cold winter’s gale 
Trembling with fear to touch th’ impurer earth,’ [IV, i; ed. Dyce, p. 56.—Ep.]. 


ACT V, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 537 


That’s curdied by the Froft, from pureft Snow, 73 
And hangs on Dians Temple: Deere Valeria. 
Volum. This is a poore Epitome of yours, 75 


Which by th’interpretation of full time, 
May fhew like all your felfe. 
Corio. The God of Souldiers : 


With the confent of fupreame Ioue, informe 79 
73. curdied] Ff, Rowe i, Mal. Var. Steev. et cet. 

a1, Del. Dyce i, Hal. Ktly, Cam. Glo. 75. [Shewing young Marcius. Pope, 

Cla. Craig. cwrdled Rowe ii,+, Varr. +, Varr. Ran. 

Ran. Wh. ii. curdl’d Cap. candied 78-83. Mnemonic Warb. 


Schmidt conj., Daniel conj.  curded 


Some Roman lady of the name of Valeria was one of the great examples of chastity 
held out by writers of the Middle Ages. So in The Dialoges of Creatures Moralysed, 
bl. 1., no date, ‘The secounde was called Valeria: and when inquysicion was made of 
her for what Cawse she toke notte the secounde husbonde, she sayde,’ &c. Hence 
perhaps Shakespeare’s extravagant praise of her namesake’s chastity —DowpEN 
(Sh.: His Mind and Art, p. 331, foot-note): Observe the extraordinary vital beauty 
and illuminating quality of Shakespeare’s metaphors and similes. A common-place 
poet would have written ‘as chaste as snow’; but Shakespeare’s imagination dis- 
covers degrees of chastity in ice and snow, and chooses the chastest of all frozen 
things. On this subject see an excellent study by Rev. H. N. Hudson, Shakespeare: 
His Life, Art, and Characters, vol. i, pp. 217-237. 

73. curdied] Matone: [This] was the phraseology of Shakespeare’s time. So 
in All’s Well, ‘I am now, sir, muddied in fortune’s mood,’ [V, ii, 4]. We should 
now write mudded, to express begrimed, polluted with mud. Again in Cymbeline, 
‘That drug-damn’d Italy hath outcraftied him,’ [III, iv, 15].—Stervens: I be- 
lieve both ‘curdied,’ muddied, &c., are mere false spellings of curded, mudded, &c. 
Mudded is spelt as at present in The Tempest, First Fol., p. 13, col. 2, three lines 
from the bottom; and so is ‘crafted’ in this play, First Fol., p. 24, col. 2, [see 
IV, vi, 147.—Ep.].—Mourray (WN. E. D.,s. v. Curdy, vb. Obs. rare): To make curd- 
like, to congeal. [The present line quoted as only example, with note (perhaps 
curdied is a misprint for curdled).] 

75. of yours] JoHNSON: I read ‘epitome of you.’ An epitome of you which, 
enlarged by the commentaries of time, may equal you in magnitude.—MALoneE: 
Though Dr Johnson’s reading is more elegant, I have not the least suspicion here 
of any corruption. 

78. The God of Souldiers:] Percy Smipson (Sh. Punctuation, p. 68) quotes 
this as an example where the colon is used to mark an emphatic pause. 

79. With the consent of supreame Ioue] WARBURTON: This is inserted with 
great decorum. Jupiter was the tutelary God of Rome.—Moncx Mason (Com- 
ments, etc., p. 262): I cannot think that Coriolanus either intended to pay, or could 
pay with decorum, any particular compliment to the tutelar Deities of Rome at 
the very time that he was determined to destroy it. 

79. supreame] W. A. Wricut: With the accent on the first syllable as in 
Lucrece, 780, ‘The life of purity, the supreme fair.’ And Cymbeline, I, vi, 4, ‘My 


538 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT v, SC. iii. 


Thy thoughts with Nobleneffe, that thou mayft proue 80 
To fhame vnvulnerable, and fticke i’th Warres 
Like a great Sea-marke f{tanding euery flaw, 
And fauing thofe that eye thee. 
Volum. Your knee, Sirrah. 


Corio, That’s my braue Boy. 85 
Volum. Euen he,your wife, this Ladie,and my felfe, 
Are Sutors to you. 87 
81. wnvulnerable] invulnerable Johns. 81. th] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. 7’the 
Varr. Ran. Mal. Knt. Cap. et cet. 


flicke] firike Ff, Rowe. 


supreme crown of grief!’ The accent is on the last syllable only once in Shake- 
speare. See III, i, 133 ante. 

79. informe] W. A. Wricut: That is, fashion, mould, and so almost equivalent 
to inspire, animate. In this sense it is used by Milton, Paradise Lost, ili, 597: 


‘Not all parts like, but all alike inform’d 
With radiant light, as glowing iron with fire.’ 


And by Cowley, On the Death of Mr. W. Harvey, 74: 


‘Large as his soul; as large a soul as e’er 
Submitted to inform a body here.’ 


81. vnvulnerable] For a discussion on the modern change of the negative 
suffix wn- to in- see ABBOTT, § 442; also ‘unproperly,’ |. 59 ante.—Eb. 

82. Sea-marke standing euery flaw] JoHNson: That is, every gust, every 
storm.—MAatoneE: So in our author’s Sonnet cxi, ‘O no! it is an ever fixed mark 
That looks on tempests, and is never shaken.’—W. H. Smuytu (s. v. Sea-Mark): 
A point or object distinguishable at sea, as promontories, steeples, rivers, trees, 
&c., forming important beacons, and noted on charts. By keeping two in a line, 
channels can be entered with safety, and thus the errors of steerage, effect of 
tide, &c., obviated. These erections are a branch of the royal prerogative, and 
by Statute 8, Elizabeth, Cap. 13, the corporation of the Trinity House are empowered 
to set up any beacons or sea-marks wherever they shall think them necessary; and 
if any person shall destroy them, he shall forfeit £100, or, in case of inability to 
pay, he shall be, ipso facto, outlawed.—WHALL (p. 73) compares Othello, V, ii, 268, 
‘And very sea mark of my utmost sail.’ 

84. Your knee, Sirrah] Camprince Epp. ii. (Note XIII.): Dr Nicholson writes 
to us: ‘The stage action here to which Coriolanus replies is this: the boy refuses 
to kneel, but interposes between the kneeling ladies and Coriolanus. See his 
after speech, ‘‘A shall not tread on me,” &c. This, if not introduced as a stage- 
direction, ought to be explained in a note.’ To us Coriolanus seems rather to com- 
mend the boy for doing as he was bid. To refuse to kneel would suit ill with his 
‘aspect of nitercession.’ Besides, he kneels, without being specially told to do 
so, afterwards (1. 186). 

86. Euen he] Scumipr (Coriolanus): ‘Even’ is here used to emphasize more 
strongly the whole of the following sentence, and belongs to the predicate ‘are 
suitors all’ more than to the single subject ‘he.’ 


ACT V, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 539 


Corio. 1 befeech you peace: 88 
Or if you’ld aske, remember this before ; 
The thing I haue forfworne to graunt, may neuer go 


Be held by you denials. Do not bid me 

Difmiffe my Soldiers, or capitulate 

Againe, with Romes Mechanickes. Tell me not 

Wherein I feeme vnnaturall : Defire not t’allay 

My Rages and Reuenges, with your colder reafons. 95 
Volum. Oh no more, no more: 

You haue faid you will not grant vs any thing: 

For we haue nothing elfe to aske, but that 

Which you deny already : yet we will aske, 


That if you faile in our requeft, the blame 100 

May hang vpon your hardneffe, therefore heare vs. 

Corio. Auffidius, and you Volces marke, for wee’l 102 
90. thing] Ff, Rowe,+, Cam.+, Words. 

Neils. things Cap. et cet. 99. we will] we'll Dyce ii, Huds. ii, 
gt. you denials] your denials F;, Del. Words. 

i. you denial F,, Rowe,+. 100. you] we Rowe ii,+, Cap. Var. 
93. Romes] Rome’s F;. 78, °85, Coll. MS. Dyce ii, Huds. ii, 
94-96. Lines end: not...with...more: Words. Beeching (Falcon Sh.), Dtn. 

Pope et seq. 102. Volces] F,, Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 


94. allay] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. Dyce ii, Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing.i, Knt. Volcies 
Huds. ii, Words. To allay Cap. et cet. F;.  Volfcies F,, Rowe. Volscians 

97. You haue] You've Pope, Theob. Pope,+. Volcians Cap. Volsces 
Han. Warb. Johns. Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Coll. et cet. 


go. forsworne to graunt] W. A. WricuT: That is, sworn not to grant. Com- 
pare Rom. & Jul., I, i, 229: ‘She hath forsworn to love.’ And Twelfth Night, 
III, iv, 276, ‘forswear to wear iron about you.’ 

92. capitulate] W. A. WricuT: That is, make conditions or agreement; here used 
of the conqueror. In modern language the conquered capitulates or surrenders on 
conditions. See French’s Select Glossary, and compare 1 Henry IV: III, ii, 120, ‘The 
Archbishop’s grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer, Capitulate against us and are up.’ 

100. if you faile in our request] MAtoneE: That is, if you fail to grant us our 
request; if you are found failing or deficient in love to your country, and affection 
to your friends, when our request shall have been made to you, the blame, &c. 
[Malone assigns the change ‘we fail’ to Pope; see Text. Notes. Hudson in his 
ed. ii. is strangely confused; he tells us that the original reads, ‘we fail in your 
request,’ even accounting for this new reading by the presence of ‘your’ in the line 
below, and credits Rowe with the reading ‘our request.’-—Ep.]—Scumipt (Corio- 
lanus): In modern usage ‘fail’ is the opposite of succeed, but here it is used in a 
wider sense: not to come up to expectation, not to do the correct thing.—Dricu- 
TON (reading with Rowe): Yet we will continue to make supplication, so that if 
we fail to obtain what we ask, the blame may rest upon you for your stubbornness, 
not on us for our want of persistency. The reading of the Folio may perhaps be 
explained, ‘fail in the matter of our request.’ 


540 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. iii. 


Heare nought from Rome in priuate. Your requeft? 103 
Volum. Should we be filent & not fpeak, our Raiment 
And ftate of Bodies would bewray what life 105 


We haue led fince thy Exile. Thinke with thy felfe, 

How more vnfortunate then all liuing women 

Are we come hither ; fince that thy fight, which fhould 

Make our eies flow with ioy,harts dance with comforts, 
Conftraines them weepe,and fhake with feare & forow, IIo 
Making the Mother, wife,and Childe to fee, 


The Sonne, the Husband,and the Father tearing II2 
103. [Seats himself. Cap. 106-116. Thinke...enioy] Mnemonic 
106. We haue] We’ve Pope, Theob. Warb. 

Han. Warb. Johns. Dyce ii, Huds. ii, 107. all] Om. Ff, Rowe. 

Words. 108. that] Om. Pope,+. 


109. eies] hearts Rowe, Pope, Theob. 


104-135. Should we be silent, etc.] FARMER, in his second edition of his Essay on 
the Learning of Shakespeare, p. 13, transcribes these thirty-two lines, together with 
the corresponding passage from North’s Plutarch, in order to confute a remark made 
by Pope in his Preface: ‘The speeches copied from Plutarch in Coriolanus may be 
as well made an instance of the learning of Shakespeare as those copied from 
Cicero, in Catiline, of Ben Jonson’s.’ Farmer’s intent is to demonstrate that 
Shakespeare’s knowledge was gained solely by the translation and not by recourse 
to the original. Pope has, however, not made any such claim; he clearly says, 
preceding the above-quoted sentence, ‘There is certainly a vast difference between 
Learning and Languages. How far he was ignorant of the latter I cannot determine; 
but ’tis plain he had much reading at least, if they will not call it Learning. Nor is 
it any great matter, if a man has knowledge, whether he has it from one language 
or from another.’ Farmer, in thus quoting but the concluding part of Pope’s re- 
mark, gives to the reader a quite erroneous impression of Pope’s contention. He 
certainly did not mean that these parallel passages proved that Shakespeare read 
them in the original Greek. The passage in North’s Plutarch, which Shakespeare 
here follows with but a few verbal changes, in order to make it into verse, will 
be found in the A ppendix: Source of the Plot, ad loc—Ep. 

104, 105. our Raiment And state of Bodies] For other examples of transposi- 
tions in noun-clauses containing two nouns connected by ‘of’ see ABBorr, § 423. 

105. bewray] W. A. Wricut: That is, discover, reveal. The word, which 
Shakespeare has taken from North’s Plutarch, is derived from the Anglo-Saxon 
wrégan, or wreian, Gothic wrohjan, to accuse, and although used almost inter- 
changeably with betray, differs from it in not necessarily involving the idea of 
treachery. See King Lear, II, i, 109, ‘He did bewray his practice’; that is, dis- 
closed his plot or design. 

106. Exile] Here accented on the last syllable; see Apgort, § 490. 

107. How more vnfortunate] See Appendix: Date of Composition, note by 
HALLIWELL, p. 600. 

110. Constraines them weepe, and shake] Jonson: That is, constrains the 
eye to weep, and the heart to shake. [See ABBort, § 349] 


ACT V, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 541 


His Countries Bowels out; and to poore we 113 
Thine enmities moft capitall : Thou barr’f{t vs 
Our prayers to the Gods, which is a comfort 115 


That all but we enioy. For how can we ? 

- Alas! how can we, for our Country pray ? 

Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory : 

Whereto we are bound : Alacke,or we muft loofe 

The Countrie our deere Nurfe,or elfe thy perfon 120 
Our comfort in the Country. We muft finde 

An euident Calamity, though we had 

Our wifh, which fide fhould win. For either thou 


Mutt as a Forraine Recreant be led 124 
113. Countries] country’s Rowe et Han. Warb. Johns. pray,...bound;... 
seq. bound? Cap. et seq. 
out;] out. Cap. et seq. 118, 119. we are...we are] we're... 
we] us Han. we're Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. 
I14. enmities] enmity’s Rowe et Dyce ii, Huds. ii. we’re...we are also 
seq. Words. 
116-121. how...Country] Om. Bell. 122. euident] eminent Rowe,+ 
116. we?] we, Rowe ii. et seq. (—Var. 773). 
117-119. pray?... bound, ... bound:] 123-130. For...determine] Mnemonic 


pray,...bound?...bound? Pope, Theob. Warb. 


113, 114. and to poore we Thine enmities] CoLLreR (ed. ii.): We may be con- 
fident that Shakespeare did not so write what has been imputed to him; and two 
very small emendations, which we meet with in the corr. fo., 1632, may be ac- 
cepted as rendering the extract grammatical and perspicuous: altering ‘to’ to so, 
and ‘enmities’ to enemies, nothing more can be desired, for it makes Volumnia 
say, in effect, ‘and so poor we are thy most capital enemies.’ [This reading Collier 
adopts in his ed. ii; in his 34 ed. he returns, however, to the Folio text without 
comment.—Ep.]—Anon. (Blackwood’s Maga., Sep., 1853, p. 324): If [the old cor- 
rector’s] is the true reading, it must be completed by changing ‘we’ to us. The 
meaning will then be—making thy mother, wife, etc.; and so (making) poor us 
(that is, those whom you are bound to love and protect before all others) thy chief 
enemies. 

113. to poore we] W. A. Wricut: ‘We’ is used for us, as in Hamlet, I, iv, 54, 
‘—and we fools of nature So horridly to shake our disposition.’ And Jul. Ce@s., 
III, i, 95, ‘and let no man abide this deed, But we the doers.’ 

115. prayers] ApBorr (§ 479): Even where ‘prayer’ presents the appearance of 
a monosyllable the second syllable was probably slightly sounded, ‘Hath turn’d 
my feignéd préyer on my head,’ Richard ITT: V, i, 21. 

117-119. how can we... are bound] DrericHTon: Compare King John, III, 
327-336, where Blanche is in the same predicament, and Ant. & Cleo., ILI, iv, 
12-10. 

121. We must finde] W. A. Wricur: That is, experience, feel. Compare 
Meas. for Meas., III, i, 80, ‘And the poor beetle, that we tread upon, In corporal 
sufferance finds a pang as great As when a giant dies.’ 


542 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. iii. 


With Manacles through our ftreets, or elfe 125 
Triumphantly treade on thy Countries ruine, 

And beare the Palme, for hauing brauely fhed 

Thy Wife and Childrens blood : For my felfe, Sonne, 

I purpofe not to waite on Fortune, till 

Thefe warres determine : If I cannot perfwade thee, 130 
Rather to fhew a Noble grace to both parts, 

Then feeke the end of one ; thou fhalt no fooner 

March to affault thy Country, then to treade 

(Truft too’t, thou fhalt not) on thy Mothers wombe 


That brought thee to this world. 135 
125. through] along Pope, Theob. 130. cannot] can’t Pope,+ (—Var. 

Han. Warb. thorough Johns. Cap. 773), 

Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Var. ’o03, 713, 132. no] not Han. Bell. 

Dyce, Hal. Cam.+, Huds. ii, Words. 134. too’t] to’t F3F,. 

Craig. Shalt] shall Rowe i. 

Streets] street Warb. Johns. 135-139. Lines end: mine...name... 

126. Countries] country’s Rowe et me...fight Pope et seq. 

seq. 135. to] into Anon. ap. Cam. 


129. I purpose not to waite on Fortune] VERPLANCK: Instead of the truly 
Roman coolness with which the resolved matron communicates her intention, 
Thomson, in his tragedy, has substituted the very commonplace and melodramatic 
incident of making his heroine ‘draw a dagger from under her robe’ and attempt 
to stab herself before her son and the Romans and Volscians; and the dialogue 


runs thus: 
‘Vol. So thy first return-—— 


Cor. Ha! (seizing her hand.) 
What dost thou mean? 
Vol. To die while Rome is free,’ etc. 


All this is interpolated into Shakespeare’s tragedy in the acted drama of Coriolanus 
[as arranged by J. P. Kemble]. 

130. determine] That is, end, terminate. Compare III, iti, 58. 

131. Rather ...to both parts] Appott: The extra syllable is very rarely a 
monosyllable, still more rarely an emphatic monosyllable. The reason is obvious. 
Since in English we have no enclitics, the least emphatic monosyllables will gen- 
erally be prepositions and conjunctions. These carry the attention forward instead 
of backward, and are, therefore, inconsistent with a pause, and besides, to some 
extent, emphatic. Here ‘parts’ is emphatic and ‘both’ is strongly emphasized. 

133, 134. treade ... on thy Mothers wombe] SNIDER (ii, 238): Here we have 
the strongest and most terrific image of filial violation. Strange to say, the wife, 
Virgilia, now utters the same sentiment; her mild nature has been absorbed in the 
colossal will of the mother. That is, his family, in all its relations, will be swept 
away in the destruction of the State. The only exception is his boy, another genu- 
ine Coriolanus, who will not submit to be trampled upon by an enemy. Still her 
appeals are not answered; she begins to despair of success. Then with lofty con- 
tempt she turns away, disowning her motherhood: ‘This fellow had a Volscian 


ACT V, SC. iii] ‘CORIOLANUS 543 


Virg. I, and mine, that brought you forth this boy, 136 
To keepe your name liuing to time. 
Boy. A fhall not tread on me : Ile run away 
Till I am bigger, but then Ile fight. 139 
136. mine] mine too Rowe,+ (—Var. 138. A] He Pope,+, Cap. Varr. Ran’ 


73): on mine Cap. Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Coll. Ktly, 
Sing. Ktly, Dyce ii, Coll. iii, Huds. ii, Huds. 


Words. Wh. ii, Neils. 139. I am] I’m Pope,+ (—Var. ’73), 
that] Om. F;F,. Dyce ii, Words. 
138, 139. Mnemonic Warb. but] Om. Huds. ii. 


to his mother.’ And all his other domestic relations are denied to him. This is 
too much for Coriolanus. His strongest tie he can allow to be severed; he might 
even contemplate his mother dead; still he would be her son. But disowned— 
denied to be her offspring—that cuts deeper than her death. He yields, Rome is 
saved, but he declares to his mother he will probably have to die for his act. To 
which declaration she gives no answer; country is, with her, above son; its salvation 
being accomplished, she and the rest of her relatives return to receive its gratitude. 
Family has thus mediated the conflict of the State. : 

136. I, and mine] With Pope’s rearrangement of the lines here these words are 
used to supply the two final feet missing in |. 135. Even thus Capell’s fine ear 
detected a missing syllable, and he added ‘on.’ Steevens, while adopting this last 
reading, remarks that the word ‘was supplied by some former editor to complete 
the measure.’ For reasons best known to himself Steevens customarily either 
ignores Capell or adopts his metrical changes without acknowledgment. To this 
Boswell, the editor of the Variorum of 1821, rejoins that this last is perhaps un- 
necessary ‘if “‘world,’”’ according to Tyrwhitt’s canon, is used as a dissyllable.’ 
Finally Appotr (§ 482) quotes this arrangement of Jl. 135, 136 as an example 
wherein a monosyllabic exclamation (‘Ay’) is frequently used as a complete foot. 
In all such discussions is it not well to follow the golden rule, ‘verify your refer- 
ences,’ before imputing to Shakespeare a fault in prosody?p—Ep.—Dyce (ed. ii.): 
What reader, if he has common sense, can doubt that Shakespeare, having written 
just before ‘on thy mother’s womb,’ wrote here ‘Ay, and on mine’? 

138, 139. A shall not... Ile fight] C. & M. Cowpen CrarkeE (Shakespeare): 
The spice of proud resistance, with consciousness of present inability and resolu- 
tion for future self-defence, finely condensed into this characteristic speech, are 
most natural in the son of Coriolanus, and most calculated to precisely touch the 
father’s heart—KE.LLETr (p. 88): There is but one boy in all Shakespeare who 
even appears to promise some genuine variation from the perverse type [of pre- 
cocious pertness as exhibited in Mamillius and young Macduff]. Young Coriolanus 
in the line and a half allotted to him, ‘A shall not tread on me, I’ll run away till 
I’m bigger, but then I’ll fight,’ utters the solitary truly boy-like sentiment in the 
whole of Shakespeare’s plays. Alas! like Marcellus, he is but shown and then 
withdrawn; he is only once put in person before us, and he seems to be an allegorical 
shadow of his father rather than an independent living being. We pass over here 
the boy in Henry V. and the fool in King Lear, both of whom, though seemingly very 
young, are beyond the age of childhood. Even in them, however, there are traces, 
visible in those who care to look, that their infancy, so recently left behind, was of 
a thoroughly Shakespearian character. We could wish that Shakespeare had not 


544 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. iii. 


Corio. Not of a womans tenderneffe to be, 140 
Requires nor Childe, nor womans face to fee : 
I haue fate too long. 
Volum. Nay,go not from vs thus : 
If it were fo, that our requeft did tend 
To faue the Romanes, thereby to deftroy 145 
The Volces whom you ferue, you might condemne vs 
As poyfonous of your Honour. No,our fuite 
Is that you reconcile them : While the Volces 
May fay, this mercy we haue fhew’d : the Romanes, 
This we receiu’d, and each in either fide 150 
Giue the All-haile to thee, and cry be Bleft 
For making vp this peace. Thou know’ft (great Sonne) 


The end of Warres vncertaine : but this certaine, 153 
141. nor] no Rowe, Pope. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt. Vol- 
142. I haue] I’ve Pope,+ (—Var. {cies F,, Rowe. Volscians Pope,+. 

73), Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. Volcians Cap. Volsces Coll. et cet. 

[Rising, Cap. Mal. et seq. 147. poyfonous] poisoners Han. Bell. 
145. to] do Pope i. (misprint). 153. Warres] Warr’s F;. War's Fy, 


146, 148. Volces] Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. et seq. 


made it seem as if this character was typical and representative of the genus boy; 
and we may be sure that he would have given us many very different child-types 
if he had felt something of that interest in children which Dickens, for example, 
possessed. But to expect this from an Elizabethan is to expect the impossible; 
even Shakespeare could not rise altogether above his age-—CasrE: This is the only 
speech given to young Marcius, but it plainly shows him to have been ‘his father’s 
own son.’ 

140, 141. Corio. Not of... face to see] Brrecuinc (Falcon Sh.): Coriolanus 
is trying to disregard natural bonds. This ‘touch of nature’ reasons against him 
more strongly than set speeches. Menenius had the cleverness to understand 
the force of humour, but he failed in naturalness. Further, this bit of natural comedy 
relieves the tragic strain—Gorpon: Nothing could show more delicately the soft- 
ening of Coriolanus than that he, of all men, should melt into rhyme.—Casx (Arden 
Sh.):*The rhyme and rhythm of these lines seem to aid the words in revealing the 
softening of Coriolanus. The use of a couplet here is not like the usual use at the 
close of a scene, save that there too the couplet often voices some truth or re- 
flection. [Compare III, iii, 113-124, where Coriolanus voices in rhymed couplets 
his determination to submit to what he considers degradation in soliciting the 
votes of the people. Possibly the rhyme is there also meant to indicate a softening 
or yielding.—Eb.] 

142. I haue sate too long] Scummpr (Coriolanus): Here modern editors introduce 
the stage-direction ‘Rising.’ Yet perhaps ‘sat’ is here, as elsewhere in Shakespeare, 
equivalent to tarry; the colloquy takes place outside the tent (see 1. 221) and is 
not suited to the mouth of one comfortably seated. 

153. The end of Warres vncertaine] ANDERS (p. 47): Halliwell-Phillipps, in 
his Outlines of the Life of Shakespeare, p. 53, writes, ‘The Sententie Pueriles was. 


Wh 


ACT V, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 545 


That if thou conquer Rome, the benefit 

Which thou fhalt thereby reape, is fuch a name 155 
Whole repetition will be doge’d with Curfes : 

Whofe Chronicle thus writ, The man was Noble, 

But with his laft Attempt,he wip’d it out: 

Deftroy’d his Country,and his name remaines 

To th’infuing Age,abhorr’d. Speake to me Son : 160 
Thou haft affeéted the fiue ftraines of Honor, 


157. Noble,]| noble— Rowe, Pope, 161. fine] first Rowe ii, Pope, Theob. 
Theob. Han. Warb. Han. Warb. fine Johns. et seq. 
161-165. Thou...Oake] Om. Bell. 


in all probability, the little manual by the aid of which he first learned to construe 
Latin; for in one place at least he all but literally translates a brief passage, and 
there are in his plays several adaptations of its sentiments.’ I cannot say exactly 
what the ‘brief passage’ is which Halliwell-Phillipps refers to. The following are 
some sentences which have a resemblance to passages in Shakespeare, but they 
are so general in character that we can scarcely infer anything definite from them. 
Belli exitus incertus: ‘The end of war’s uncertain.’ [With the other passages we 
need not here concern ourselves; as to the present passage there would, I think, 
be more force in the comparison were it not that the words in North’s Plutarch 
are here, ‘though the ende of war be uncertaine.’ In regard to the Sententie 
Pueriles Anders says that is ‘a little manual consisting of brief Latin sentences 
collected from divers authors by Leonard Culmann of Krailsheim and completed 
probably not long before 1544.’ It was entered on the Stationers’ Registers in 1569. 
In 1612 the book was translated into English by John Brinsley. It is possible that 
Culmann’s Latin sentence is an adaptation from the Greek of Plutarch——Ep.] 

155,156. such... Whose] Apzort (§ 278): ‘Such’ was by derivation the natu- 
ral antecedent to which—‘such’ meaning so-like, so-in-kind; which meaning what 
like, what-in-kind? 

161. the fiue straines] Jonnson: The niceties, the refinements. [To Johnson 
has been given the credit for the correction of this obvious misprint of ‘fiue’ 
for fine, but it appears also in Capell’s text, and Capell says in a foot-note on p. 18 
of his Introduction that he has throughout made no reference to an edition which 
came out a twelvemonth before, 7. e., Johnson’s. Furthermore, many of his vol- 
umes went to the press in 1760, and the volume containing this present play in 
1765, the year of Johnson’s publication. Neither Johnson nor Capell record this 
reading as original; a point whereon Capell is most meticulous. In my copy of 
the Folio the word is plainly ‘fiue,’ as also in Verner and Hood’s, in Staunton’s 
photo-lithograph, and in Booth’s facsimile. In the Lee facsimile taken from the 
Devonshire Folio this whole column is very badly printed; the type seems to have 
taken the ink imperfectly, and in this word the letter « or m appears but as two 
strokes; anyone in reading this hastily would naturally, I think, read it as five, not ex- 
pecting the more unusual word five. Possibly the Folios which Johnson and Capell 
examined had this same imperfection, but, at all events, Capell is entitled to the 
priority —Ep.]—Care tt. (vol. I, pt i, p. 99): The sentiment that follows is attired in 
such high-flown expressions that we almost lose sight of it. The divine graces that 


35 


546 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Act v, SC. iii. 


To imitate the graces of the Gods, 162 
To teare with Thunder the wide Cheekes a’th’Ayre, 
And yet to change thy Sulphure with a Boult 164 
163. To] Who Han. 164. to change thy] Fi, Rowe, Pope, 
ath] o’th’ F,, Rowe,+, Wh. i. Schmidt. do charge their Han. to 
o’the Cap. et cet. charge thy Theob. et cet. 


Coriolanus ‘affected to imitate’ are terror and mercy, both attributes of their 
gods; to express this he is said to thunder as they do, but so to temper his terrors 
that mankind is as little hurt by them as they commonly are by thunder, which 
mostly spends its fury on oaks.—Lxo (Coriolanus): Volumnia means, ‘Speak to me! 
Confess that thou hast injured thine honour (in being the enemy of thy country) 
only for the purpose to be as merciful as the gods.’ [‘Affected’ in the sense 
injured is not admissible here, since it clearly means to aim at, as Schmidt (Lez., 
s. v. vb. 3) classifies it, and as this word is used in three other passages in this 
play: II, ii, 22; III, iii, 1; IV, vi, 41 —Ep.]J—W. A. Wricut: ‘Strains of honour,’ 
that is, the emotions or impulses of honour. ‘Strain,’ which is etymologically 
connected with the Anglo-Saxon str§man, to beget, is used for a stock or race, as in 
Jul. Cas., V, i, 59, ‘O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain.’ Hence it takes the 
secondary sense of ‘natural disposition,’ as in Lear, V, iii, 40, ‘Sir, you have 
shown to-day your valiant strain,’ that is, the valiant disposition of your race 
which you have inherited. Finally, it denotes feeling, or impulse generally. See 
2 Henry IV: IV, v, 171, ‘But if it did infect my blood with joy, Or swell my 
thoughts to any strain of pride.’ 

163. the wide Cheekes a’th’Ayre] W. A. Wricut: Compare Tempest, I, 
ii, 4, ‘The welkin’s cheek,’ and Richard II: III, iii, 57, ‘The cloudy cheeks of 
heaven.’ [Verity also compares these two passages with the present one, and adds: 
‘The occurrence of a notable piece of imagery in an early and then again in a late 
play is always interesting; one feels that it thoroughly approved itself to Shake- 
speare’s taste. —Ep.]—TuckreR Brooke (Yale Sh.): The allusion is doubtless to 
the common indication of the winds (north, south, etc.) in old maps as issuing from 
cherubs’ swollen cheeks. 

164. And yet to change] THEOBALD is, I think, fully entitled to the credit for 
the reading charge instead of ‘change.’ Warburton calmly appropriated it without 
any acknowledgment to his friend. This doubtless misled Malone, who assigns this 
reading to Warburton; but in the many letters that passed between them there 
is not any reference to this passage. Theobald in his note says: ‘I have certainly 
restor’d the true word,’ and refers to his note on II, i, 216, g. v. I feel quite sure 
he would not have said this had there been any question of a suggestion from 
Warburton. How universal has been the concurrence in opinion with Theobald 
the Text. Notes will show.—Ep.—Warpurton: The meaning of the passage is, 
To threaten much, and yet be merciful—Matone: In The Taming of the Shrew, 
III, i, [81], ‘charge’ is printed instead of change, [p. 218, col. b Folio. Corrected 
in F,.—Ep.].—Scamipt: The reading of the Folio may perhaps be allowed to 
stand; the lightning glowing with sulphur is to be exchanged for a wedge, which 
only splits an oak, but does not set it on fire. Ordinary Shakespearian usage 
affords examples to justify ‘with a bolt’ instead of ‘for a bolt.’—W. A. Wricur, 
in answer to the foregoing note, says: ‘But the reading “charge” suits better with 
the figure employed in the present passage, which is that of a piece of artillery 


ACT V, Sc. iii] CORIOLANUS 547 


That fhould but riue an Oake. Why do’ft not fpeake? 165 
Think’ft thou it Honourable for a Nobleman 

Still to remember wrongs ? Daughter, {peake you : 

He cares not for your weeping. Speake thou Boy, 

Perhaps thy childifhneffe will moue him more 


Then can our Reafons. There’s no man in the world 170 
More bound to’s Mother, yet heere he let’s me prate 
Like one i’th’Stockes. Thou haft neuer in thy life, 172 
165. fhould| shall Han. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt, Del. Hal. 
166. Nobleman] Noble man Ff. Ktly. 
170. There’s| There is Ff, Rowe, Cap. 172. Vth] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh.i. 7’the 
Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Cap. et cet. 
i, Kut, Coll. Del. Hal. Wh. i, Craig. Thou hafi} Thowst Pope,+ 


171. to’s] to his Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. (—Var. ’73), Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 


loaded with a bolt which after being discharged with a great noise only rives an 
oak.’ Wright also compares Ant. & Cleo., I, ii, 5, where the Folios have: ‘O that 
I knew this husband, which, you say, must change his horns with garlands,’ where 
modern editors read charge——Hunpson (ed. ii.): The same misprint [‘change’ for 
charge] has occurred before in this play. See II, i, 216. [It is well to note that this 
latter reading, also due to Theobald, has had, however, but comparatively few 
adherents.——Ep.]—Gorpon: That is, And yet to temper your thundering with 
moderation and mercy. If the gods are his models, he should imitate their mercy 
as well as their might. 

166. Think’st thou it Honourable] BErcuine (Henry Irving Sh.): Volumnia 
says: ‘You have always affected the honour and graces of the gods whose power 
is nicely directed, not brute violence; but is your present conduct like theirs, is it 
honourable or courteous?’ 

167. Daughter, speake you] C. & M. CowbEN CLarkE (Shakespeare): With 
what exquisitely artistic touches Shakespeare finishes his character-portraits! 
Here in two half lines he paints Virgilia’s habitual silence, and Volumnia’s as 
habitual torrent of words. She bids her daughter-in-law plead, yet waits not for 
her to speak. (See IV, ii, 67 and note.) And then how consistently has he de- 
picted Volumnia’s mode of appeal to her son throughout, in III, ii. and here; begin- 
ning with remonstrance and ending with reproach; her fiery nature so like his 
own and so thoroughly accounting for his inherited disposition. 

168. Speake thou Boy] J. C. CoLzins (p. 77) calls attention to this as a touch 
not in Plutarch, but which ‘may have been suggested by the pathetic scene in the 
Iphigenia in Aulis (ll. 1241-5), where the little Orestes is employed by Iphigenia 
for the same reason and for the same purpose.’ Inasmuch as there was not any 
translation in English of Euripides until long after Shakespeare’s time—except 
the Jocasta, by Gascoigne and Kinwellmarsh, in 1566—the Iphigenia is a very 
doubtful source of his inspiration. There is a similarity in situation between this 
whole scene and that in Act I, sc. ii. of the Jocasta, as in the foregoing translation 
(ed. Cunliffe, pp. 274-277), but nothing can be argued from that, as Shakespeare is 
here following Plutarch, and it may be that Euripides was the inspiration for 
Plutarch’s fictitious account of Volumnia’s intercession.—Eb. 

172. Like one i’th’Stockes] JoHNSoN: Keep me ina state of ignominy, talking 


548 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. iii, 


Shew’d thy deere Mother any curtefie, 173 
When fhe(poore Hen) fond of no fecond brood, 
Ha’s clock’d thee to the Warres : and fafelie home 175 


Loden with Honor. Say my Requeft’s vniutt, 

And f{purne me backe : But, if it be not fo 

Thou art not honeft, and the Gods will plague thee 

That thou reftrain’{t from me the Duty, which 

To a Mothers part belongs. He turnes away : 180 
Down Ladies:let vs fhame him with him withjour knees 

To his fur-name Coriolanus longs more pride 

Then pitty to our Prayers. Downe : an end, 

This is the laft. So, we will home to Rome, 


And dye among our Neighbours : Nay, behold’s, 185 
175. clock’d] Case (Arden Sh.). 182. longs] F.F;, Dyce i. ’longs Fy, 
cluck’d Ff et cet. Rowe et cet. 
176. Loden| Loaden Rowe et seq. [They kneel. Coll. ii. 

181. him with him with] F;. 183. Downe:] Down; down; Johns. 
182. To his] To’s Theob. Warb. an end] and end F,, Rowe,+. 
Johns. 185. behold’s,| Fi, Rowe i, Dyce, Sta. 

fur-name] Sir-name Rowe,+. Wh. Cam.+, Neils. behold! Coll. iii. 
surname Cap. et cet. behold us, Rowe ii. et cet. 


to no purpose.—W. A. WricuT: Rather, you treat me as a worthless vagabond to 
whose complaints under punishment no one pays heed.—E. K. CuamBers (Warwick 
Sh.): Volumnia plays her part with no less tact than dignity. She appeals to 
patriotism and reason, and falls back on a woman’s last resource, the pathetic. 
Perhaps a tear comes, which Coriolanus has never seen on her cheek before. 

174. fond of] Case (Arden Sh.): That is, wishing for, desirous of. Compare 
Cymb., I, i, 37, ‘Two other sons . . . Died . . . for which their father, Then old 
and fond of issue, took such sorrow,’ etc. 

175. clock’d] W. A. Wricut: So Cotgrave: ‘Glosser. To cluck or clocke, as 
a Hen.’—Case (Arden Sh.) also compares Nashe, Christ's Teares over Jerusalem, 
1593, ed. McKerrow, ii, 42-43, ‘The Henne clocketh her Chickens; I would have 
clocked and called them by my preaching.’ 

182. longs] BRapLEy (NV. E£. D., s. v. vb’, arch): To be appropriate to (occas. 
for); to pertain ¢o (rarely with simple dative); to refer or relate to, etc. Tam. of 
Shr., IV, iv, 6, ‘With such austerity as longeth to a father.’ [Although in all 
modern texts, following F,, this word is printed as though a contraction of belong, 
it is, as will be seen, a separate verb.—Eb.] 

182-193. more pride Then pitty ... husht vntill our City be afire] Miss C. 
Porter (First Folio Sh.): More powerful than her petition is her acceptance of 
his refusal. Of this forceful climax there is no syllable in Plutarch. And the 
Folio stage-direction following 1. 194 is consummate. As it stands it isa dramatist’s 
wording and form. Unfortunately, almost no editor has refrained from touching 
it up. 

184. home to Rome] WALKER (Crit., ii, 114) observes that here, as in other places, 
‘Rome’ is pronounced Room, which, therefore, removes the jingle in this line. 


ACT V, SC. iti.] 


CORIOLANUS 549 


This Boy that cannot tell what he would haue, 186 
But kneeles, and holds vp hands for fellowfhip, 
Doe’s reafon our Petition with more ftrength 


Then thou haft to deny’t. 


Come, let vs go : 


This Fellow had a Volcean to his Mother: 190 
His Wife is in Corioles, and his Childe 

Like him by chance: yet giue vs our difpatch : 

I am hufht vntill our City be afire,& then Ile {peak a litle 193 


189. [They rise. Coll. ii. 

190. Volcean] F2F;. Volcian Cap. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, Knt. Volce 
Vare27O)0 05, kan.  Volician i,cet 
cet. 
tgt. Corioles] Ktly, Schmidt. Cori- 
olus Ff, Rowe. Corioli Pope et cet. 

his] this Theob.+, Cap. Varr. 


Ran. Wh. Dyce ii, Coll. iii, Huds. ii, 
Words. Leo. 

193-195. Lines end: afire...Mother! 
Pope et seq. 

193. I am] I’m Pope,+ (—Var. ’73), 
Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 

hufhi} Ff, Rowe,+, 

hush’d Cap. et cet. 


Case. 


188. Doe’s reason our Petition] Jonnson: That is, does argue for us and our 
petition. [Thus, also, W. A. Wright.—Scumipt, both in his Lexicon and in his 
notes to this play, interprets ‘reason’ here as simply the verb to speak; possibly 
this is better than the more extended meaning, argue. The childish inability to 
express, except by appealing action, speaks with more strength than Coriolanus 
will have power to urge against granting their petition—E. K. CHAMBERS on this 
says: ‘It is not argument, but the power of one soul over another that is to move 
Coriolanus.’—ED.] 

I9o1, 192. His Wife... his Childe... by chance] THEOBALD: Tho’ his wife 
were in Corioli, might not his child, nevertheless, be like him? The minute altera- 
tion I have made, I am persuaded, restores the true reading [see Text. Notes]. 
Volumnia would hint that Coriolanus by his stern behaviour had lost all family- 
regards, and did not remember that he had any child. I am not his mother (says 
she), his wife is in Corioli, and this child whom we bring with us (young Marcius) 
is not his child, but only bears his resemblance by chance——WALKER (Crit., ii, 
ch. xiv, pp. 219 et seq.): In the Folio and likewise in the original editions of Shake- 
speare’s poems (the latter statement is grounded altogether on internal evidence) 
this and his have in many instances supplanted one another. [Walker quotes the 
present line among his other examples.—Ep.]—Roire: Theobald’s change is quite 
unnecessary, in our opinion. Volumnia does not think of the apparent inconsist- 
ency; or we might say that ‘his child’ is equivalent to this child that passes for 
his, or that we call his—Brrcuinc (Henry Irving Sh.): Theobald’s suggestions 
deserve all respect, but the text as it stands is not indefensible. Volumnia has 
said ‘kis mother was a Volscian, his wife is in Corioli,’ and then continues, ‘his 
child’—but looking at him is struck by the likeness—and ends the sentence differ- 
ently and, I venture to think, most effectively. 

193- I am husht] Case (Arden Sh.): This is really an adjective meaning silent, 
and not a past participle identical with hushed or hush’d, which is usually substituted 
for it in the text. See the NV. £. D. on its priority in time and, indeed, origination of 
the verb. Compare Tempest, IV, i, 207, ‘All’s husht as midnight yet’; Venus & 
Adonis, \. 458, ‘Even as the wind is husht before it raineth.’ The V. EZ. D. quotes 


550 THE TRAGEDIE OF i [ACT V, SC. iii. 


Holds her by the hand filent. 
Corio. O Mother, Mother’ 195 
What haue you done? Behold, the Heauens do ope, 


The Gods looke downe, and this vnnaturall Scene 
They laugh at. Oh my Mother, Mother : Oh! 198 


194. Holds her...] holding Volumnia... 194. hand] Ff, Rowe i, Coll. Dyce, 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. Sta. Wh. Cam.+, Huds. Words. 
Craig. He holds Volumnia... Coll. Del. hands Rowe ii. et cet. 


Ktly, Huds. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii, Neils. 195-198. O Mother...at.] Mnemonic 
After holding Volumnia by the hand, Warb. 

in silence. Dyce, Sta. Cam. Words. 195. O] Om. Pope,+, Cap. Varr. 
He takes Volumnia by the hand, which Ran. Mal. 

he holds for a while in silence. Wh. i. 196. Heauens] Heav’ns Rowe,+. 


after earlier examples Dryden’s Virgil, Pastorals, ix, 80, ‘Husht Winds the topmost 
branches scarcely bend.’ 

193. then Ile speak a litle] Lzo: The last word she will speak before her death 
shall be a curse on her son! 

194. Holds her by the hand silent] Cottrer (Notes and Emendations, etc., 
p- 363): The following descriptive addition [to this stage-direction] is made in 
manuscript, long, and self-struggling. After this protracted strife, which shook the 
whole fabric of the hero, he yields, with the exclamation, ‘O mother, mother! 
What have you done?’ &c.—BrEcuiNnG (Falcon Sh.): It is impossible to believe 
that Coriolanus’s long hesitation has been from fears of his own safety, but it is 
characteristic of him to state the problem as an equipoise between the certain de- 
struction of a whole city and his own probable fate. 

195, 196. Corio. O Mother, Mother! What haue you done?] Horn (iv, 25): 
I have no desire to bestow upon this much-admired scene the ordinarily expressed 
praises, but for all that extol it highly, since it does not in any way tend towards 
a soft and gentle quietude, which here would be quite out of place. As soon as 
this mother, by her own person, has shown to him his mother Rome, and he feels 
himself vanquished, what words has our poet given him? Is the bow of peace 
again set forth in the heavens? and dare the hero recognise himself as the saviour 
of his country? Nay! his dreadful mistake is but brought more clearly to him, 
he feels it, and would willingly retract it and make good, but complete atonement 
is impossible, since a revolt from one’s country is not to be expiated by such easy 
means, and he is henceforth for all time at variance with his native land and with 
himself—ROTSCHER (p. 25): The tragic power of this scene lies in this, that 
Coriolanus, with the consciousness that this victory of filial duty will bear for him 
deadly fruit, yet bows before the might of filial duty. Therein is its wizardry, its 
most hidden skill revealed. The actor has here the task of presenting to us the 
hero overwhelmed by the power of filial love and his pride and obstinacy melting 
during the exhortation of Volumnia. 

197. this vnnaturall Scene] E. K. Coampers (Warwick Sh.): The whole situa- 
tion is unnatural—a Roman making war on Rome; a mother pleading with her 
son for mercy; a conqueror melted by a woman. 

198. Oh my Mother, Mother: Oh!] This is, to me, painfully reminiscent of 
that line in Thomson’s Sophonisba, Act III, sc. ii, ‘O Sophonisba! Sophonisba O” 


ACT V, SC. iii.] CORIOLANUS 551 


You haue wonne a happy Victory to Rome. 

But for your Sonne, beleeue it : Oh beleeue it, 200 
Moft dangeroufly you haue with him preuail’d, 

If not moft mortall to him. But let it come : 


Auffidius, though I cannot make true Warres, 203 
199. You haue] Youve Pope,+ 201. dangeroufly] dongeroufly F-. 
(—Var. ’73), Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 202. But] Om. Pope, + (—Var. ’73). 


which evoked any amount of ridicule on the first performance of the tragedy. 
After the 2™ edition it was altered to ‘O Sophonisba, I am wholly thine.’ It will 
be remembered that Thomson also wrote a tragedy on the subject of Coriolanus, 
for an account of which see Appendix to this volume, but the slight comfort we 
might derive from the thought that the line in Sophonisba was inspired by a study 
of this scene in Shakespeare’s play is denied us, since Sophonisba antedates by 
several years Thomson’s Coriolanus.—Ep. 

199. a happy Victory to Rome] AssBortr (§ 419@) quotes this line, among 
others, as an example of the transposition of the adjective, as in ‘Bring me a con- 
stant woman to her husband,’ Henry VIII: III, i, 134. This is not, however, 
strictly speaking, a Shakespearian example, as it is taken directly from North, 
whose words are, ‘oh mother, sayed he, you have a wonne a happy victory for 
your countrie.’ For the construction ‘to Rome’ compare ‘to his Mother,’ |. 190, 
above.—Eb. 

201. Most dangerously you haue with him preuail’d] MAcCALium (p. 621): 
This collapse of Coriolanus’ purpose means nothing more than the victory of his 
strongest impulse. There is no acknowledgment of offence, there is no renovation 
of character, there is not even submission to the highest force within his experi- 
ence. Our admiration of his surrender is not unmixed. It is a moving spectacle 
to see a man, despite all the solicitations of wrath and revenge, of interest and 
fear, obedient to what is, on the whole, so salutary an influence as domestic affec- 
tion. But loyalty to this will not of itself avail to safeguard anyone from criminal 
entanglements, or to equip him for beneficial public action, or to change the cur- 
rent of his life. It may mean the triumph of a natural tendency that happens to 
be good over other natural tendencies that happen to be bad, but it does not mean 
acceptance of duty as duty, or anxiety to satisfy the claims that different duties 
impose. Hence Coriolanus, to the very end, leaves unredeemed his inherited 
obligations to Rome, while he leaves unfulfilled his voluntary pledges to his allies. 
Even in Plutarch’s narrative Shakespeare’s insight is not required to detect this 
underlying thought, but in the Comparison, which there is proof that Shakespeare 
had studied, it is set forth so clearly that he who runs may read. That Shakespeare, 
with his patriotism and equity, perceived the double flaw in Coriolanus’ act of 
grace can hardly be doubted. He was the last man to put the household above 
the national gods, or to glorify breach of contract if only it were sanctioned 
by domestic tenderness. In point of fact, he does not acquit his hero on either 
count. 

202. mortall] W. A. Wricut: That is, mortally; the adverbial termination being 
carried on from ‘dangerously.’ Compare Richard IT: I, iii, 3, ‘The duke of 
Norfolk sprightfully and bold.’ And Othello, III, iv, 79, ‘Why do you speak 
so startingly and rash?’ 


552 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Ile frame conuenient peace. 


[ACT V, SC. iii. 


Now good Auffidius, 


Were you in my fteed, would you haue heard 205 
A Mother leffe? or granted leffe Auffidius ? 


Auf. 


Corio. 


I was mou’d withall. 


1 dare be {worne you were : 


And fir, it is no little thing to make 

Mine eyes to {weat compaffion. But (good fir) 210 
What peace you’! make, aduife me:For my part, 

Ile not to Rome, Ile backe with you, and pray you 

Stand to me in this caufe. Oh Mother! Wife ! 


Auf. 


205. Were you] If you were Cap. 
Were] An were Walker (Crit., ii, 
157): 


I am glad thou haft fet thy mercy, & thy Honor 214 


witht Cap. 
211-213. What...caufe.] Om. Bell. 
213. [Speaks apart with them. Neils. 


would] say, would Pope,+, 

Varr. Ran. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Sing. i, 
Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 

207. I...withall.]) I too was mov'’d. 

Pope,+ (—Var. 73). I was movd 


214. I am...thou haft] I’m...thow st 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Dyce 
ii, Huds. ii, Words. J am...thowst 
Vary se 


204-206. Now good Auffidius . . . lesse Auffidius] BApHam (Text of Sh., Cam- 
bridge Essays, p. 280): The second ‘Aufidius’ [l. 206] is evidently redundant, 
and is owing to the name of the character to which the next speech is given. I 
have little doubt but that the whole passage should be read and the verses dis- 
tributed as follows: 


Cor. Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars, 
T’ll frame convenient peace. Tell me now good 
Aufidius, were you in my stead, would you 
Have heard a mother less, or granted less? 

Auf. I was mov’d withal.’ 


205. would you haue heard] Matone: ‘Heard’ is here used as a dissyllable. 
The modern editors read, say, would you have heard—StTrEvens: As my ears 
are wholly unreconciled to the dissyllabifications e-arl, he-ard, &c., I continue to 
read with the modern editors. Say, in other passages of our author, is prefatory 
toa question. So in Macbeth, ‘Say, if thou hadst rather hear it from our mouths,’ 
&c., [IV, i, 62].—Assort (§ 483) by emphasizing strongly the monosyllable ‘you’ 
following ‘Were,’ makes it practically a dissyllable, and thus pieces out the metrical 
deficiency. Such ‘dissyllabifications’ are to my ears more disagreeable than 
Malone’s suggested he-ard.—Ep. 

207. I was] WALKER (Crit., ii, 203): Thou wert (sometimes written in the old 
poets Th’wert), you were, I was, &c., occur frequently, both in Shakespeare and 
contemporary dramatists, in places where it is clear they must have been pro- 
nounced as one syllable, in whatever manner the construction was affected. Here 
I believe we ought so to pronounce ‘I was.’ 

213. Stand to me] W. A. Wricut: That is, stand by me, support me. See 
TI, i, 250. 


ACT V, SC. iti] 


CORIOLANUS 553 


At difference in thee : Out of that Ile worke 215 


My felfe a former Fortune. 
Corto. 
And you fhall beare 


215. Ai] A F;F,, Rowe. 

215, 216. Out...Fortune.] Aside Rowe 
et seq. 

216-218. Lines end: 
beare Han. Cap. et seq. 

216. a] my Han. 

former| firmer Coll. iii. (MS.), 

Wh. i, Huds. ii. 


by and by... 


I by and by ; But we will drinke together : 


218 


lanus. Johns. et seq. (except Neils.). 
217. I by and by;) Ay, by and by; [To 

Volumnia, Virgilia, &c. Rowe et seq. 
(except Schmidt). 

But...together| Om. Bell. 

But we will] But first we'll 
Words. 

drinke] think Farmer. 


[The Ladies make signs to Corio- 218. [To Vol., Virg., &c. Rowe et seq. 


216. a former Fortune] JoHNson: I will take advantage of this concession to 
restore myself to my former credit and power.—Dezius: Since ‘former’ in the 
older tongue was used not only as simply referring to time but also to class and 
position, it is, therefore, more likely here used in the sense of an advanced fortune, 
a fortune that stands more in the very first rank. Thus it appears in Jul. Ces., 
V, i, 80, ‘our former ensign.’—CoLiiER (Notes & Emendations, ed. ii, p. 368): 
We do not insist upon the change, but we are told, in this speech of Aufidius, to 
substitute ‘a firmer fortune’ for ‘a former fortune.’ We think the emendation 
extremely admissible—Tycuo Mommsen (Der Perkins Folio, p. 224): How un- 
natural is the indefinite article with ‘former’ instead of, possibly, ‘my former’; 
how striking and clear firmer, since Aufidius already sees in spirit the fortune of 
Coriolanus declining, from whose downfall he will construct for himself a more 
stable fortune, firmer than his own was before, and rehabilitate himself from that 
of Coriolanus. The words ‘former’ and firmer are so nearly alike that the error was 
an easy one.—R. G. Wuirte: ‘Former,’ the Folio reading, is clearly a trifling mis- 
print, as Aufidius does not say ‘my former fortune’; which, even if such were the 
text, would be a less appropriate reading [than Collier’s MS. correction].—H. 
WELLESLEY (p. 29): ‘Former’ with the indefinite article reads harshly. The ante- 
cedents of Aufidius make it more consistent with his part to read, ‘a firmer for- 
tune.—Scumipt (Coriolanus): That is, such fortune as I possessed formerly. 
So in Ant. & Cleo., ‘You have seen and proved a fairer former fortune Than that 
which is to approach,’ [I, ii, 33, 34. Johnson’s explanation of the phrase ‘former 
fortune’ has been adopted by most modern editors. To the parallel passage from 
Ant. & Cleo., given by Schmidt, Case adds: ‘but please your thoughts In feeding 
them with those my former fortunes,’ [bid., IV, xv, 52-54. That the phrase 
thus occurs in two other passages besides the present shows, I think, that it was 
one that commended itself to Shakespeare; this would be sufficient to cause a 
rejection of the reading of Collier’s MS. Corrector, firmer. The interpretation by 
Delius and his comparison of the phrase ‘our former ensign’ are not to the point. 
Former, in this latter passage, is the regular use of the word, signifying that which 
is in the forward part, as in ‘the former part of the head.’—Ep.] 

217. I by and by] Scummr (Coriolanus): The stage-direction inserted by 
Johnson before these words, and adopted by modern editors, is quite unnecessary. 
While Aufidius is speaking aside, Coriolanus is engaged in conversation with the 
ladies, and this colloquy, seen but not heard by the audience, he closes with the 


554 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. iii. 


A better witneffe backe then words, which we 
On like conditions, will haue Counter-feal’d. 220. 
Come enter with vs : Ladies you deferue 


221. Come...vs] Transposed to follow 221-224. Ladies...peace.] Auf. 
1. 224 Bell. Ladies...peace. Han. Warb. Bell. 


words, ‘Ay, by and by.’ In North’s Plutarch, ch. 19, there is this: ‘These words 
being spoken openly, he spake a little apart with his mother and wife, and then let 
them return again to Rome, for so they did request him.’ [Wright, while retaining 
Johnson’s stage-direction in the Globe, Cambridge and Clarendon editions, admits 
that perhaps Schmidt’s objection to its insertion is just.—Ep.] 

217. we will drinke together] FaArmMEeR: Perhaps we should read think.— 
STEEVENS: Our author, in 2 Henry IV, having introduced drinking as a mark of 
confederation, ‘Let’s drink together friendly and embrace,’ [IV, ii, 64], the text 
may be allowed to stand, though at the expense of female delicacy, which, in the 
present instance, has not been sufficiently consulted—R. G. Waite: Though I 
cannot accept Farmer’s proposition to read ‘think together,’ and have no better 
word to propose, I cannot but believe that ‘drink,’ addressed to Volumnia and 
Virgilia, is a corruption —HERWEGH (ap. Utricr: Skh., p. 171): This invitation to 
drink extended to Volumnia and Virgilia has given offence to certain English 
commentators. It is quite true that North’s Plutarch says nothing on this point. 
If drinking is not Roman, yet, on the other hand, it is characteristically English, 
and, therefore, Shakespeare has here assuredly written ‘drink,’ just as in I, ix, 110 
he has made the exhausted Coriolanus cry out, ‘Have we no wine here?’— 
Scumipt (Coriolanus): Every doubt as to the correctness of the reading ‘drink 
together’ may be dismissed. Such was the sign of peace and friendship, just as in 
2 Henry IV. [quoted above by Steevens] and also in other passages. [Notably 
in Jul. Ces., on the conclusion of the quarrel between Brutus and Cassius. Brutus 
there says, ‘Give me a bowl of wine. In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius,’ 
IV, iii, 158, 159.—Hunson in his ed. i. accepts the Folio reading without com- 
ment, apparently unconscious of the slur thus cast upon the fair fame of Volum- 
nia and Virgilia, but White, in his note, with its excusatory hint as to a corruption 
in the text here, doubtless opened the eyes of Hudson to this grievous fault, so 
in his ed. ii, in order to preserve the ‘female delicacy,’ he made the slight change 
in the text, ‘We will but drink together’; and we have at once the picture of 
Coriolanus and Aufidius retiring to the back of the tent for a surreptitious drink 
while the ladies patiently await them. The words ‘Come enter with us,’ 1. 221, 
militate somewhat against this——Ep.] 

221. Ladies you deserue, etc.] WARBURTON: This speech, beginning at ‘Ladies 
you deserve,’ which is absurdly given to Coriolanus, belongs to Aufidius. For 
it cannot be supposed that the other, amidst all the disorder of violent and con- 
trary passions, could be calm and disengaged enough to make so gallant a compli- 
ment to the ladies. Let us further observe from this speech, where he says, ‘all 
the swords In Italy, and her confed’rate arms,’ and from that a little before, 
‘Let the Volscians Plough Rome, and harrow Italy,’ that the poet’s head was 
running on the later grandeur of Rome, when, as at this time, her dominion ex- 
tended only a few miles round the city—JoHNson: The speech suits Aufidius 
justly enough if it had been written for him; but it may, without impropriety, be 


ACT V, SC. iv.] CORIOLA NUS 555 


To haue a Temple built you : All the Swords 222 
In Italy,and her Confederate Armes 
Could not haue made this peace. Exeunt. 224 
[Scene IV] 
Enter Menenius and Sicinius. (ftone ? I 


Mene. See you yon’d Coin a’th Capitol, yon’d corner 
Sicin. Why what of that ? 
Mene. If it be poffible for you to difplace it with your 


little finger, there is fome hope the Ladies of Rome, efpe- 5 
SCENE Iv. Pope et seq. SCENE II. Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Del. 
Rowe. Dyce, Cam.+, Huds. ii, Words. Craig, 
Rome. Rowe, Pope, Han. The Neils. yond’...yond’ F, et cet. 
Forum in Rome. Theob. Warb. Johns. 2. Coin] coign Cap. et seq. 
Varr. Ran. Rome. A public Place. ath] o’th’ F,, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 
Cap. et cet. o’the Cap. et cet. 
2. yon'd...yon'd) F.F;. ‘yond...yond 3. of] o’ Coll. ii. 


spoken by Coriolanus; and, since the copies give it to him, why should we dis- 
possess him?—CaPeLt gives substantially Warburton’s note, and on it thus com- 
ments: ‘But that other is in no such tempest of passions at this time; but calm 
enough to detain his mother and the rest, who would have taken their leave of 
him, and invite them into his tent; which he would enter with very good grace 
if his speech were to end as they make it. And as for giving that part to Aufidius, 
the absurdity of such a step is, indeed, very strong; for he certainly has his en- 
gagements, and is not ‘calm within’; or, if he were, there is no part of his char- 
acter that gives a handle to suspect him of gallantry, and to ladies, his enemies, 
who came upon such an errand. 

222. To haue a Temple built you] STEEVENS: Plutarch informs us that a 
temple dedicated to the Fortune of the Ladies was built on this occasion by the 
order of the senate—W. A. WricuT: ‘The Temple of Fortuna Muliebris, dedi- 
cated in the year 286, A. U. C., on the spot at which Coriolanus is said to have 
met his mother, stood at the fourth milestone’ on the Via Latina—Burn, Rome and 
the Campagna, p. 437. 

Scene IV.] Miss C. PortER (First Folio Sh.): Scene iv. is in Rome again, and the 
audience may understand it to be so, not only from the reappearance of Menenius 
on the fore-stage, but from his words as to ‘yon’d Coin a’th Capitol.’ Whatever 
part of the wall at the back of the stage or column buttressing the side served to 
be pointed at thus, it was enough, apparently, imaginatively to reset the scene, 
while at the same time making more graphic the speech of Menenius.—VERITY 
(Student’s Sh.): Here again we have the ‘irony’ of misplaced assurance. And the 
scene illustrates the pleasant vanity of Menenius, who thinks that where he failed 
Coriolanus’s wife and mother must fail too. 

2. Mene. See you yon’d Coin, etc.] Detrus (Die Prosa in Sh’s Dramen, Jahrbuch, 
v, p. 270): This conversation, where even in such an extremity Menenius is true 
to his peculiar character, is held in the familiar form of prose, which is here espe- 
cially incisive. With the entrance of the Messenger, who brings terrible news, 
the blank-verse is resumed and then continues to the close of the play. 


550 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT v, Sc. iv. 


cially his Mother, may preuaile with him. But I fay, there 6 
is no hope in’t, our throats are fentenc’d, and ftay vppon 
execution. 
Sicin. Is’t pofsible, that fo fhort a time can alter the 
condition of a man. Io 
Mene. There is differency between a Grub & a But- 
terfly, yet your Butterfly was a Grub : this -Aartius, is 
growne from Man to Dragon : He has wings, hee’s more 
then a creeping thing. 
Sicin. He lou’d his Mother deerely. 15 
Mene. So did he mee : and he no more remembers his 
Mother now, then an eight yeare old horfe. The tartneffe 
of his face,fowres ripe Grapes. When he walks, he moues 
like an Engine,and the ground fhrinkes before his Trea- 
ding. He is able to pierce a Corflet with his eye : Talkes 20 
like a knell, and his hum isa Battery. He fits in his State, 
as a thing made for Alexander. What he bids bee done, is 
finifht with his bidding. He wants nothing of a God but 


Eternity,and a Heauen to Throne in. 24 
11. differency] difference Ff, Rowe,+, F;F,, Rowe,+. eight-year-old Dyce, 
Cap. Varr. Ran. Cam.+. 
17. eight yeare old] eight years old 21. his State] state Johns. Var. ’73. 


7. stay vppon] STEEVENS: That is, stay but for it. So in Macbeth, ‘Worthy 
Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure,’ I, iii, 148. [W. A. Wricut also compares 
‘I thank you and will stay upon your leisure,’ All’s Well, III, v, 48.] 

11. differency] Murray (NV. E. D., s. v.) quotes the present line as the earliest 
example of this use of the word, and gives but three other examples ranging from 
1640 to 1872. 

17. then an eight yeare old horse] WarBuRTON: Subintellegitur remembers 
his dam. 

17-24. The tartnesse of his face, etc.] E. ScHERER (p. 48): The only thing 
which can be brought against Shakespeare is at times a too sharp change—one, 
so to speak, affected on the stage—in the sentiments of his characters. Aufidius, 
for example, passes too quickly from hatred to sorrow when he sees Coriolanus 
fall, and in Richard III. Anne accepts with too great ease the ring of the man on 
whom she has just spit in contempt; while Elizabeth is too quick in giving her 
daughter to the man who has massacred her sons. This is certainly turning the 
corner too sharply, and there is a want of truth in it. I think that something 
of the same kind may be said of Shakespeare’s style. The language which he 
puts into the mouths of his characters is not always appropriate—is sometimes 
far from being appropriate—to the circumstances, even to the characters them- 
selves. The poet delights too much in the expression for itself and its own sake. 
He dwells on it, he lingers over it, he plays with equivalents and synonyms. 
Menenius thus complains of the change which has occurred in Coriolanus, [ll. 


ACT V, SC. iv.] CORIOLANUS 557 


Sicin. Yes,mercy,if you report him truly. 25 
Mene. I paint him in the Charaéter. Mark what mer- 


17-24 here quoted]. I take this quotation at random to exemplify what I mean. 
This poet’s form sometimes overruns in this fashion; the expression is redundant 
and out of proportion to the situation. 

21. He sits in his State] Jonnson: In a foregoing passage he was said to sit 
im gold. ‘The phrase ‘as a thing made for Alexander’ means ‘as one made to 
resemble Alexander.’—Matone: ‘His state’ means his chair of state as described 
by Plutarch, ‘he was set in his chaire of state, with a marvellous and unspeakable 
majestie.—Lro (Coriolanus): In my opinion these are not Shakespeare’s words. 
Perhaps he has written, . . . as a king, great as . . ., or something similar; but 
the words which stand in the text seem to me almost nonsense, because I cannot 
agree with Malone, who understands ‘state’ as ‘a chair of state,’ and consequently 
must refer ‘thing’ to ‘state,’ so that in this case the sense would be, ‘He sits in 
his state as in a thing . . .’ [The construction here would doubtless be puzzling 
to a foreigner, but scarcely any English reader could fail in understanding that 
‘as a thing’ refers to Coriolanus and not to ‘his state.’ —Eb.] 

22. as a thing made for Alexander] See note by Johnson, preceding line. 
Case (Arden Sh.): Mr Hart supplied the following from Holland’s Plinie, 1634 
ed., Bk xxxiv, ch. 8, pt ii, p. 499: ‘But above all, he (Lysippus) got the greatest 
name for making in brasse a chariot drawne with four steeds. . . . The personage 
of King Alexander the Great hee likewise expressed in brasse, and many images 
he made of him, beginning at the very childhood of the said Prince: and verily 
the Emperor Nero was so greatly enamoured of one state image of Alexander, 
that he commanded it to be gilded all over.’ 

25. Yes, mercy, if you report him truly] At first sight it would seem that what 
Sicinius means is, that the attribute, mercy, which belongs to a god is lacking in 
Coriolanus, but from the reply of Menenius it is evident that he takes it as the 
reverse, that is, If one should speak the truth about Coriolanus he is merciful. 
‘You report’ is, I think, here general, like the French ‘Si on voulait dire,’ but 
Menenius takes it in the particular perhaps with a strong emphasis on ‘J paint 
him,’ etc.—BrircH (p. 499) says in regard to this passage: ‘Thus Shakespeare 
paints the characters of Coriolanus and the gods; and, whilst he thus represents 
them distinctly, points out the attribute of mercy wanting in them and existing 
in the man. Was not the mockery of religion partly the purpose of this play, its 
judgments and punishments, and its want of pity and benevolence? Pardon to 
the Romans is granted by the man, but none is provided for Coriolanus, who falls 
a sacrifice to his forgiveness of injuries, the triumph of love over hate.’ In the 
foregoing pages I have purposely omitted many of Birch’s comments on passages 
in this play, which, as they bear witness to their author’s utter lack of any dramatic 
perception, are calculated to make the judicious grieve. Wordsworth, in his 
Shakespeare’s Knowledge and Use of the Bible, p. 114, says, in reference to this 
passage: ‘I am inclined to think that in Coriolanus it is purposely left a doubtful 
point whether mercy was an attribute of the Deity or no.’ But is not Shakespeare 
here referring to the gods of the Romans?—Ep. 

26. the Character] W. A. Wricut: That is, in his true character. The definite 
article is here emphatic, as in V, ii, 110, 111. Compare King John, II, i, 396, 
“Smacks it not something of the policy?’ 


558 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT v, SC. iv. 
cy his Mother fhall bring from him : There is no more 27 
mercy in him, then there is milke in a male-Tyger, that 

fhall our poore City finde : and all this is long of you. 


Sicin. The Gods be good vnto vs. 30 
Mene. No, in fuch a cafe the Gods will not bee good 
vnto vs. When we banifh’d him, we refpe¢ted not them : 


and he returning to breake our necks, they ref{pect not vs. 
Enter a Meffenger. 

Mef. Sir, if you’ld faue your life, flye to your Houfe, 35 
The Plebeians haue got your Fellow Tribune, 
And hale him vp and downe ; all fwearing, if 
The Romane Ladies bring not comfort home, 
They’! giue him death by Inches. 

Enter another Meffenger. 40 

Sicin. What’s the Newes ? (preuayl’d, 

Meff. Good Newes, good newes, the Ladies haue 
The Volcians are diflodg’d, and Martius gone : 
A merrier day did neuer yet greet Rome, 


No,not th’expulfion of the Zar quins. 45 
Sicin. Friend, art thou certaine this is true ? 
Is’t moft certaine. 47 


29. long] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Cam. Hal. 


Glo. Cla. Neils. Jong Cap. et cet. 

36. The] For the Ktly. 

40. another] a second Dyce, Glo. 
Cla. Huds. ii, Words. Wh. ii. 

42. Meff.] Sec. Mess. Dyce, Cam.+, 
Huds. ii, Words. 

43. Volcians] F.F;, Cap. Mal. Knt. 
Volscies Rowe ii. Volces Var. ’78, ’85, 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. i. Volsces 


Volfcians F,, Rowe i. et cet. 

45-47. Two lines, ending: Friend... 
certaine. Pope et seq. 

46, 47. As one line Sta. 

46. art thou] Art Pope,+. 

47. Is’t...] Ff, Rowe, Sing. ii, Sta. 
Neils. 2. Mess. Ay, sir... Huds. ii. 
(Lettsom). Js it... Pope et cet. 
certaine.] certain? F3F,. 


27. bring from him] That is, evoke, call forth, as in the phrase ‘to bring tears 


to the eyes.’ 


29. long of you] W. A. Wricut: That is, owing to you. 


See Mid. N. Dream, 


III, ii, 339, ‘You mistress, all this coil is long of you’; that is, accompanies you as 


a consequence. 


[This is not, properly speaking, an abbreviation of along, but a 


separate word, and should not therefore be printed, as in many modern texts, 


"long.—ED.] 


36. Plebeians] Accented on the first syllable as almost always. 


See LIL pres: 


47. Is’t most certaine] Lerrsom (ap. WALKER, Sh’s Versification, p. 285, note): 
Shakespeare could scarcely have jumbled the two phrases [Jt is certain, I am certain] 
together so awkwardly as he appears from the editions to have done [in this pas- 


sage]. 


‘Is’t’ (as the old copies print it) is a misprint for I sir, i. e., Ay, sir, and 
here the Messenger begins his answer to Sicinius. 
‘certaine’ first appeared in the Third Folio. 


The note of interrogation after 
‘Thou,’ moreover, seems to have been 


ACT V, SC. iv.] CORIOLANUS 559 


Mef. As certaine as I know the Sun is fire : 48 
Where haue you lurk’d that you make doubt ofit : 
Ne’re through an Arch fo hurried the blowne Tide, 50 


As the recomforted through th’gates. Why harke you : 


inserted 0b metrum, as in the old copies the verse begins with ‘Friend.’—Dvycr 
But the absence of the interrogation point here in the Folio proves nothing, for 
the Folio frequently has a full stop at the end of an interrogative speech; so, a 
little after in the present dialogue, it gives the question of Sicinius thus: ‘They 
are near the City.’ Nor, considering how often the lines are wrongly divided 
in the Folio, is any stress to be laid on its arrangement here.——Inm. (ed. ii.): In 
a letter with which he has lately favoured me Mr Lettsom adds: ‘It is not at all 
likely, or rather it is quite impossible, that a person would begin with “Art tou 
certain this is true?” and then go on, is 1r most certain? He would say “art 
thou most certain?” ’—Scumipt (Coriolanus): If ‘certain’ is not to be accented 
on the second syllable, which is found in Shakespeare only as an intentional 
archaism, this line might be well amended to read, ‘Art certain this is true? is 
it most certain?’ [Reference to the Text. Notes will show that Schmidt has here 
reproduced the readings of Pope and his followers including the Variorwm of 
1773.—ED.] 

50. an Arch ...the blowne Tide] Matone: So in our Author’s Lucrece, 
‘As through an arch the violent roaring tide Out-runs the eye that doth behold his 
haste,’ [ll. 1667, 1668]. ‘Blown’ in the text is swell’d. So in Ant. & Cleo., ‘here 
on her breast There is a vent of blood, and something blown,’ [V, ii, 352]. The 
effect of a high, or spring tide, as it is called, is so much greater than that which 
the wind commonly produces that I am not convinced by the following note 
that my interpretation is erroneous. Water that is subject to tides, even when 
it is not accelerated by a spring tide, appears swoln, and to move with more than 
ordinary rapidity when passing through the narrow strait of an arch.—STEEVENS: 
The ‘blown tide’ is the tide blown, and consequently accelerated by the wind. 
So in another of our author’s plays, ‘My boat sails swiftly both with wind and 
tide.’ [Steevens was trusting toomuch to his memory, which has here played 
him false—he not only did not remember the name of the play, but has grossly 
misquoted a line from Othello, ‘My boat sails freely both wind and stream,’ II, iii, 65. 
The adjectives swiftly and freely are quite different in signification ——Ep.]— 
WHITELAW agrees with Steevens that ‘blown’ means here the tide driven before 
the wind; but Scumipr both in his Lexicon and his edition of this play adopts 
Malone’s interpretation swoln or swell’d, ‘since the wind would not have such an 
effect upon water retarded by the arch of a bridge; besides, if it be not taken in 
this sense, it must be readily admitted that the expression of augmented water is 
here otherwise not suitable.,—W. S. WALKER (Criticisms, iii, 213): Not, I imagine, 
driven by wind, but swollen, as in Beaumont and Fletcher, Queen of Corinth, III, 
i, ‘—my blown billows must not Strive ’gainst the shore, that should confine me.’ 
So ‘blown ambition,’ King Lear, IV, iv, [27]; ‘our blown sails,’ Pericles, V, i, |256].— 
W. A. Wricut: The swoln tide. Compare Lear, IV, iv, 27, ‘No blown ambition 
doth our arms incite.’ Shakespeare had frequently seen the tide rushing through 
the narrow arches of old London Bridge, the shooting of which by the boats was 
a difficult and often dangerous operation. 


560 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act v, sc. iv. 


Trumpets, Hoboyes, Drums beate, altogether. 52 
The Trumpets, Sack-buts, Pfalteries,and Fifes, 
Tabors, and Symboles, and the fhowting Romans; 


Make the Sunne dance. Hearke you. A shout within 55 
52. Trumpets... altogether.] Ff, 52. altogether.] all together. Rowe 

Rowe,+, Varr. Ran. Cam.+, Neils. et seq. 

Noise within of Shoutings and loud 54. Symboles] Cymbole F;. cymbals 

Musick. Cap. Trumpets and hautboys F,. 

sounded, and drums beaten all to- 55- you] yon F.. 

gether. Shouting also within. Mal. A...within] Ff, Rowe,+, Varr. 

et cet. Ran. Cam.+, Neils. Shout again. 


Cap. Shouting again. Mal. et cet. 


52. Hoboyes] Nayior (p. 175): This is an important musical term and occurs 
about fourteen times in eight plays. It always implies a certain special impor- 
tance in the music, and is generally connected with a Royal banquet, masque, or 
procession. In six cases at least the direction has some special qualification— 
e. g., Hautboys playing /oud music; A lofty strain or two to the hautboys; Trumpets 
and hautboys sounded, and drums beaten all together. In Ant. & Cleo., IV, iii, 
12, Hautboys supply the supposed ominous ‘music in the air.’ In the last of the 
above examples, from Coriolanus, we have the extreme limit of power of this time 
provided for—viz., trumpets and hautboys and drums, all together. It is interest- 
ing to notice the wording of Menenius’s description of this stage music. ‘The 
trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries, and fifes, Tabors and cymbals.’ The ‘sackbut’ 
was merely our modern slide trombone, while the rest of these instruments were 
in common use in the 168 century, except the Psaltery, which Kircher (b. 1601) 
says is the same as the Nebel of the Bible. The picture he gives is remarkably 
like the dulcimers which may be seen and heard outside public houses to this very 
day, z. e., a small hollow chest with the strings stretched across it. An instru- 
ment of this kind could be played with the fingers, like a harp, or with a plectrum 
like a zither, or with two little knob-sticks, like the dulcimer. Marsennus (b. 1588) 
also identifies the Psaltery with the dulcimer. 

53, 54. The Trumpets... Psalteries...and Symboles] W. A. Wricut: 
Shakespeare probably had in his mind the list of musical instruments mentioned in 
Daniel, iii, 7. The word ‘psaltery’ comes to us from the translation of the Bible, 
where the Hebrew is also rendered ‘lute.’ The Greek psalterion was a stringed 
instrument played with both hands. ‘Every stringed instrument which was 
played upon with the fingers of both hands, instead of by one hand and a plectrum 
held in the other, came under the denomination of a psaltery’ (Chappell, History 
of Music, p. 307). In the Wicliffite Versions the word appears in the form psautrie, 
sautree or sawtree, and sautrie or sawtrye; and in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, 
3213, we find that ‘hende Nicholas’ had 


‘a gay sawtrye, 
On which he made a-nightes melodye.’ 


[The passage in Daniel to which Wright refers is as follows: ‘Therefore at that time, 
when all the people heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harpe, sackbut, psalterie, 
and all kindes of musicke,’ etc.—Ep.] 

55. Make the Sunne dance] W. A. Wricur and other commentators detect 


ACT V, SC. v.] CORIOLANUS 5 561 
Mene. This is good Newes : 56 
I will go meete the Ladies. This Volumnia, 
Is worth of Confuls, Senators, Patricians, 
A City full :Of Tribunes fuch as you, 
A Sea and Land full : you haue pray’d well to day : 60 
This Morning, for ten thoufand of your throates, 
I’de not haue giuen a doit. Harke,how they ioy. 
Sound ftill with the Shouts. 
Sicin. Firft, the Gods bleffe you for your tydings : 
Next,accept my thankefulneffe. 65 
Meff. Sir, we haue all great caufe to giue great thanks. 
Sicin. They are neere the City. 
Mef. Almoft at point to enter. 


Sicin. Wee’l meet them, and helpe the ioy. LExeunt. 69 
[Scene V.]} 
Enter two Senators, with Ladies, pafsing ouer I 


the Stage, with other Lords. 


57. Volumnia] Volumna F,. 

60. you haue] you've Pope,+ (—Var. 
73), Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 

62. doit.) doit. [Shout.] Cap. 


City...enter...ioy Sta. Lines end: all... 
City...them...ioy Cap. et cet. 

67. They are] Theyre Pope,+ 
(—Var. ’73), Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 


63. Sound...Shouts.] Ff, Rowe,+, 
Varr. Ran. Neils. Om. Cap. Music 
still, with shouts. Cam.+, Craig. 
Shouting and Music. Mal. et cet. 

64, 65. Firft...Next] As one line Pope 
et seq. 

64. your] their Var. ’03, ’13, 721, 
Knt, Coll. i, iii, Del. Wh. i. 

65-69. Next...ioy] Fi, Rowe,+, Varr. 
Ran. Mal. Huds. i. Lines end: dail... 


City.) city? F3F,. 
69. Wee’l] We'll F,, Rowe,+, Varr. 
Ran. Mal. Ktly. We will Cap. et cet. 
Exeunt.] going. Cap. Mal. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Del. Hal. Ktly. 
SCENE V. The Same. A Street near 
the Gate. Dyce, Sta. Wh. Cam.+, 
Coll. iii, Huds. ii, Words. Neils. Scene 
continued Ff, Rowe et cet. 
1-10. Om. Bell. 


in this a reference to the popular superstition that the sun dances on Easter day; 
for my own part I may say that I think Shakespeare had no such stuff in his 
thoughts. It is manifestly the same kind of hyperbole as scarring the moon’s 
face with the splinters of the spears. Wright’s other reference from Twelfth 
Night is much more to the point, ‘But shall we make the welkin dance indeed?’ 
II, ii, 5o.— Eb. 

57. Volumnia] For other examples wherein polysyllabic names often receive 
but one accent at the end of the line in pronunciation see Apport, § 469. 

68. at point] See III, i, 233; and for this use of ‘at’ see, if needful, ABBorrv, 
§ 143. 

Scene V.] Dyce: It is quite evident that Menenius, Sicinius, &c., were intended 
by the author to quit the stage, and that on their ‘xewnt’ a change of scene—to 
a street near the gate of the city—was to be supposed by the spectators. Menenius 


36 


562 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Sena. 


[ACT Vv, SC. v. 


Behold our Patronneffe, the life of Rome : 3 


Call all your Tribes together, praife the Gods, 

And make triumphant fires, {trew Flowers before them : 5 
Vnfhoot the noife that Banifh’d Martius ; 

Repeale him, with the welcome of his Mother : 


Cry welcome Ladies, welcome. 
Welcome Ladies, welcome. 


All, 


A Flourifh with Drummes & Trumpets. 10 


1, 2. Enter...Lords.] Ff, Rowe,+, 
Schmidt. Enter, in Procession, the 
Ladies; with a great Press of Senators, 
Patricians, and People. Cap. Enter 
the Ladies, accompanied by Senators, 
Patricians, and People. They pass 
over the Stage. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
Knt, Coll. Del. Sta. Ktly, Huds. i, 
Craig. Enter Volumnia, Virgilia, 
Valeria, &c., accompanied by Senators, 
Patricians, and Citizens. Dyce i, Wh. 
Enter two Senators with Volumnia, 
Virgilia, Valeria, &c. passing over the 
Stage, followed by Patricians and 
others. Cam.+. Enter, in procession, 
Volumnia, Virgilia, Valeria, &c., accom- 
panied by Senators, Patricians, and 
Citizens. Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 

1. Ladies] the Ladies Han. Var. ’78, 


’85, Ran. 
2. with other Lords.] &c., &c. Var. 
DASE Mets SN 
3. Sena.) kaso. (Caps oHirstaoens 
Dyce, Cam.+, Huds. ii, Words. 1 
Sen. Mal. et cet. 
4. your] our Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. 
5. firew] ftrow FF. 
6. Vnfhoot]| Unshout Rowe et seq. 
8, 9. Cry welcome Ladies, welcome. 
All. Welcome Ladies,| Ff, Rowe,+, 
Varr. Ran. Mal. Knt, Del. As one 
line Steev. et cet. 
9. welcome.] As sep. line Steev. et 
seq. (except Knt, Del. Sta.). 
welcome.] welcome. [Exeunt. Rowe 
et seq. 
to. A Flourifh...Trumpets.] Flour- 
ish. [Exeunt. Cap. 


and his companions go out to meet the ladies as they proceed through the city 
homewards; but their meeting is not brought before the eyes of the audience, nor 
was it necessary that it should be—Scumupt (Coriolanus): It can hardly be doubted 
that with this scene v. there is no change of scene in the usual sense of that term 
with Shakespeare, and Delius is quite right in continuing this with scene iv.; 
but for the sake of the line-numbering as in modern editions we have not desired 
to depart from the usual division——HeERWEGH (ap. Utricr: Coriolan., p. 172): 
In nearly all editions of Coriolanus there is here marked a division of scenes with 
change of locality. To us it seems much simpler that Menenius and Sicinius 
on the point of departure should be overwhelmed by the triumphal entry of the 
ladies, which should be set forth in the most brilliant manner possible in order to 
contrast with the funeral train of the son at the close of the next scene. 

6, 7. Vnshoot ...Repeale him] MacCatium (p. 515): In Shakespeare’s 
account the action of Rome becomes much more dignified [than in Plutarch]. 
In none of the negotiations, in no chance word of citizen, tribune, or senator 
is there any hint of the sentence on Coriolanus being revoked. Only when peace 
is concluded does his recall follow quite naturally, as an act of gratitude, in the 
burst of jubilant relief. This, too, is one of the indications of Shakespeare’s feeling 
for Roman greatness that we should bear in mind when elsewhere he seems to 
show less sense even than Plutarch of her civic virtue. 


ee 


ACT V, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 563 
[Scene VI.| 
Enter Tullus Auffidius,with Attendants. I 


Auf. Go tell the Lords a’th’City, I am heere : 
Deliuer them this Paper : hauing read it, 
Bid them repayre to th’Market place, where I 4 


SCENE vI. Dyce, Hal. Wh. Cam.+, Cla. Huds. i. Corioli. A public Place. 
Huds. Coll. iii, Words. Neils. ScENE Sing. ii. et cet. 


Iv. Rowe. SCENE v. Pope et cet. 1. Enter...Attendants.] Enter Aufid- 
Antium. Rowe, Pope, Han. A ius attended. Cap. 
publick Place in Antium. Theob. Warb. 2. a’th’] oth’ F,, Rowe,+, Sta. Wh. 


Johns. Varr. Ran. Antium. A public i, Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. of the Cap. 
Place. Cap. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. i, et cet. 
Kant, Coll. i, Del. Dyce i, Cam. i, Glo. 


Scene VI.] SINGER (ed. ii.): The place of this scene has been hitherto marked at 
Antium, but from what Aufidius says at 1. rr0 it must have been at Corioli—Lro 
(Coriolanus): Aufidius’ words, ‘thy stolne name Coriolanus in Corioles,’ may be read 
in two different ways: ‘thy in Corioli stol’n name,’ and then Antium may be right 
[as the locale of this scene]; but if we read, ‘Dost thou think I’ll grace thee in 
Corioli,’ then Antium must give way for Corioli, though Plutarch calls Antium 
the native town of Aufidius, and the Conspirator says, ‘your native town,’ |. 59.— 
C. & M. CowDEN CrarKeE (Shakespeare): We believe—judging from other points 
in the scene—that Il. 109, 110 do not mean, ‘Dost thou think I’ll grace thee in 
Corioli with that robbery, thy stolen name of Coriolanus? ’—we believe that they 
mean, ‘Dost thou think that /’ll grace thee with that robbery, thy name of 
Coriolanus stolen in Corioli?’? If the emphasis be thrown on ‘J,’ we think the 
author’s intention in the sentence will be clear. The points in the scene which 
make us believe that Shakespeare intended it to be laid in Antium are these: 
In the first place Antium was the capital of the Volscian territory, Corioli only 
one of the towns on its borders; therefore it was likely that the capital was the 
place to which Coriolanus and Aufidius would return to render an account of their 
expedition to Rome; and, accordingly, the latter begins by sending to ‘tell the 
lords of the city,’ &c. When they enter they bid him ‘welcome home’; and we 
know that Aufidius’ residence was at Antium. The First Conspirator says, ‘ Your 
native town you enter’d like a post, and had no welcome home.’ Coriolanus tells 
the lords of the city, ‘We have made peace, with no less honour to the Antiates than 
shame to the Romans’; and these very lords of the city are also here styled ‘heads 
of the state,’ which shows that they were chief rulers, rulers of the Volsces gen- 
erally, and not merely city authorities belonging to any one of the Volscian towns. 
Finally—and which we think conclusive, because North’s Plutarch was evidently 
the authority that Shakespeare followed throughout most closely—Plutarch 
distinctly states that Marcius and Aufidius returned to Antium when they came 
back from Rome.—Herwecu (ap. Urrict: Coriolan.) brings forward substantially 
the same reasons for accepting Antium as the locale of this scene, but says, ‘At 
the same time we do not wish to lay any special stress on the remark of the Con- 
spirator to Aufidius in regard to his entrance into his native town, since possibly 
may be urged against this the remark of Volumnia, ‘His wife is in Corioli.”’— 
Rotre: We should infer from |. 138 that this scene is not in Corioli. Surely 


564 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT V, SC. vi. 


Euen in theirs,and in the Commons eares 5 


Will vouch the truth of it. 


Him I accufe : 


The City Ports by this hath enter’d, and 
Intends t’appeare before the People, hoping 


To purge himfelfe with words. 


Difpatch. 


Enter 3 or 4 Confpirators of Auffidius Faction. 10 


Moft Welcome. 
I.Con. 


How is it with our Generall ? 


Auf. Euen fo,as with a man by his owne Almes im- 
poyfon’d, and with his Charity flaine. 

2.Con.Moft Noble Sir, If you do hold the fame intent 15 
Wherein you wifht vs parties : Wee’l deliuer you 


Of your great danger. 


6. Him] HePope,+, Cap. Varr. Ran. 

g. [Exit All. Cap. [Exeunt All. Mal. 
et seq. 

to. Enter...Faction.] After I. 11 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Varr. Ran. 
Enter certain Friends of Aufidius, 


17 


Conspirators against Marcius. Cap. 
11-16. As verse, ending lines: /o... 
impoyfon’d...Sir...W herein...deliuer you. 
Pope et seq. 
15. you do] you Warb. 
Johns. Var. ’73. 


yet you 


Coriolanus would not have said this, but rather ‘in this city here,’ or to that effect; 
but we believe that none of the commentators have referred to this as a reason 
for not following Singer in placing this scene in Corioli. According to Plutarch 
Antium should be the place——Brrcuine (Falcon Sh.): There can be no doubt 
that the scene is laid in Antium. For (1) it was from Antium that Coriolanus 
received his commission, and he returns to report upon it; and (2) in]. 97 he speaks 
as though the Antiates alone were involved inthe war. Further, in 1. 59, the scene 
is called Aufidius’s native town, and this was Antium. It is an additional argu- 
ment that Plutarch makes him perish at Antium.—Gorpon: Editors are divided 
whether to place this scene in Antium or Corioli. The solution seems to me to 
be this: Shakespeare meant the scene to be Antium, and wrote with Antium 
in his mind until he came to Aufidius’s speech, Il. 109, 110. There he was carried 
away by the magnificent opportunity of placing ‘Coriolanus in Corioli,’ and for 
the rest of the scene thought rather of Corioli than of Antium.—CaseE (Arden Sh.): 
That the army should come back to a small town like Corioli seems most im- 
probable, and Il. 96-98 must have been spoken in Antium, not in Corioli. There, 
not the Antiates but the Volscians would have been named. Mr Gordon’s solution 
seems very reasonable—TucKkER BROOKE (Yale Sh.): The text of this scene is 
inconsistent in locating it first at Antium, the Volscian capital, and later at 
Corioli. Professor Gordon’s explanation is highly satisfactory. 

5. theirs] For other examples wherein mine, hers, theirs are used as pronominal 
adjectives before their nouns see ABBOTT, § 238. 

6. Him I accuse] Assorr (§ 208): Him is often put for he by attraction to 
‘whom’ understood. ‘Him (he whom) I accuse,’ etc. [Other examples of this 
construction follow.] 

16, 17. deliuer you Of... danger] For other examples wherein ‘of’ is used in 


ACT V, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 565 


Auf. Sir, I cannot tell, 18 
We mutt proceed as we do finde the People. 
3.Con. The people will remaine vncertaine, whil’f{t 20 


*Twixt you there’s difference : but the fall of either 
Makes the Suruiuor heyre of all. 
Auf. I know it: 
And my pretext to ftrike at him, admits 
A good conftruction. I rais’d him, and I pawn’d 25 
Mine Honor for his truth : who being fo heighten’d, 
He watered his new Plants with dewes of Flattery, 
Seducing fo my Friends : and to this end, 
He bow’d his Nature, neuer knowne before, 
But to be rough, vnf{wayable, and free. 30 
3.Confp. Sir, his ftoutneffe 
When he did ftand for Confull, which he loft 
By lacke of ftooping. 
Auf. That I would haue {poke'of: 
Being banifh’d for’t, he came vnto my Harth, 35 
Prefented to my knife his Throat : I tooke him, 
Made him ioynt-feruant with me : Gaue him way 


In all his owne defires : Nay, let him choofe 38 
25-34. I rais’d...fpoke of:| Om. Bell. wright. 
25. and I pawn’d) and pawn’d 31. Sir, his ftoutneffe] His stoutness, 
Pope,+ (—Var.’73). pawn’d Cap. Sir Han. Witness, sir, his stoutness 
27. watered] water’d Rowe et seq. Sta. conj. 
30. and free] and fierce Han. Coll. iii. 33. flooping.| stooping— Rowe,+. 


(MS.), Huds. ii. and proud Cart-  stooping,— Cap. et seq. 


the sense out of, or from, with verbs that signify depriving, delivering, see ABBOTT, 
§ 166. 

27, 28. He watered ...so my Friends] Case (Arden Sh.): Here we are told 
figuratively that Coriolanus fostered with refreshing flattery the new growths of 
intimacy and ascendency arising in his favor from union with the Volscians in a 
common cause. The use of ‘watered’ is illustrated by a passage supplied by Mr 
Charles Crawford from a letter from Sir Francis Bacon to Sir George Villiers, 
August 12, 1616: ‘After that the King shall have watered your new dignities, with 
the bounty of the lands which he intends you,’ etc. Some, including Craig, are 
confident that Aufidius wilfully misrepresents Coriolanus here, knowing well that 
‘He would not flatter Neptune for his trident, Or Jove for’s power to thunder.’ 
At any rate even courtesy would seem flattery in the jealous eyes of Aufidius. 

30. and free] W. S. WALKER (Cyit., i, 76): My ear tells me that Shakespeare 
never could have so concluded a period; neither could he have used ‘bow’d’ so 
absolutely. Part of a line has dropped out, somewhat to the following effect: 


‘But to be rough, unswayable and free, 
[To an enforc’d observance.]’ 


566 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. vi. 


Out of my Files, his proie¢ts, to accomplifh 


My beft and frefheft men, feru’d his defignements 40 

In mine owne perfon : holpe to reape the Fame 

Which he did end all his; and tooke fome pride 42 
39. protects, to accomplifh] projects to Rowe,+ (—Var. ’73). reap...car Coll. 

accomplifh, FF, et seq. ii. (MS.). reap...inn Coll. i. conj. Ktly, 
41. holpe] hope F.F;. hop’d Fy, Bailey, Coll. iii. ear...reap Sing. ii. 

Rowe, Pope i. help’d Pope ii. reap...bind Sta. conj.  reap...hend 


AI, 42. reape...end] reap...make F,, Cartwright. 


41. holpe to reape] THEOBALD (Sh. Restored, p. 182), evidently misled by the 
fact that the Second, Third, and Fourth Folios here read ‘hope’ or ‘hop’d,’ and 
unfortunately not consulting the First Folio, offers as an original emendation the 
present reading, ‘holpe.’ His note on this is to the effect, that hop’d could not 
be the reading intended by Shakespeare, which is undoubtedly true. Theobald 
in his edition adopts the Folio reading without comment, doubtless having dis- 
covered his error on collating the Folios. Hratu (Revisal, p. 433) is even more 
astray than was Theobald; he goes out of his way to find fault with Warburton 
for his failure to credit the reading ‘holpe’ to Theobald, and enters upon a defense 
of the reading hop’d, ‘being persuaded that it is right and genuine.’ As his note is, 
however, merely an interpretation of a reading which has not been accepted by 
any editors other than Rowe, and Pope in his ed. i, it is needless to repeat it 
here.—Ep. 

42. Which he did end all his] CottrER (Notes & Emendations, p. 364): Shake- 
speare is here only using a metaphor which he has often employed before, and 
it is obvious from the context that for ‘end’ we ought to read ear [the MS. cor- 
rection], which means in its derivation, as well as in its use, to plough; therefore 
when Aufidius says that he had ‘Holp to reap the fame Which he did ear all his,’ 
he means that Coriolanus had ploughed the ground, intending to reap a crop of 
fame, which Aufidius had assisted him to harvest. The use of the word ‘reap’ 
proves what was in the mind of the poet. It is needless to enumerate the places 
where Shakespeare employs the verb, to ear, in the sense of to plough —Co Lier 
(ed. ii.), after quoting with approbation the foregoing MS. correction, adds: ‘We 
are not satisfied that Shakespeare’s word was not im instead of ‘end’; to im a 
harvest is to get it in; and in All’s Well, I, iii, 47, our poet uses both ‘ear’ and in 
technically, ‘“He that ears my land, spares my team, and gives me leave to in 
the crop.” So we might amend the passage before us thus, “—holp to reap 
the fame Which he did im all his”; that is to say, “I helped to reap the crop, 
which he harvested as entirely his own.”’—W. N. L. (Notes & Queries, April 16, 
1853): To ear is to plough. Aufidius complains that he had a share in the harvest, 
while Coriolanus took all the ploughing to himself. We have only, however, to 
transpose reap and ear, and this nonsense is at once converted into excellent sense. 
The old corrector blindly copied the blunder of a corrupt but not sophisticated 
manuscript. This has occurred elsewhere in this collection. [The initials W. N. L. 
are but a transparent disguise through which we may detect Collier’s redoubtable 
opponent, W. N. Lettsom. SrnceEr (Sh. Vindicated, p. 227) repeats substantially 
the foregoing communication, duly crediting it to ‘a correspondent in N. & Q.,’ 
and in his ed. ii. remarks that the reversal is also to be found on the margin of his 


ACT V, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 567 


[42. Which he did end all his] 
annotated 2"4 Folio.—Ep.J—Tycno Momsen (Der Perkins Folio, p. 181): 
Although the common reading, ‘end,’ gives an intelligible meaning, yet it would 
have been much finer to have had here some word which continued the metaphor. 
Certainly ear does this, but on further examination the doubt arises whether ear 
and reap, the former in the sense fo plough, should not be reversed, that thus in 
the original manuscript there may have been an interlineation and an erasure. 
In his ed. ii. of Notes & Emend. Collier proposes inne. This emendation of the 
MS. corrector would then be one of the most dubious. Could to ear be made to 
signify, as does the German drndten, the gathering in of the grain, then the emenda- 
tion would be excellent; the reading of gleaning can hardly be accepted, but that of 
ploughing is impossible. It may be urged against this meaning and reversal 
(which I notice Singer also proposes) that to ear has for its object the ground, and 
not the corn, as has reap.—STaunrTon: Is not ‘end’ an erratum for bind? So in 
As You Like It, Ill, ii, 113, ‘They that reap must sheaf and bind.’ Again, in 
Beaumont & Fletcher’s Bonduca, IV, iii, ‘—when Rome like reapers, Sweat blood 
and spirit for a glorious harvest, And bound it up, and brought it off,’ [ed. Dyce, 
p. 71]. And in the ancient Harvest Song, ‘Hooky, hooky, we have shorn And 
bound what we did reap.’—W. W. [WirxtaAms] (Parthenon, August 16, 1862): When, 
in the Literary Gazette of March 15, I submitted what I thought to be a new reading 
of a passage in Coriolanus, Act V, scene vi, I was not aware that Mr Staunton had 
proposed the same alteration in a note in his edition, and had confirmed it by pas- 
sages from other writers. The correction occurred to me long prior to the publica- 
tion of Mr Staunton’s Shakespeare; but any credit that may attach to it is fairly 
due to Mr Staunton as having been the first to print it. I am but too happy to 
find my conjecture so satisfactorily confirmed. [It is gratifying to record such 
generosity as this in those past days characterized by bitter controversy and jeal- 
ousy as to priority among emendators, and we can but sigh, Utinam sic omnes, 
etc.—Ep.]—ArrowsmitH (Editor of Notes & Queries, and Mr Singer, p. 8): Since 
when has this word [‘end’] been a stumbling-block to the commentators? The 
answer to the inquiry would supply a shrewd conjecturer with the means of fixing 
the date of the old commentator’s era. If Mr Singer’s interpretation of the old 
commentator’s ear be true, if by ear is here meant plough, then is his corruption of 
the text . . . open to an objection which ousts it from its usurped place in the 
text altogether, either as a substitute for reap or for end, and remands it to the 
shop from whence it issued. Fame in the passage represents the crop, and what- 
ever be the custom in Cockneydom, we country folk do not plough the crop, but 
the Jand for the crop. If this, then, be a sample of the old or any other commenta- 
tor’s critical acumen—if this be the process by which Shakespeare’s nonsense is 
to be distorted into ‘resplendent sense’—it is a quality and an art that working- 
day men would hardly covet. Should, however, the old commentator’s ear sig- 
nify something else than plough, then all that is got through his corruption of the 
text is ignotum per ignotius, and the sense, if sense there be, is very obscurely 
resplendent; nor would it prove a Herculean labour to match him at his own game. 
Thus, ‘holp to reap the fame which he did zm all his.’ The metaphor is preserved, 
the term pertinent and familiar, and the resemblance in the letters of inn and 
end as close as in those of end and ear. [Arrowsmith was quite unaware that he 
had been forestalled in this emendation.—Ep.] To them, on the other hand, that 
regard the old commentator as an authority, that imagine his readings are derived 


568 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. vi. 


[42. Which he did end all his] 
from more authentic sources than those of the received text, how humiliating it 
must be to learn that the shallowest Gloucestershire or Herefordshire auctioneer is 
competent to verify the reading which this ridiculous impostor has not merely 
failed to understand, but on that account has impudently corrupted. [Arrow- 
smith here quotes from two announcements by auctioneers of the above localities 
wherein occur the ‘phrases ‘well-ended hay ricks,’ ‘well-ended wheat ricks,’ 
adding in a foot-note that he encloses with his communication these two advertise- 
ments in order ‘to preclude all suspicion of dishonesty. —Ep.] But supposing no 
proof could be adduced that end is a technical phrase in harvest work, yet the 
ordinary signification of the word would fully justify its use by Shakespeare here.— 
R. G. Wuire: The reading of Collier’s folio has been received with favor, though 
it is admitted that it makes a transposition necessary. But there is not the least 
necessity for this violence to the original text. Aufidius helped to reap the fame 
which Coriolanus made, in the end, all his—C. & M. Cowpen CLARKE (Shake- 
speare): The word ‘end’ has been variously altered, but we take the-sentence to be 
the elliptical form of a usual idiom, ‘which he did end by making all his,’ signifying, 
‘which he, in the end, made all his. —WrLtEsLtEy: ‘Which he did end all his’ 
is not satisfactory. The conjecture ear for ‘end’ is ingenious and tempting as 
preserving the metaphor, but it would be necessary in order to apply it to the case 
that we should not read ‘he,’ but we—‘ Which we did ear, all his.’ If the earing 
had been by Coriolanus, he might claim the reaping. As a simpler form of ex- 
pressing the complaint of Aufidius I would propose, ‘Which he declar’d all his.’ 
In the old handwriting cl might be mistaken for d and 7 for ; so that declar’d 
might have been read did end by the compositor. [An unfortunate attempt 
at justification, since it but serves to show how superficial is Wellesley’s acquaint- 
ance with ‘old handwriting’; by no possibility could the two letters c and / in the 
current handwriting of Shakespeare’s time be mistaken for the single letter d; the 
same applies equally to the letters r and »—Ep.]—IncLtEsy (Sh. Hermeneutics, 
p. 61): There is not the faintest obscurity about this metaphor; and nothing in 
this passage but the inflection ‘holpe’ is entirely obsolete, and that, of course, 
never stuck with anybody. The whole force of suspicion has fallen upon the 
unoffending verb, end/ Why, in the name of common sense? Aufidius says that 
he helped Coriolanus to reap the crop, that he endured with him ‘the burden and 
heat of the day,’ but that Coriolanus ended it, and made it all his own. Certainly 
no difficulty in this phraseology would be presented to the mind of the rudest 
midland farm-labourer. We may still hear the farmers of Worcestershire and 
Herefordshire employ that verb in a technical sense in speaking of their crops. 
Ending a crop is gathering it. A well-ended crop is one that is secured in good 
condition, or has made a good end.—WuiTELAw: That is, contrived finally to 
appropriate-—W. A. Wricut: To ‘end’ a crop was the technical term for getting 
it in and housing it, and in all probability is a corruption of ‘in,’ which is so used 
in Tusser’s Five Hundred Points of Husbandry, p. 64 (English Dialect Society’s 
waitin): ‘Some countries are pinched of medow for hay, 
Yet ease it with fitchis as well as they may. 
Which inned and threshed and husbandlie dight, 
Keepes labouring cattle in verie good plight.’ 


And in Bacon’s History of Henry VII., ‘All was inned at last into the Kings Barne; 


ACT V, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 569 


To do my felfe this wrong : Till at the laft 43 
I feem’d his Follower, not Partner; and 
He wadg’d me with his Countenance,as if 45 


I had bin Mercenary. 


44. not] nor F2F;, Pope i. 45. wadg’d] wag’d F3F,, Rowe et seq. 
wagg’d Anon. (Gent. Maga.). 


but it was after a Storme.’ Cotgrave has ‘Engranger, To inne corne, &c.; to put, 
or shut, vp in a barne.’ And Palsgrave, Lesclarcissement de la Langue Francoyse, 
‘I inne, I put in to the berne. Je mets en granche.’ Compare also All’s Well, 
I, iii, 48, ‘He that ears my land spares my team and gives me leave to in the crop.’ 
When the true word is once corrupted to ‘end,’ of course a meaning is fitted to it, 
and it is interpreted of ending or finishing the harvest. In this sense it is still 
in use in Surrey, Sussex, Hallamshire, and probably elsewhere. The insertion 
of ‘d’ after a liquid is frequent in common pronunciation. Hence ‘vile’ becomes 
‘vild,” and we know that Johnson gave as a proof of Mrs Pritchard’s vulgarity 
that she called a gown ‘a gownd.’—Rotre: That is, made all his own at last. 
The use of ‘end’ would not be singular, even if it had not been shown that it is a 
provincial term for getting in a harvest, still used in Surrey, Sussex, and elsewhere. — 
DEIGHTON: That is, which he garnered up for himself—Casr (Arden Sh.): The 
metaphor in reap is believed to be carried on in end, taken as a dialectal term for 
getting in or stacking a crop. The Eng. Dial. Dict. cites Milton, L’ Allegro, 109, 
‘His shadowy flail hath threshed the corn That ten day-labourers could not end.’ 
—Verity (Studeni’s Sh.): In its ordinary signification end gives good sense— 
Aufidius helped to reap the crop, but in the end Coriolanus made it all his own. 
The Glossary of the Globe Ed. says that end is ‘a corruption of 7m’ (quite a com- 
mon verb = ‘to get in the harvest’); I do not know what evidence there is to sup- 
port this view. 

45. He wadg’d me with his Countenance] Jounson: This is obscure. The 
meaning I think is, he ‘prescribed to me with an air of authority, and gave me 
his countenance for my wages; thought me sufficiently rewarded with good looks.’— 
Braviey (NV. E. D., Wage, vb. II, 7): To engage or employ for wages; to hire: 
(a) for military service. Obs. [The present line quoted; also], 1599 Hayward 1°t 
Pt, Life Henry IV., 68, ‘Assone as the Duke was come into Brittaine he waged 
certaine souldiours, and presently departed to Calice.’? [Under 9. To pay wages to. 
Bradley gives many more examples; in some of the earlier quotations the word 
is spelt as here, wadge. The use of the word ‘Mercenary’ here in connection with 
‘wadg’d’ is evidently Bradley’s justification for giving it this special, almost 
technical, meaning—Ep.]—Staunton quotes Johnson’s interpretation, and re- 
marks, ‘But ‘‘countenance,” or we mistake, means here not looks, but entertain- 
ment’; in support of this Staunton quotes ‘you must meet my master to counte- 
nance my mistress,’ Tam. of Shr.,1V,i, 101. [This is not, however, to the purpose; 
‘countenance’ in this last quotation does not mean, as Staunton asserts, entertain, 
but to grace, to honour. Neither Schmidt, in his Lexicon, nor the NV. E. D. give 
any example wherein ‘countenance,’ as a verb, means to entertain, or as a noun 
means entertainment.—Ep.]—Rev. Jonn Hunter: That is, he specified or limited 
my worth or estimation with his patronage. This passage would have seemed 
less obscure to the commentators if they had compared it with the following in 


570 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Vv, SC. vi. 


1.Con. So he did my Lord : 47 
The Army marueyl’d at it, and in the laft, 
When he had carried Rome, and that we look’d 


For no leffe Spoile, then Glory. 50 
48. it,] Ff, Rowe,+, Cam.+, Neils. 48. in the la/i| at last Pope,+. 
it; Coll. Del. Sing. ii, Dyce, Sta. Ktly, 50. Glory.] glory— F;F,, Rowe,+, 


Wh. i, Huds. Words. Craig. 7. Cap. glory,— Cap. et cet. 
et cet. 


North’s Plutarch, ‘—all other governors and captains must be content with such 
credit and authority as he would please to countenance them with.’—W. A. WRIGHT: 
That is, rewarded me with his favour or patronage, patronized me. For this sense 
of ‘countenance’ compare 1 Henry IV: I, ii, 33, ‘Being governed, as the sea is, 
by our noble and chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.’ 
And Hamlet, IV, ii, 16: 
‘Ros. Take you me for a sponge, my lord? 
Ham. Ay, sir, that soaks up the king’s countenance, his rewards, 
his authorities.’— 

Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): An obscure word still more obscured by the 
change of Rowe to ‘waged’ [see Text. Notes], but which seems from the context to 
mean something more pictorial in shake and thrust out of the face during vehement 
and authoritative speech than the unsatisfactory waged of the modernising editors. 
Their only explanation is ‘patronized,’ of which they give no example. It clearly 
is not the case that it here means, hire or pay wages to. [I regret that I must 
here take exception to Miss Porter. In the first place, if the Folio reading is more 
obscured by the modern spelling the editor of the Third Folio, not Rowe, is respon- 
sible. Secondly, no modern editor, as far as I know, has interpreted ‘wadg’d’ or 
wag’d as patronized. Wright explains the whole line, ‘rewarded me with his pat- 
ronage,’ but this last word refers to ‘countenance,’ for which use he gives two good 
examples. Thusalso Hunter. Thirdly, why, from the context, does the word here 
clearly mean other than hire, or pay wages? At the time of Miss Porter’s writing 
the NV. £. D. had not extended as far as this word, but the Century Dictionary records 
it (s.v.}6); in fact, under its definition ‘to hire for wages’ this very passage is quoted 
in illustration —Ep.]—Casr (Arden Sh.): He gave me his patronage as wages, as if 
I had been on hire. The idea that is added by Johnson in ‘thought me sufficiently 
rewarded with good looks,’ and adopted by others, has no justification in the text. 
The sting is not that Coriolanus thought his favour a fair reward, but that he 
should have assumed the right of patronage at all. [Case quotes the same passage 
from North’s Plutarch as that in Hunter’s note ante.—Ep.] 

48. in the last] A. W. Wricut: That is, at the last. So ‘in the pest’? = at 
best, Hamlet, I, v, 27; ‘in the least’ = at least, Lear, I, i, 194.—Casr (Arden Sh.): 
An example of this expression is still wanting. [Wright’s parallel examples are 
sufficient to supply the lack.—Eb.] 

49. had carried] W. A. Wricut: That is, might have carried (see ABBOTT, 
§ 361); orit may mean, had in effect carried or conquered Rome.—CaseE (Arden Sh.): 
When he had virtually won Rome, when Rome lay at his feet. There is no diffi- 
sulty in the natural anticipation here, but a huge one in Dr Wright’s supposition. 

49. and that we look’d] For other examples of this construction see ABBOTT, § 285. 


ACT V, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 571 


Auf. There was it : 51 
For which my finewes fhall be f{tretcht vpon him, 
At a few drops of Womens rhewme, which are 
As cheape as Lies; he fold the Blood and Labour 
Of our great Action; therefore fhall he dye, 55 
And Ile renew me in his fall. But hearke. 

Drummes and Trumpets founds,with great 
JShowts of the people. 

1.Con. Your Natiue Towne you enter’d like a Pofte, 
And had no welcomes home, but he returnes 60 
Splitting the Ayre with noyfe. 

2.Con. And patient Fooles, 
Whofe children he hath flaine, their bafe throats teare 
With giuing him glory. 

3. Con. Therefore at your vantage, 65 
Ere he expreffe himfelfe, or moue the people 
With what he would fay, let him feele your Sword: 
Which we will fecond, when he lies along 


After your way. His Tale pronounc’d, fhall bury 69 
53-55. Al...dye] Mnemonic Warb. 64. With] Om. Pope,+ (—Var. ’73). 
53. At] As Mal. 68. we] he F.F;. 

57, 58. Drummes...people.] Noise fecond,)| second. Han. et seq. 
within, of Drums, Trumpets, and great 69. After...pronounc’d] His tale pro- 
Shoutings. Cap. nounced, after your way Words. 

57. founds] found F;F,, Rowe et seq. way.| way, Rowe, Pope. way 

62-70. Om. Bell. Theob. et seq. 


51. There was it] ApBotr (§ 227): ‘It’ is sometimes more emphatically used 
than with us. We have come to use ‘it’ so often superfluously before verbs that 
the emphatic use of ‘it’ for ‘that’ before which is lost. [Abbott, besides the present 
line, gives several other examples of this construction.] 

52. For which my sinewes shall be stretcht] Jounson: This is the point on 
which I will attack him with my utmost abilities. 

59. a Poste] Bercuine (Falcon Sh.): That is, a forerunner to announce Corio- 
lanus.—CasE (Arden Sh.): That is, a messenger. See r Henry IV: I, i, 37, ‘there 
came A post from Wales loaden with heavy news.’ [This last is, I think, the 
better definition. A forerunner would more likely be spoken of as the vawnt- 
courier. —ED.] 

67. With . . . Sword] This line at first reading may seem irregular; if, however, 
as WALKER (Vers., p. 1) suggests, the word ‘would’ be strongly emphasized the 
line becomes quite rhythmic.—Ep. 

68, 69. second, . . . way.] It is well, I think, to call attention here to the judicious 
changes in the punctuation made by Hanmer and Theobald, whereby what, in the 
Folio text, was unintelligible is rendered plain.—Ep. 

68. when he lies along] That is, at full length; compare Jul. Ces., III, i, 115, 
‘That now on Pompey’s basis lies along No worthier than the dust.’-—Ep. 


572 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


His Reafons, with his Body. 
Auf. Say no more. 


[ACT Vv, SC. vi. 


7O 


Heere come the Lords, 


Enter the Lords of the City. 


All Lords. 
Auf. 


You are moft welcome home. 
I haue not deferu’d it. 


But worthy Lords, haue you with heede perufed 75 


What I haue written to you ? 
All. We haue. 


1.Lord. And greeue to heare’t : 
What faults he made before the laft, I thinke 
Might haue found eafie Fines : But there to end 80 
Where he was to begin,and giue away 
The benefit of our Leuies, anfwering vs 
With our owne charge : making a Treatie, where 83 


70, 71. His...no more] As one line 
Pope et seq. 

72. the City] Corioli Coll. iii. 

73. All Lords.] Ff, Rowe,+. All 


the Lords. Cam.+, Neils. Lords. 
Cap. et cet. 
You are] Yon are F.. Yowre 


74. I haue] I’ve Dyce ii, Huds. ii, 
Words. 

76. to you?] Om. Han. Bell. 

78. heare’t] hear it Rowe,+, Cap. 
Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
Knt, Coll. i, ii, Hal. Wh. i. hear’t 
Dyce et cet. 


Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. 


69, 70. your way ... Body] W. A. Wricut: When you have told his story 
in your own way, instead of allowing him to speak for himself, the reasons he 
might have urged for his conduct will be buried with his body. 

79. What faults he made] W. A. Wricut: That is, committed. Compare 
Lucrece, 804, ‘That all the faults that in thy reign are made May likewise be 
sepulchred in thy shade.’ 

82, 83. answering vs With our owne charge] JoHNSoN: That is, rewarding us 
with our own expences; making the cost of war its recompence—BEECHING 
(Falcon Sh.): Does this mean bringing us back enough to cover expences, or the 
bill to pay? Probably the latter. Either way it was calumny. See Il. 91-94.— 
TucKER BROOKE (Yale Sh.): Paying us back only the amount of our expenditure, 
bringing in no profit. Compare Il. 94-96, where Coriolanus estimates that the 
gains from the expedition amount to one-third more than the costs. The point 
is that no large indemnity had been secured from the Romans. [This somewhat 
cryptic sentence may be derived from this passage in North: ‘Tullus, having pro- 
cured many of his confederacy, required Martius might be deposed from his 
estate to render up account to the Volsces of his charge and government. Martius, 
fearing to become a private man again under Tullus being general, . . . answered, 
he was willing to give up his charge, and would resign it into the hands of the lords 
of the Volsces, if they did all command him, as by all their commandment he 
received it.’ Thus the complaint of the 1 Lord is, that Martius merely handed 
back to them the money and office entrusted to him, without any addition on his 
part.—Ep.] 


ACT V, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 573 


There was a yeelding; this admits no excufe. 
Auf. He approaches, you fhall heare him. 85 
Enter Coriolanus marching with Drumme, and Colours. The 
Commoners being with him. 
Corio. Haile Lords, I am return’d your Souldier : 
No more infected with my Countries loue 
Then when I parted hence : but ftill fubfifting 90 
Vnder your great Command. You are to know, 
That prof{peroufly I haue attempted, and 
With bloody paffage led your Warres, euen to 
The gates of Rome : Our fpoiles we haue brought home 


Doth more then counterpoize a full third part 95 
The charges of the Aétion. We haue made peace 
With no leffe Honor to the Antiates 97 
84. this] Om. Pope, Han. Ran. 
86. SCENE vi. Pope, Han. Warb. 88. return’d] return’d, Ff, Rowe,+. 
Johns. 89. Countries] country’s Rowe et seq. 
marching] Om. Cap. et seq. 04, 95. fpotles...Doth] Fi, Rowe. 


86, 87. The...being...] Crowd of spoil...Doth Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 
Citizens... Cap. a Crowd of Citizens... Spotls...Do Pope et cet. 
Mal. et seq. 96. The] Thee F>. 

87. Commoners] F.F;, Cam.+, We haue] We've, Pope, + (—Var. 
Neils. Commons F,, Rowe,+, Varr. 73), Dyce ii, Huds. ii, Words. 


84. no excuse] ABBott (§ 462) quotes this line as an example wherein, for the 
sake of rendering the metre exact, these words are to be pronounced as though 
but two syllables—noxcuse. It is, I think, gravely to be questioned whether this 
trifling gain in metrical exactness be worth the slurring of two such important 
words in this accusation. Who among the auditors would detect that the line, 
if uttered slowly and gravely, was prosodically defective-—Ep. 

88. Haile Lords, etc.] A. C. BRADLEY (Coriolanus, p. 14): Since we know that 
Coriolanus’s nature, though the good in it has conquered, remains unchanged, and 
since his rival’s plan is concerted before our eyes, we await with little suspense, 
almost indeed with tranquillity, the certain end. As it approaches it is felt to 
be the more inevitable because the steps which lead to it are made to repeat as 
exactly as possible the steps which led to his exile. His task, as then, is to excuse 
himself, a task the most repugnant to his pride. Aufidius, like the Tribunes 
then, knows how to render its fulfilment impossible. He hears a word of insult, 
the same that he heard then—‘traitor.’ It is followed by a sneer at the most 
sacred tears he ever shed, and a lying description of their effect on the bystanders; 
and his pride and his loathing of falsehood and meanness explode, as before, in 
furious speech. . . . As he turns on Aufidius the conspirators rush upon him, 
and in a moment, before the vision of his glory has faded from his brain, he lies 
dead. The instantaneous cessation of enormous energy (which is like nothing 
else in Shakespeare) strikes us with awe, but not with pity. 

gs. a full third part] For other examples of this transposition of an adverbial 
expression see ABBOTT, § 420. Compare I, i, 37. 


574 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. vi. 
Then fhame to th’Romaines. And we heere deliuer 98 
Subfcrib’d by’th’Confuls, and Patricians, 
Together with the Seale a’th Senat, what 100 
We haue compounded on. 
Auf. Read it not Noble Lords, ; 
But tell the Traitor in the higheft degree 
He hath abus’d your Powers. 
Corio. Traitor? How now ? 105 
Auf. I Traitor, Martius. 
Corio. Martius? 
Auf. I Martius, Caius Martius : Do’ft thou thinke 
Ile grace thee with that Robbery, thy {tolne name 
Coriolanus in Cortoles ? 110 
You Lords and Heads a’th’State,perfidioufly 
He ha’s betray’d your bufineffe and giuen vp 
For certaine drops ofSalt,your City Rome : 
I fay your City to his Wife and Mother, 
Breaking his Oath and Refolution, like 115 


98. heere] heare Fo. 110. Corioles}] Ktly. Coriolus Ff, 


Rowe. 


100. a’th] o’th’ F,, Rowe,+, Wh. i. 
o’the Cap. et cet. 

103. Traitor] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Coll. i, ii, Del. Wh. i, Craig. traitor! 
Wh. ii. traitor, Theob. et cet. 

higheft] high’st Dyce ii, Huds. 
Glo. Cla. Words. Wh. ii. 

105. Traitor? How now?] Traitor! 
How now? Traitor!—How now!— 
Rowe et cet. (subs.). 


107. Martius?] Martius'— Rowe, 


Corioli Pope et cet. 

111. Heads] Head F;F,, Rowe, Pope, 

Han. 

ath’ oth’ Fy, Rowe,+. o’the 
Cap. Sta. Huds. Glo. Cla. Words. 
of the Var. ’73 et cet. 

114, 115. I...City...Refolution,| I... 
City,...Resolution Rowe, Pope, Han. 
I...City,...Resolution, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Coll. i, ii, Cam.+, Craig, Neils. 
(I...City)...Resolution, Cap. et cet. 


Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 


103. in the highest degree] Detrus: It may appear doubtful whether ‘in the 
highest degree’ is to be connected with ‘traitor’ or with ‘he hath abus’d.’ The 
first.alternative is the more natural; thus likewise ‘perjury in the highest degree’ 
appears in Richard III: V, iii, 196—W. A. Wricut: In other passages in which 
this phrase occurs it appears to be used in a technical and almost legal sense 
as a qualification to a criminal charge. For instance, in Twelfth Night, I, v, 61, 
‘Misprision in the highest degree.’ And Richard III: V, iii, 106. 

110. Coriolanus in Corioles] WurreLaw: ‘And if not there, how in any Volscian 
city—how here in Antium?’ For (unless in this line) we have no indication, and it is 
unlikely that Shakespeare intended the scene (as some editors have thought) 
to be laid in Corioli—Scamipr (Coriolanus): Does ‘in Corioles’ belong with ‘stolen’ 
or with ‘grace’? In the latter the locality of this scene should not be Antium. 
[See notes at beginning of this scene.—Ep.| 

113. drops of Salt] MAtone: For certain tears. So in King Lear, ‘Why this 
would make a man, a man of salt,’ [IV, vi, t99].—W. A. Wricut: Compare also, 


Sy ey, oe ee 


en ee ae a ee 


uP 


a 


ACT V, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 575 


A twift of rotten Silke, neuer admitting 116 
Counfaile a’th’warre : But at his Nurfes teares 
He whin’d and roar’d away your Victory, 
That Pages blufh’d at him, and men of heart 
Look’d wond’ring each at others. 120 
Corio. Hear’{t thou Mars ? 
Auf. Name not the God, thou boy of Teares. 
Corto. Ha? 
Aufid. No more. 
Corio. Meafureleffe Lyar, thou haft made my heart 125 
Too great for what containes it. Boy? Oh Slaue, 
117. @th’| oth’ F,, Rowe,+ (—Var. 120. each at others] Ff, Knt i. at 
*73), Wh. i. o’the Cap. et cet. each other Var. ’73. each at other 


120. wond’ring] Ff, Rowe,+, Wh. ii, Rowe et cet. 
Neils. wondering Var. ’73 et cet. 


‘Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled 
eyes,’ Hamlet, I, ii, 154. 

120. each at others] W. A. WricuT: If this be the true reading we must either 
suppose the sentence to be interrupted by Coriolanus, ‘Look’d wondering each at 
others’; or we must regard ‘others’ as equivalent to ‘the others,’ ‘each’ being 
used, as it frequently is, of every individual of an indefinite number. [W. S. 
Walker gives this as an example of the interpolation of a final s in many instances 
in the Folio; see Crit., i, Art. xxxviii.] I 

124. Aufid. No more] Tyrwuitt: This should rather be given to the first 
Lord. It was not the business of Aufidius to put a stop to the altercation.— 
Monck Mason (Comments, etc., p. 48): It appears to me that by these words 
Aufidius does not mean to put a stop to the altercation, but to tell Coriolanus 
that he was no more than a ‘boy of tears. —Dyce (ed. ii.): That is, No more than 
a boy of tears. But perhaps Tyrwhitt is right in supposing that these words 
belonged to the First Lord, and in understanding them to mean Have done.— 
C. & M. CowbDEN CLARKE (Shakespeare): Perhaps these words are meant to express, 
‘name the god Mars no more.’ But we believe [Mason’s explanation rather than 
Tyrwhitt’s] to be the right one-—Rotre: Probably to be explained as equivalent to, 
no more than a boy of tears.—Scumipt (Coriolanus): This may mean either, enough, 
or speak no further! Whereby Aufidius cuts short the speech of Coriolanus, and 
also wishes at the same time to give a signal to the conspirators; or, no more than 
a boy of tears—Casr (Arden Sh.): The choice is supposed to be between giving 
this, with Tyrwhitt, to the First Lord in order to take it naturally as, Have done, 
and to understand it from Aufidius as, No more than a boy of tears. But why 
could not Aufidius bid Coriolanus be silent?p—[Mason’s interpretation is accepted 
by the majority of commentators.—Ep.] 

125, 126. my heart... what containes it] Dercuron: That is, your words 
have made my heart swell till it threatens to burst my breast. Compare Ant. & 
Cleo., I, i, 6-8, ‘his captain’s heart Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst 
The buckles on his breast.’ [Also Ibid., IV, xiv, 40, 41, ‘Heart once be stronger 
than thy continent, Crack thy frail case.—CasE compares also Kyd, Soliman 


576 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT v, Sc. vi. 
Pardon me Lords, ’tis the firft time that euer 127 
I was forc’d to fcoul’d. Your iudgments my graue Lords 
Muft giue this Curre the Lye : and his owne Notion, 
Who weares my ftripes impreft vpon him, that 130 
Mutt beare my beating to his Graue, fhall ioyne 
To thruft the Lye vnto him. 

1 Lord. Peace both,and heare me f{peake. 

Corio. Cut me to peeces Volces men and Lads, 


Staine all your edges on me. Boy, falfe Hound : 135 
127,128. that euer I was] that ever I’m 134. Volces] Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Mal. 

Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. I ever was Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt i. Volctes F;. 

Han. Bell. Volfcies F,, Rowe. Volscians Pope,+. 
128. fcoul’d| [could F3F,. Volcians Cap. Volsces Coll. et cet. 
134. to] too F.. 135. on] in Rowe,-+, Varr. Ran. 


and Perseda, II, i, 85, ‘I must unclaspe me or my heart will breake,’ remarking, 
‘But the idea is a common one.’—Ep.] 

126. Boy? Oh Slaue] VERPLANCK: It is but justice to Thomson to observe 
that he has here [in his Tragedy of Coriolanus] a thought worthy of Shakespeare, 
and embodied in language not unworthy to be his. Instead of the hero’s being 
exhibited as provoked to violent language by an insult personal to himself, he 
is made to fire up by Tullus’s invective against his countrymen: 


‘—the Roman nobles 

The seed of outlaws and of Robbers. 

Cor. The seed of gods!—’Tis not for thee vain boaster— 
By her victorious sword, to talk of Rome 
But with respect and awful veneration. 
Whate’er her blots, whate’er her bloody factions, 
There is more virtue in a single year 
Of Roman story, than your Volscian annals 
Can boast through all your creeping dark duration.’ 


This passage was retained by John Kemble in his revision of the stage edition, 
and as he declaimed the lines none but the most exclusive Shakespearian could 
wish them away. 

127,128. ’tis the first time ... to scoul’d] Case (Arden Sh.): In this he is 
much mistaken. [Is it not, however, a remarkably natural touch? One of a 
proud, imperious character rarely acknowledges more than that he is justifiably 
provoked. Coriolanus here terms the most opprobrious names he could utter 
merely ‘scolding.’—Ep.] 

128. I was] WALKER (Cyrit., ii, 204) quotes this as an example where, for the 
sake of the metre, ‘I was’ is to be pronounced as one syllable. Walker himself 
admits that he is not quite certain in what manner the contraction was 
affected —Eb. 

129. Notion] W. A. Wricut: That is, understanding, sense. Compare Macbeth, 
ITI, i, 83, ‘And all things else that might To half a soul and to a notion crazed Say 
“Thus did Banquo.”’ And Lear, I, iv, 248, ‘Either his notion weakens, his dis- 
cernings are lethargied.’ 


ACT V, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS S77 


If you haue writ your Annales true, ’tis there, 136 
That like an Eagle in a Doue-coat, I 
Flatter’d your Volcians in Corioles. 
Alone I did it, Boy. 

Auf. Why Noble Lords, 140 
Will you be put in minde of his blinde Fortune, 
Which was your fhame, by this vnholy Braggart ? 


’Fore your owne eyes, and eares ? 143 
138. Flaiter’d] F,, Schmidt. Flutter’d Sing. ii, Ktly. Volfcians F, et cet. 
F,F, et cet. 138. Corioles}] Ktly, Schmidt. Cori- 

Volcians} Cap. Mal. Knt i. olus Ff, Rowe. Corioli Pope et cet. 
Volfctes Rowe. Volces Var. 778, ’8s, 139. it, Boy.|] it. Boyl— Rowe,+. 
Ran. Steev. Var. ’21, Sing i. voices it. Boy! Cap. et seq. 

Var. ’03, 713, Hal. Volsces Coll. ii, 142. Braggart?] braggart, Rowe et seq. 


137, 138. That like an Eagle... in Corioles] M. SHertock (p. 16): A more 
just, a more noble, a more apposite comparision cannot be conceived. A lion 
among heifers, a wolf among sheep; this has been said a thousand times. An 
eagle among doves presents a new image. But it is more than an eagle among 
doves; it is an eagle among doves in a dove-house, where the disturbance and the 
terror are far greater. This image is here a characteristic stroke, it is a sentiment, 
and a sentiment which can only suit that particular moment. It is to the valiant, 
the susceptible, the proud Coriolanus that Tullus gives an affront which touches 
him in the most delicate point—his military glory. Coriolanus makes a comparison 
without knowing it; nor does the reader, who also takes fire, perceive it any more 
than he. He only sees one line of character, which completely discovers to him 
the whole Coriolanus, and a sublime sentiment, which transports his soul... . 
The brilliant, the flowery, the light Voltaire has introduced a fashion, as it were, 
of reading without attention. This magician has infused into our minds a most 
pernicious idleness, and a beauty which is not superficial passes unobserved. One 
of the first lords of the city speaks to Coriolanus. Coriolanus, transported with 
tage, does not hear him; this is one beauty; he makes a violent apostrophe to the 
soldiers; this is another beauty; and with the same fierceness, the same fury he 
makes, at the same instant, another apostrophe to Tullus; and these three beauties, 
founded in nature and in the particular character of Coriolanus, will never be 
perceived by those who are accustomed to read superficially —WALKER (Crit., ii, 
167) places these lines among his examples of apparent rhymes in Shakespeare, 
remarking that it is only when the modern reading Corioli is used that there is any 
suggestion of rhyme. See Text. Notes.—Ep. 

138. Flatter’d] Scummr (Coriolanus): This is Shakespeare’s own word (com- 
pare the German flattern), not the modern word fluttered, the correction of later 
editors.—_W. A. WRIGHT, commenting on the foregoing, says: There is also the 
Dutch fladderen, and the Swedish fladra. But in the absence of better evidence 
for the existence of the form ‘flatter’d’ than the spelling of the first and second 
folios I have preferred the more usual form which is found as early as Spenser, and 
has the support of the analogous form ‘floteren,’ which occurs in the fourteenth 
century. 

138. in Corioles] See note by RoxFe on locality of this scene, ante. 


HL 


578 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


All Confp. Let him dye for’t. 
Teare him to peeces,do it prefently - 145 


All People. 


[ACT V, SC. vi. 


He kill’d mySonne, my daughter, he kill’d my Cofine 


Marcus, he kill’d my Father. 


2 Lord. Peace hoe : no outrage, peace : 
The man is Noble,and his Fame folds in 
This Orbe o’th’earth : His laft offences to vs 150 
Shall haue Iudicious hearing. Stand Auffidius, 


And trouble not the peace. 


144. [Several speaking at once. Mal. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. 

146, 147. He...Father.| 1. Cit. He 
kill’d my son. 2. Cit. My daughter. 3. 


Cit. Kill’d my cousin. 4. Cit. He 

kill’d my father. Han. As prose Cap. 

et seq. (except Ktly). Om. Bell. 
he...Marcus] kil’d my 


cousin, Pope,+ (—Var. ’73). 


E52 


147. [The Crowd speak promiscu- 
ously. Theob.+ (—Han.), Varr. Ran. 
Speaking promiscuously. Mal. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. 

149. Fame] frame Pope ii. 

150. o’th’| Rowe,+, Wh. i. o’the 
Cap. et cet. 

offences] offence Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Sta. Hal. Ktly. 


145. All People] Cotter (Notes & Emendations, p. 364): Where ‘All People’ 
is the prefix to various exclamations by different citizens against Coriolanus the 
figures 1, 2, 3, 4 are placed in manuscript in the margin to show that the speeches, 
‘He killed my son—my daughter—he killed my cousin Marcus—he killed my 
father’ were uttered by different people, whose families Coriolanus was charged 
with having thinned. 

145. do it presently] R. G. Waite: That is, instantly, at the present moment. 
The change in the meaning of this word—which, used always as it is here in 
Shakespeare’s day, is now universally used to mean a time between on the instant 
and by and by—seems to indicate that procrastination is inherent in man. 

149, 150. his Fame folds in This Orbe o’th’earth] JoHNSON: His fame over- 
spreads the world.—STEEVENS: So before, ‘The fires i’th’ lowest hell, fold in the 
people,’ [III, iii, 89]. 

151. Iudicious hearing] StEEvENS: Perhaps ‘judicious,’ in the present instance, 
signifies judicial; such a hearing as is allowed to criminals in courts of judicature. 
Thus imperious is used by our author for imperial—Scumapt (Coriolanus): 
Rightly explained by Steevens as judicial. In its modern and usual sense the 
word would here be quite superfluous. [In his Lexicon Schmidt gives the present 
as the only passage wherein ‘judicious’ is used in this sense.-—Ep.]—MuRRAY 
(N.E. D., s. v. 3 = Judicial) quotes the present line; also Lear, ITI, iv, 76, ‘Judi- 
cious punishment, ’twas this flesh begot Those Pelicane Daughters,’ remarking 
that in both these passages ‘the actual sense is doubtful.’ As manifest examples 
of the word in the sense judicial Murray gives: 1611 Coryat Crudities 270, ‘Their 
courts of justice their judicious proceedings.’ 1632. J. Hayward, tr. Biondi’s 
Eromena 178, ‘To proceede against him by judicious way.’—WuITELAW: Wise 
and careful. Steevens explains it as judicial; but Shakespeare does not so use it 
elsewhere.—CasE (Arden Sh.): Mr Hart considered the meaning here to be ‘of 
good judgment, discerning, rational, fair,’ and referred to Ben Jonson, A pologetical 
Dialogue appended to The Poetaster, near the end, ‘Where, if I prove the pleasure 


ACT V, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 579 


Corto. O that I had him, with fix Auffidiuffesor more: 153 
His Tribe, to vfe my lawfullSword. 
Auf. Infolent Villaine. 155 
AllCon/p. Kill, kill, kill kill, kill him. 
Draw both the Conjpirators, and kils Martius, who 


falles, Auffidius fiands on him. 158 
152-155. Lines end: him...Tribe... and the Conspirators... Cap. et cet. 
Villaine Pope et seq. 157. kils] kill F, et seq. 
153. Auffidiuffes] A ufidius’s Rowe,+. Martius] Coriolanus Mal. et 
Aufiduses Cap. et cet. seq. 
157- Draw... Confpirators...] The 158. Auffidius] and Auffidius F,, 


Conspirators all draw... Rowe,+. Both Rowe et seq. 
the Conspirators... Neils. Aufidius, 


but of one, So he judicious be, he shall be alone A theatre unto me.’ But the 
fact that judicious has evidently its modern sense here, being applied to a critical 
spectator, is no evidence for the same sense in a different context. [The majority 
are in favour of Steevens’s interpretation.—Ep.] 

153. O that I had him . . . or more] WHITELAW: Coriolanus ends, as he began, 
with intemperate speech, which would ‘take from Aufidius a great part of blame’ 
had we not overheard him plotting the murder of the Roman in cold blood. It 
is to be noticed how our admiration of the noble side of the character of Coriolanus, 
on which depends the tragic interest of his death, is excited to the utmost by the 
contrast between him and Aufidius, strongly marked throughout the play, most 
strongly here. 

156. Kill, kill, . . . kill him] Case (Arden Sh.): Compare Lear, IV, vi, ror, 
“And when I have stolen upon those sons-in-law, Then kill, kill, kill, kill kill, kill? 
Cotgrave has: ‘A mort,@ mort: Kill, kill; the cry of bloudie souldiors persuing their 
fearefull enemies unto death.’ 

157. Draw both the Conspirators] CoriieR (Notes & Emendations, p. 364): 
We have already seen Aufidius instructing three Conspirators. Perhaps in the 
economy of our old stage only two were so employed at the time the hero was 
actually struck, and that the actor, who had played the third Conspirator in the 
early part of this scene, had other duties to perform in the busy last scene of the 
drama. 

157. kils Martius] MAcCALLum (p. 626): It is not asa martyr to retrieved patri- 
otism that Coriolanus perishes, but as the victim of his own passion. In truth, 
the victory he won over himself under the influence of his mother, though real, 
is very incomplete. His piety to the hearth saves him from the superlative infamy 
of destroying his country, which is something, and even a good deal; but it is not 
everything; and beyond that it has no result, public or personal. On the contrary, 
Coriolanus’ isolated and but partly justified act of clemency receives its comment 
from the motives that induced it, the troth-breach that accompanied it, and the 
rage in which he passed away. If, like his son with the butterfly, he did grasp 
honour at the close, it was disfigured by his rude handling. But at least he never 
belies his own great, though mixed, nature, and it is fitting that his death, needless 
but heroic, should have its cause in his nature and be such as his nature would 
select. Indeed, it is both his nemesis and his guerdon. For he would not be a 


580 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. Vi. 


Lords. Hold, hold, hold, hold. 
Auf. My Noble Mafters,heare me fpeake. 160 
1.Lord. O Tullus. 
2.Lord. Thou haft done a deed, whereat 
Valour will weepe. 
3.Lord. Tread not vpon him Matters, all be quiet, 


Put vp your Swords. 165 
Auf. My Lords, 

When you fhall know (as in this Rage 167 
160. Majters] Lords Rowe, Pope, Han. 164. him Mafters, all| him—Masters 
161-165. Om. Bell. all, Rowe+ (—Var. 773). him, mas- 
162, 163. Thou...weepe] As one line ters; all Schmidt, Cla. him—Masters 

Steev. et seq. (except Sta.). all, Cap. et cet. 

162. Thou haft| Thowst Dyce ii, 166, 167. My Lords...Rage] As one 

Huds. ii, Words. line Pope et seq. 


Roman, he could not be a Volsce; what part could he have played in the years to 
come? Perhaps Shakespeare read in Philemon Holland’s rendering the alter- 
native account that Livy gives of the final scene: ‘I find in Fabius, a most ancient 
writer, that he [Coriolanus] lived untill he was an old man: who repeateth this 
of him: that oftentimes in his latter daies he used to utter this speech: A heavie 
case and most wretched, for an aged man to live banisht.’? At all events some such 
feeling as his regrets in this variant tradition suggest makes us prefer the version 
that Plutarch followed and that Shakespeare adapted. Coriolanus deserves to 
be spared the woes that the future has in store. As it is, he falls in the fullness of 
his power, inspired by great memories to greater audacity, and, no doubt, elated 
at the thought of challenging and outbraving death, when death is sure to win.— 
STANLEY Woop: Poetic justice requires that Coriolanus should die in order to 
make atonement for the wrongs he has committed in his life. His death has been 
more than once foreshadowed, by himself and by Aufidius. Our remaining interest 
is in the circumstances and in the manner of his death, and this we shall find to 
be such that when his mother hears of it she shall still hear nothing of him but 
what was like him formerly. His physical bravery remains with him to the last, 
and as he dies at the hands of the Volscian conspirators it seems to fall as a shroud 
around him. 

162, 163. Thou hast... will weepe] W. S. WALKER (Criticisms, iii, 214), 
without in this case consulting the Folio text, proposes this identical arrangement 
in order to correct the modern distribution (see Text. Notes) as given by Steevens 
in his own edition, 1793, and since universally followed. Lettsom in a foot-note 
calls attention to this lapse on the part of Walker.—Ep. 

164. Tread not vpon him Masters, all be quiet,] As will be seen by reference 
to the Text. Notes, Rowe’s punctuation, slightly modified by Capell, has been 
generally accepted. Schmidt and W. A. Wright, with a change of semicolons for 
commas, follow the Ff; the latter while noting Rowe’s change adds that such is 
however needless, wherein I must beg to differ. The stage-direction, l. 157, men- 
tions specifically that Aufidius ‘stands on’ Coriolanus; the 2 Lord addresses Aufidius 
directly, the 34 Lord continues this with an admonition to Aufidius, and a general 
order to the people to be silent. 


ACT V, sc. vi.] CORIOLANUS 581 


Prouok’d by him, you cannot) the great danger 168 
Which this mans life did owe you, you’! reioyce 
That he is thus cut off. Pleafe it your Honours 170 


To call me to your Senate, Ie deliuer 
My felfe your loyall Seruant, or endure 
Your heauieft Cenfure. 
1.Lord. Beare from hence his body, 
And mourne you for him. Let him be regarded 175 
As the moft Noble Coarfe, that euer Herald 
Did follow to his Vrne. 
2.Lord. His owne impatience, 
Takes from Auffidius a great part ofblame : 
Let’s make the Beft ofit. 180 


167, 168. you...know...you] I...shew...I Han. 


168. the great danger] Apsorr (§ 457) gives several examples wherein, as 
here, an unemphatic monosyllable, ‘the,’ is allowed to stand in an emphatic place, 
and to receive an accent. 

169. did owe you] VERITY (Student’s Sh.): Literally ‘possessed for you,’ hence 
‘made you liable to.’ [GorDoN also so interprets ‘owe’ here—Ep.]—DEIcHTon: 
That is, which while this man lived was owing to you, would sooner or later have 
fallen upon you.—CaseE (Arden Sh.): Deighton puts this clearly. But for the 
irresistible attraction which obsolete meanings exert upon commentators it would 
be difficult to see why several make ‘owe’ = possess here, with the further awk- 
wardness of making ‘owe you’ = possess for you. The modern meaning is, in 
fact, rather the most frequent in Shakespeare, and occurs in this play, III, i, 292, 
‘One time will owe another.’ [Deighton is unquestionably right.—Ep.] 

176, 177. Herald Did follow to his Vrne] STEEVENS: This allusion is to a 
custom unknown, I believe, to the ancients, but observed in the public funerals 
of English princes, at the conclusion of which a herald proclaims the style of the 
deceased.—Scumipt (Coriolanus): So in Henry V: I, ii, 228, ‘Or lay these bones 
in an unworthy urn, Tombless, with no remembrance over them.’—W. A. WRIGHT: 
Compare also Hamlet, I, iv, 49, where ‘inurn’d’ is the reading of the folios, while 
the quartos have ‘interr’d.’ 

178-180. His owne impatience... the Best of it] StropFoRD BROOKE (p. 
243): These lines might serve as Coriolanus’s epitaph. Yet, Aufidius is not 
ignoble. He can see more clearly than either patrician or plebeian what is of a 
fine nature in Coriolanus. He has not been subjected as much as they to the 
worry of his pride and rage. Even when he most envies Coriolanus he can make 
a judgment of his character and career—as he does to the Lieutenant at the 
end of Act IV.—which is at once tolerant and wise, and which in itself is a most 
noble piece of poetry. It is given almost against his will, for he is as determined 
as the Tribunes were to put an end to Coriolanus: ‘When, Caius, Rome is thine, 
Thou’rt poor’st of all; then shortly thou art mine.’ He has now done this work; 
he has sated his hatred and envy, and thinks it politic to seem sorry for his fate. 
It is not true sorrow; envy has no grief; it is only to seem noble that he says, ‘My 
rage is gone, And I am struck with sorrow.’ 


582 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. vi. 


Auf. My Rage is gone, 181 
And I am ftrucke with forrow. Take him vp : 
Helpe three a’th’cheefeft Souldiers, Ile be one. 
Beate thou the Drumme that it fpeake mournfully : 
Traile your fteele Pikes. Though in thisCity hee 185 
Hath widdowed and vnchilded many a one, 
Which to this houre bewaile the Iniury, 
Yet he fhall haue a Noble Memory. Affift. 

Exeunt bearing the Body of Martius. A dead March 


Sounded. 190 
FINIS. 

183. Helpe...Souldiers,| Help.. .sol- 188. Afit.| Om. Pope,+ (—Var. 
diers; Rowe, Pope, Han. Johns. Help, ’73). As separate line Cap. et cet. 
...soldiers; Theob. et cet. 189. Martius] Coriolanus Mal. et 

a’th’| o’th’ F,, Rowe,+, Wh. i. seq. 
o’the Cap. et cet. 190. Sounded.] sounded, while they 


pass round the Stage. Coll. MS. 


181. My Rage is gone, etc.] A. C. BRADLEY (Coriolanus, p. 16): Such an emotion 
as mere disgust is out of place in a tragic close, but I confess I feel nothing but 
disgust as Aufidius speaks the last words, except some indignation with the poet 
who allowed him to speak them, and an unregenerate desire to see the head and 
body of the speaker lying on opposite sides of the stage —[T. A. Buckley, editor 
of the Oxford translation of the Ajax of Sophocles (p. 284), calls attention to the 
similarity between this speech of Aufidius and that of Ulysses over the dead body 
of Ajax: ‘I wish to help bury this dead body here, to share the labor, and omit 
nothing of all that is man’s duty to care for in honor of the noblest of mankind,’ 
ll. 1377-80.]}—E. K. CaamBers (Warwick Sh.): The closing speech is well put 
in the mouth of Aufidius, who throughout the play has been divided between envy 
and admiration of his rival. 

183. three a’th’cheefest Souldiers, Ile be one] THEOBALD: Not one of the 
three, but one to assist them; he would make the fourth man. So in the con- 
clusion of Hamlet, ‘Let four Captains Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,’ 
[V, ii, 406]. 

185. Traile your steele Pikes] J. W. Fortescue (Sh’s England, vol. i, p. 116: 
The Army): A special occasion for trailing a pike was a military funeral, a duty 
which the train-bands enjoyed immensely. The classical instance of a military 
funeral at St Paul’s is that of Sir Philip Sidney in 1586. Shakespeare must have 
witnessed more than one; and hence at the close of Coriolanus we find Aufidius 
saying over the corpse of the hero, ‘Trail your steel pikes.’ [In Lant’s plates of 
Sir Philip Sidney’s Funeral, which are reproduced accompanying this description, 
the pikes are shown reversed.—Ep.] 

188. a Noble Memory] That is, a noble memorial. See also IV, v, 73. 

189. Exeunt] Ficcs (p. 276): As the tragedies proceed in their course a change 
can be noticed coming over them, and it is Macbeth that makes the border-line 
of distinction. In Hamlet, Othello, and King Lear the conclusions are about as 


ACT V, SC. vi.] CORIOLANUS 583 


perplexing as they well may be. Everything ends in disorder and disaster; scarce 
anything is resolved on this earth, all things, even subsidiary perplexities, being 
dismissed to a further court for settlement. But in the tragedies that succeed, 
Antony & Cleopatra and Coriolanus, the ends are far more peaceful, owing to 
the fact that they fall to more of a conclusion. They are in no way so perplexed. 
In Antony & Cleopatra the judgment beyond is plainly hinted at, and so in a 
measure achieved. In Coriolanus the end is not one of perplexity, but one of rest: 
Tullus Aufidius’ words, together with something in Coriolanus that altogether 
loses our patience, make the end seem something complete in itself. 

189, 190. A dead March Sounded] CoLiiEr (Notes & Emendations, p. 365): 
We have before said that the stage-directions are little added to or altered in this 
play, but, at the very close, some words are subjoined which require notice; the 
old printed stage-direction is: Exeunt bearing the body of Martius. A dead march 
sounded; to which the following words are appended in manuscript—whiles they 
leave the stage, marching round; the dead march was, therefore, continued to be 
played until the whole procession had passed round the stage, in order doubtless 
to render the ceremonial more distinct and impressive. This, we believe, is a 
traditional practice which has ever since been continued. 


AP Ten be 


a 


APPENDIX 


THE TEXT 


Knicut (Introd., p. 147): The Tragedy of Coriolanus was first printed in the 
Folio collection of 1623. It is entered in the Stationers’ Registers of that year 
by the publishers of the folio as one of the copies ‘not formerly entered to other 
men.’ In this Folio edition it stands the first of the tragedies in the order of 
paging; but this arrangement, as in every other case, was, in all likelihood, an 
arbitrary one. The text is divided into acts and scenes, according to the modern 
editions; and the stage directions are very full and precise. [After the first caption, 
Actus Primus, Scena Prima, there are no scene divisions throughout the play.— 
Ep.] With the exception of a few obvious typographical errors, such as invari- 
ably occur even under the eye of an author when a book is printed from manu- 
script, the text is wonderfully accurate. 


Coxier (ed. i.): The Tragedy of Coriolanus is, on the whole, well printed 
for the time in the Folio of 1623; but in Act II, sc. iii. either the transcriber of 
the manuscript or the compositor must have omitted a line, which Pope supplied 
from conjecture (with the aid of North’s Plutarch), and which has ever since been 
received into the text, because it is absolutely necessary to the intelligibility of 
the passage. [See II, iii, 259.] Ism. (ed. ii.): It is printed in the folio with a 
number of evident blunders, as pointed out in our notes. 


R. G. Wurte: Coriolanus is the worst printed play in the whole First Folio. 
Every page of it is spotted with corruption. In several passages Mr Collier’s 
Folio of 1632 gives unwonted aid to conjecture in the restoration of the text; but 
even with this help some of the confusion must be abandoned as hopeless. 


CAMBRIDGE Epp.: The text [of Coriolanus] abounds with errors, due, probably, 
to the carelessness or the illegibility of the transcript from which it was printed.— 
E. K. Cuampers (Warwick Sh.: Introd.): I am inclined to think that this verdict is 
the true one [rather than Knight’s]. Certainly an editor has to admit an unusual 
number of emendations and to rearrange an unusual number of lines in this play. 


Hopson (ed. i.): The Tragedy of Coriolanus stands the second in the division 
of tragedies, as originally published: the acts are regularly marked, but not the 
scenes; the stage-directions are remarkably full and complete; while the text, 
though very well printed in the main, has perhaps a larger number of difficult 
and seemingly corrupt readings than any other in the volume. Some of these 
readings have hitherto baffled and nonplussed all the resources of editorial ingenuity 
and learning. Several of them, however, have, we think, at length been greatly 
relieved, if not entirely removed, by the help of the manuscript corrections lately 

587 


588 APPENDIX 


discovered by Mr Collier in a copy of the Second Folio, which presents a greater 
number of valuable new readings in this play than in any other where we have 
thus far consulted it. 


G. S. Gorpon (Introd., p. xviii.): The text of Coriolanus has a bad name. It is 
one of those texts which editors call corrupt. Their efforts to restore it, to recover 
out of the damage done by copyists and compositors the very words which Shake- 
speare wrote, have left a hundred marks on every page of the play. Their foot- 
notes bristle with improvements, and altogether there is such a twisting of lines, 
such changing of forms, such tossing of commas, such triumphing and groaning as 
obscurities yield or win the day, that an ordinary reader begins to wonder if the 
wars of the Volces have not strayed into the margin among the notes. It is to be 
feared that, like some other great events, this textual battle was hatched from a 
very small egg. The editors, one encouraging another, have exaggerated both their 
difficulties and their exploits. Much less has been done to improve the text than 
their foot-notes give out, and much less was needed than has been done. They 
found the play abrupt and irregular, full of fierce rapidities of speech and cultural 
dissonance of metre. They have left it, after two centuries of tidying, not yet quite 
neat, but neater and tidier certainly than it ever left its author’s hands. They have 
been indeed ‘too good for it.? They scotched it and notched it. They have put a 
hook into the ‘horn and noise of the monster’ and sent him into the world tame. 
Now this may be to improve the play, but it is not to correct it. Editors have 
assumed too readily that they were correcting errors when they were only making 
a difficult play more readable. The play is rough; but it was not meant to be 
smooth. It is difficult; but it was not meant to be easy. And it is certainly not 
corrupt. A corrupt text should contain corrupt passages. But there are only 
three such passages in the play—I, iii, 46; I, ix, 59, 60; II, iii, 239—and the last 
of these is a slip. 


S. Ler (Jefferson Press Sh.: Introd., p. 9): The Folio text of Coriolanus is excep- 
tionally corrupt. The ‘copy’ was obviously ill-written, although, from the fulness 
of the stage-directions, it may be inferred that it was a transcript which belonged 
to the theatrical manager. Despite the efforts of textual critics, several passages 
remain barely intelligible. 


List oF EMENDATIONS ADOPTED IN THE TEXT OF THE CAMBRIDGE EDITION 


This list does not include Stage-directions; divisions into metrical lines; mere 
punctuation, such as an! into an ?; or changes of spelling. The Four Folios are 
considered as one text. The lines are numbered according to the Text in the 
present volume. 

In the following passages— 

Theobald amends ‘scale’ to stale.—I, i, 94. 

Pope amends ‘Shooting’ to shouting. —I, i, 228. 

Theobald amends ‘vnroo’{t’ to wnroof’d.—I, i, 233. 

Rowe amends ‘ Lucius’ to Lartius—I, i, 263. 

Pope amends ‘Coriolus’ to Corioli—I, ii, 1. 

Collier amends ‘Contenning’ to contemning.—I, iii, 46. 

Johnson amends ‘you Heard of Byles’ to you herd of —Boils.—I, iv, 49. 

Theobald amends ‘Calues’ to Cato’s.—I, iv, 82. 


COLLIER'’S TRILOGY 589 


Pope amends ‘Antients’ to Antiates.—I, vi, 66. 

Steevens amends ‘Querture’ to covertwre—I, ix, 50. 

Theobald amends ‘beesome’ to bisson.—II, i, 65. 

Hanmer amends ‘teach’ to touch.—II, i, 289. 

Cam. Edd. amend ‘I, but . . .’ to Ay, but not.—II, iii, 73. 

Malone (Steevens) amends ‘Wooluish tongue’ to woolvish toge.—II, iii, 120. 

Pope (Theobald) amends ‘O God!’ to O good.—III, i, 115. 

Rowe amends ‘Whereon’ to Where one.—III, i, 172. 

Pope amends ‘bring him in peace’ to bring him.—III, i, 306. 

Theobald amends ‘things of’ to thwartings of —III, ii, 26. 

Theobald (Warburton) amends ‘to’th’heart’ to to the herd.—III, ii, 42. 

Theobald amends ‘Through’ to throng.—III, iii, 48. 

Pope (Theobald) amends ‘Actions’ to accents. —III, iii, 75. 

Theobald amends ‘from Rome’ to for Rome.—III, iii, 139. 

Capell amends ‘haue I’ to hate J.—IV, iv, 209. 

Pope amends ‘boyld’ to broiled —IV, v, 197. 

Theobald amends ‘tame, the’ to tame z’the—IV, vi, 3. 

Rowe amends ‘comming’ to come.—IV, vi, 74. 

Pope amends ‘I pray’ to I prate.—V, iii, 52. 

Pope amends ‘hope’ to holp.—V, iii, 69. 

Theobald amends ‘change’ to charge.—V, iii, 164. 

Rowe amends ‘Vnfhoot’ to Unshout.—V, v, 6. 

{I have not included in this list Pope’s interpolation at II, iii, 259, as that is an 
addition to the text, not a textual emendation.—Ep.] 


COLLIER’S TRILOGY 


[J. P. Collier printed for distribution among his private friends in 1874 a 
treatise in three parts entitled ‘Trilogy’; it was cast in the form of Conversation 
between himself and two other fictitious characters on the subject of the MS. 
Emendations in his Folio of 1632 and the treatment accorded these corrections 
by recent editors. In his Preface he says: ‘If the asperity of the notes and criti- 
cisms of my adversaries have here and there tinged my style, or led me astray 
from the narrow line of mere vindication, I am heartily sorry for it.’ This refers 
to the sharp attacks made on him by Dyce and Singer. The many MS. corrections 
in Coriolanus form the subject of one of the Conversations, and for that reason 
alone I have thought it of interest to include this ensuing extract in the discussion 
on the text of this Tragedy.—Ep.] 

Alton. It is now more than a quarter of a century since you bought from 
Rodd, the bookseller, the corrected copy of the Folio Shakespeare dated 1632; 
and about twenty years since you published your volume of ‘Notes and Emenda- 
tions’ derived from it. Have you since had any reason to doubt their genuineness, 
or to alter your opinion of their value? 

Collier. None to doubt their genuineness, but some for altering my opinion 
as to the value of a few of the manuscript emendations. In my joy at my dis- 
covery I was here and there disposed to give some of the proposed changes an 
importance and a value which I now think does not really belong to them. 


590 | APPENDIX 


Newman. Iam not at all surprised at that: it was natural, and to be expected; 
but, surely, as to the great majority of them, and especially of those affecting the 
sense of remarkable passages in the text, you have not altered the opinion in some 
cases so emphatically expressed in your volume of ‘Notes and Emendations’ 
published in 1853. 

Collier. Certainly not. I am more than ever confirmed in my judgment as 
to the value of a good many of them, if only by the use which subsequent editors of 
Shakespeare have made of them. 

Newman. True; not a small number of the emendations have found their 
way into the text of, I think, all impressions of Shakespeare since the year 1853. 

Alion. But some of them have been most violently resisted; and all sorts of 
injurious epithets applied to them, and even to yourself personally. 

Newman. But the changes have been adopted nevertheless, so that they can 
never again be excluded; they are now admitted to be the true language of the poet. 

Collier. Seeing how my volume of ‘Notes and Emendations’ has been treated, 
some editors and would-be editors inveighing furiously, and without common 
decency, against them, and yet after all most grudgingly admitting them, I have 
sometimes thought that my better course would have been, first to print the 
changes as mere suggestions on my part, and then afterwards to produce my old 
corrected copy of the Folio 1632 in the justification. 

Newman. Or better still: if you had condescended to play the rogue, you 
might have produced, as your own, all the indisputable improvements of Shake- 
speare’s text—improvements that now are sanctioned by the approbation of 
everybody, readers or rival editors; and having thus been acknowledged as the 
most gifted speculative annotator that ever existed, you might have destroyed 
your corrected copy of the Folio 1632, and left your enemies to wonder how it had 
happened that you alone had guessed at what, beyond all cavil, was the true 
language of our great dramatist in some of his most notorious and admired 
passages. 

Alton. Such, for instance, as which? 

Newman. Well, I hardly know where to choose; but take the grand speech in 
‘Coriolanus’ (Act III, sc. i.), where the hero is furiously blaming the patricians 
for yielding to the claims of the plebeians by giving them the contents of the 
public granaries: 

‘Well, what then? 
How shall this bisson multitude digest 
The Senate’s courtesy?’ 


The words ‘bosom multiplied’ instead of bisson multitude (as the text must now 
forever stand) have puzzled every editor of Shakespeare from the time of Rowe 
to our own day; even Theobald was obliged to reprint ‘bosom multiplied’ without 
an attempted change; later endeavours, such as that of Malone, to explain ‘bosom 
multiplied’ as bosom multitudinous, have utterly failed; but the old Corrector of 
the Folio 1632 puts the passage right at once, and shows that bosom was a mis- 
print for ‘bisson’ (the old word for blind), and multiplied a misprint for ‘multi- 
tude.’ The passage can never again be printed in any other words than those 
substituted in his margin by the old Corrector of the Folio 1632. 

Alton. They certainly cannot be disputed; and you will see that Dyce (VI, 
255, edit. 1864), without hesitation, calls it ‘an excellent emendation.’ Singer, 
too, says it is ‘happy,’ and there can be no doubt about it. 


COLLIER’S TRILOGY 591 


Collier. Singer so often inserts in his text important changes of the kind with- 
out acknowledgment that his avowed consent to accept ‘bisson multitude’ is 
perhaps the more remarkable. However, we can hardly consider him in the rank 
of an independent editor. It is quite certain that ‘bosom multiplied’ will never 
again make its appearance in any impression of Shakespeare to the end of time. 

Newman. I only produce it as a short and decisive proof of, I may say, the 
inestimable value of some of the changes in the corrected Folio 1632, in answer 
to Alton’s demand for an instance. 

Alton. admit the answer; and, were it wanted, we might confirm it by another 
authority, if we may so call it. Of course you know what is entitled ‘the Globe 
Edition of the Works of Shakespeare,’ of which it is generally said that twenty or 
even thirty thousand copies have been sold; and we need not wonder at it, con- 
sidering its beauty and extraordinary cheapness: there we see ‘bisson multitude’ 
given as if it had always been Shakespeare’s text, and ‘bosom multiplied’ never 
heard of, though it had been invariably printed ‘bosom multiplied’ during the 
course of two hundred and fifty years. 

Newman. I have not till now seen, though I have heard of, the ‘Globe Shake- 
peare.’ Do they not give any information that the old reading was bosom mul- 
tiplied, and the new reading ‘bisson multitude’? 

Alton. Nothing of the sort; and it is the more surprising because they state 
in the preface that they mark by an ‘obelus’ (f) such corrections as they intro- 
duce in the text of the poet as it has been usually handed down to us. They some- 
times keep their word in this particular, but by no means always; and only two 
lines above that in which ‘bisson multitude’ occurs they very properly alter 
native to ‘motive,’ yet give no hint of the change. This looks unfair, though I 
dare say it was not meant so; but recollecting the enormous sale of ‘the Globe 
Edition,’ it was the more important that this and other emendations should be 
clearly distinguished; we could not expect them to state that ‘bisson multitude’ 
was derived from ‘Mr Collier’s corrected Folio 1632,’ but they ought to have in- 
formed the reader by the obelus that it was a new reading. 

(Part iii, p. 11) Newman. There are many trifling points adverted to by various 
editors that might be passed over entirely or, at all events, dismissed summarily. 
Dyce has no fewer than 257 notes upon this drama, occupying nearly forty closely 
printed pages, at least two-thirds of which might have been advantageously 
omitted; and why are we to waste time upon them? 

Collier. And many of them are beyond the pale of our inquiry; we ought to 
limit ourselves to those notes only which illustrate the manner in, and the extent 
to, which he, in particular, has been indebted to the old Corrector of my Folio 1632. 

Newman. There are scores of places in his notes on ‘Coriolanus’ where Dyce 
has been compelled to mention and quote that surprising and, to many, unwelcome 
volume. 

Alton. And of not a few of those we need say nothing, but, on the other hand, 
there are nearly twenty places in which he has most unwillingly been driven to 
admit his obligations to the old Corrector, having actually derived his text from 
him, and from him only. In all those instances, and on that authority merely, he 
has made his edition different from any that preceded it, excepting always your own. 

Newman. How often does he not say ‘I here give the text of Mr Collier’s 
MS. Corrector’—‘So Mr Collier’s MS. Corrector’—‘I adopt the reading of Mr 
Collier’s MS. Corrector’—‘This is the excellent emendation of Mr Collier’s MS. 
Corrector,’ etc. 


592 APPENDIX 


Collier. Besides the numerous places where he couples the old Corrector with 
Hanmer, Mason, Ritson, Capell, and others, always taking care to put the Cor- 
rector last, as if in truth they had all preceded him and he was merely a follower. 
This is a course unworthy of Dyce, who had previously admitted, incautiously 
perhaps, that the MS. Corrector had ‘lived long before’ Pope, Theobald, Capell, 
or any of the modern commentators. 

Alton. Dismissing that really trifling matter, let us look at the first emenda- 
tion, of any importance, that he derived from your corrected folio. 

Collier. Just turn to Act I, sc. iii, and to the words ‘at Grecian swords con- 
temning.’ So I printed it conjecturally in my first edition of 1844, but Dyce, in 
his first edition of 1857, at once refused ‘contemning’ and printed contending from 
the Second Folio, quoting in his support a writer in ‘Blackwood’s Magazine.’ But 
what did he do in his second edition of 1864? He saw that I persevered in favour 
of ‘contemning,’ and that it was the emendation of the old Corrector of my Folio 
1632, and on that authority alone, in his own teeth and in spite of Blackwood, he 
adopted ‘contemning,’ adding, fairly enough, the real source of the emendation. 

Newman. A remarkable instance of his absolute reliance upon that book which 
has been the source of so many other improvements. 

Alton. But you had preferred ‘contemning’ ten years before you discovered 
it in your contemned and despised corrected folio, 1632. Now it must be the 
text as long as Shakespeare is admired and reprinted; even the Globe Shakespeare 
adopts the word, tho’ as usual, and consistently with its plan perhaps, it gives no 
notice of the improvement, or of the cause of it. 

Collier. In the next scene we have a strong proof of Dyce’s irresolution; he 
believed that 

‘Unheard of boils and plagues 
Plaster you o’er’ 


was what the poet might have written, and yet Dyce dared not remove the cor- 
ruption, though censuring Singer for declaring that it was ‘very improbable.’ 

Alton. What say you to the expression ‘To the pot, I warrant him’? 

Collier. I admit that I was wrong in printing ‘to the port’; for I have since 
found many good authorities for the vulgarism. Look at this from B. R.’s 
(Barnabe Rich?) ‘There is no remedy that one of you both must to the pot, 
either the mayster or the man’; and in G. Whetstone’s ‘Rock of Regard,’ 1576, 
‘Their enemies soe did flie, or go to pott.’ Dyce is right there. 

Newman. It was your oversight; but in the passage ‘Thou art lost Marcius,’ 
Dyce says that ‘lost,’ instead of left, was an emendation by Mr Grant White, when 
he might have seen it with a note in your edition of 1844. 

Collier. It is a trifle of no moment; and Dyce gives me credit for ‘More than 
thy fame I envy,’ in the eighth scene, and for ‘coverture for the wars’ instead of 
overture; but they are both in the Corr. Fo. 1632. 

Newman. ‘Then this brings us to Act II, sc. i, where in the speech of Menenius 
we meet with some singular corruptions, and particularly the important word 
first for thirst—‘the thirst complaint.’ 

Collier. For this correction I would willingly rely upon the common sense of 
any reader; it is a misprint that, in truth, corrects itself. What can be the objec- 
tion to these words from the mouth of the merry old man, descriptive of his own 
character: ‘I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that loves a cup of 
hot wine, with not a drop of allaying Tyber in’t, and to be something imperfect 


COLLIER’S TRILOGY 593 


in favouring the thirst complaint.’ Only substitute first for ‘thirst’ and what 
nonsense is made of it. The words ‘thirst’ and first were so easily misheard, and 
therefore misprinted; ‘a-first’ for a-thirst is a very old corruption in the ballad 
of ‘The Friar and the Boy,’ and Mr Wright, the editor of a reprint of it in 1836, 
quotes various instances in which a-first is put for ‘a-thirst’; while in Lazarus 
Piot’s ‘Silvayn’s Orator,’ 1596, containing the speech of the Jew on the pound of 
flesh, the word ‘thriftie’ is misprinted thirstie—‘Wherewith the father being dis- 
pleased disinheriteth the thirstie son of his patrimonie’ (p. 202). Nothing could 
be more likely than that ‘thirst’ should be misprinted in various ways; and in 
Tarlton’s ‘Tragical Discourses,’ 1567, Fo. 135, he speaks of ‘glutting the lascivious 
thrust of this ravynous apostat,’ viz., the monk to whom the story relates. 

Alton. Surely we may dispense with other proofs not merely because those 
you have brought forward are so convincing, but because the error is so self- 
evident. The word ‘bisson,’ which occurs in the same speech, and afterwards in 
a more remarkable passage, I see is spelt ‘blisson’ by your favourite translator 
Holland, on p. 334, of his ‘Livy,’ where he tells us that Appius Claudius, the Censor, 
was surnamed Cezcus, that is, blisson or blind. 

Collier. That, I apprehend, is merely an error of the press in a book that has 
very few blemishes of the kind. Your mention of Holland and his ‘Livy’ reminds 
me of a mistake I made in the next speech of Menenius, where I said, in my last 
edition, that ‘dismiss the controversy bleeding’ ought to be pleading. I was wrong; 
the expression was almost technical in Shakespeare’s day in reference to unfinished 
lawsuits. 

Newman. How do you establish that? It has always seemed to me that to 
‘dismiss the controversy pleading’ was the exact meaning of the poet. 

Collier. However unwilling I may be, I must convict myself of being wrong 
there. In Dr Wilson’s ‘Arte of Logicke,’ first printed in 1551, we read as follows: 
‘The Judges seeing the matter so doubtfull and so hard to determine for either 
partie, fearing to doe amisse, left the matter raw,’ 7. e., ‘bleeding,’ as in Shake- 
speare. The passage I have in my mind from Holland’s ‘Livy’ runs thus when a 
lawsuit was undecided: ‘for all now lieth bleeding, and in extreame hazard.’ 
Dyce does not say I was mistaken, he only observes that ‘Mr Collier’s MS. Cor- 
rector substitutes pleading.’ He had no authority on the point or he would cer- 
tainly have adduced it. I only want to be just and to correct myself as well as 
other people. As to ‘the thirst complaint’ there cannot be a doubt. 

Alton. So I say of ‘empyric phisique,’ often spelt so of old, while the com- 
positor could make nothing of it but emperickquitique. It converts pure nonsense 
into a very plain meaning. 

Newman. Next we come to ‘the napless vesture of humility,’ printed in the 
folios ‘Naples vesture of humility,’ as if it had been brought from Naples to be 
worn in Rome, and regarding which, and Mr Dyce’s droll blunder in his edition 
of ‘Middleton’ (IV, 425), we have perhaps already said enough. 

Alion. Which may, however, properly introduce us to the ‘woolvish tongue,’ as 
it stands in the First Folio, while in the Second, tongue is altered to gowne. What 
infinite trouble these two words ‘woolvish tongue’ have given the commentators! 
There can be no doubt, however, that tongue must be read togue or toge, 7. e., 
toga; but what could they make of ‘woolvish’? 

Collier. Johnson tells us that it means hirsute, and Steevens says a great deal 
about wolf in sheep’s clothing. Dyce did not know what to do with the word, 
and in his first edition of 1857 simply reprinted wolvish, although in 1853 my 

38 


504 APPENDIX 


volume of ‘Notes and Emendations,’ founded upon the Corr. Fo. 1632, had offered 
him the admirable word ‘woolless,’ in entire consistency with ‘napless,’ in an earlier 
part of the tragedy. In 1857 he could not bring himself to adopt ‘“woolless’ on the 
unwelcome authority of the old Corrector, and was content with wolvish, though 
everybody but himself saw it was wrong. 

Newman. That was four years after your Vol. of ‘Notes and Emendations’ 
came out. What did Dyce do in 1864, when his second edition appeared? 

Collier. In the meantime my second edition of 1858 had been published with 
‘woolless’ instead of wolvish, as applied to the ‘togue,’ or toga, worn by Coriolanus; 
and impartial people saw that was the very word wanted; even Dyce’s ‘afilictive 
friends’ could not dispute it; and in consequence of this defect and others, to some 
of which we have already adverted, he called in his edition of 1857, did what he 
could to stop the circulation of copies that had got out into the world, and pub- 
lished his edition of 1864. In 1864 he obliterated ‘wolvish togue,’ and substituted 
the very word he had before utterly rejected. 

Alton. Avowing fairly, however, that he was indebted for it to your old volume 
of 1632. 

Newman. He could not well do otherwise, for even his friends deserted him; and 
now, owing solely to your corrected and much abused folio, ‘woolless togue’ must 
inevitably stand as the language of Shakespeare. 

Collier. That, I take it, is quite certain. And now we may go on, without 
noticing minor points, to the scene (Act III.) where Coriolanus in his fury against 
the mob calls upon the Senators to ‘revoke their dangerous bounty,’ as the Corr. 
Fo. 1632 has it, and as the text must hereafter stand, in spite of all the poor de- 
fences of the old reading, which Dyce upholds, though the new reading only requires 
us to admit that ‘revoke’ has been misprinted awake, and ‘bounty’ lenity, two 
very easy errors with the old compositor. 

Newman. Yes, something more must be done; for ‘impotence’ must be sub- 
stituted for ignorance, where the hero urges the Senators to conceal their want of 
power. 

Alton. No very unlikely mistake we must also allow; seeing that the printer 
of 1623 could just before compose woolvish instead of ‘woolless,’ surely we may 
suppose that he was careless enough to make the other mistakes, especially when 
the corrections most aptly fall in with the whole spirit of the angry address of 
Coriolanus. 

Collier. At the same time nobody is to be blamed for adhering to the old 
text in every case where it can be fairly understood without the grossest violence 
to our language. In this part of the tragedy, possibly, the original manuscript 
was very corrupt, or the compositor of it unusually inattentive, because only a 
few lines onward he presents us with what everybody, even Dyce and his coad- 
jutors, allow to be a most egregious blunder. 

Alton. And which egregious blunder would have been preserved to the end of 
time but for the old Corrector; you allude to bosom multiplied, instead of ‘bisson 
multitude,’ the indisputable language of the poet. 

Collier. I do; everybody has seen that the old text could not be right, yet no- 
body, with all the ingenuity of all the commentators, could discover the true words 
until I found them in my old despised and maligned folio of 1632. On that 
authority I printed them in 1853, and even my bitterest opponents have ever since 
been compelled to welcome them as ‘an excellent emendation.’ 

Newman. Must it not ever appear strange, I might say unaccountable, that 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—MALONE 595 


when we see so many invaluable emendations by the old Corrector, we cannot give 
him credit for a few others not quite so palpable? 

Alton. That, to my mind, is an unanswerable logical inference. 

Collier. Irresistible. Thus, in the second scene of this very Act, is it not more 
likely that Volumnia (whose entrance, by the way, Dyce alters at the sole instance 
of the old Corrector) should impatiently address Coriolanus as ‘O, son, son, son!’ 
than as ‘O, sir, sir, sir!’? 

Alton. Unquestionably. 

Collier. And we may feel even more certain about the inserted line, 


“To brook control without the use of anger,’ 


not merely because it is found in the margin of my Folio 1632, but because common 
sense requires the addition. 

Newman. Dyce admits that ‘the passage is obscure,’ and that the additional 
line makes it clear, yet, with childish obstinacy, I must say, rejects it. As to the 
change of carriage for ‘courage’ in Act ITI, sc. i, we need here say nothing, having 
already shown the blunder into which Dyce fell regarding it when we were exam- 
ining Henry VI, Part 3. 

Collier. Dyce cannot refuse the important change in Act IV, sc. i, ‘Whose 
house, whose bed, whose meal,’ etc., simply adding ‘So Mr Collier’s MS. Cor- 
rector.’ All the rest of his notes are comparatively trifling, now adopting and 
now rejecting small improvements, and in one case absolutely recalling an emenda- 
tion he had inserted in his first edition, acting throughout upon no intelligible 
principle. 

Newman. Only remark the difficulty in which he involves himself as to ‘cheer’ 
or chair, five lines from the end of Act IV.; he owns that the text is very much cor- 
rupted, quotes various suggestions by as many editors, and ends by refusing the 
very word (only cheer instead of ‘chair’) which clears away all obscurity. 

Alton. But that word, you must remember, was contained in the odious volume 
upon the representations of which you so much and so justly rely. 

Collier. Dyce’s later notes to this tragedy merit no particular comment; he 
is generally at variance with other editors, and sometimes with himself, and resorts 
to any authorities rather than to the Corr. Fo. 1632. We may just remark, as to 
the words (Act V, sc. v.) ‘Which he did end all his,’ that nobody seems aware that 
‘end,’ in Dyce’s extracts from the Hereford Times (note to what authorities he is 
driven), means that a wheat-rick is ‘well-ended’ because the end, top, or apex of 
it is not made up, as it sometimes was, of stubble or stover, but of as good sheaves 
of corn as the whole body of the stack. 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 


MALtone in his first edition of The Chronological Order of Shakespeare’s Plays, 
which was given in the prefatory matter in vol. i. of the Variorwm of 1778, assigns 
Coriolanus to the year 1609, and thus it appears also in his own edition of 1790. 
Malone gives for this arbitrary date no reasons other than, that as the other 
plays derived from Plutarch are assignable to the years between 1607 and 1609, 
Coriolanus naturally follows Julius Cesar and Antony & Cleopatra. In his final 
revision of the list which appears in the Variorwm of 1821 Malone advances the 
date one year and assigns Coriolanus to 1610. Abandoning his former reasons 


596 APPENDIX 


for accepting 1609 as the date of composition he says: ‘Cominius, in his panegyric 
which he pronounces on Coriolanus, says: 


“He lurch’d all swords of the garland.” 


In Ben Jonson’s Silent Woman, Act V, Sc. last, we find (as Mr Steevens has ob- 
served) the same phraseology: “You have lurch’d your friends of the better half 
of the garland.” 1 formerly thought this a sneer at Shakespeare; but have lately 
met with nearly the same phrase in a pamphlet by Thomas Nashe, and suppose it 
to have been a common phrase of the time.* [See note by Malone, II, ii, 113.— 
Ep.] This play is ascertained to have been written after the publication of 
Camden’s Remaines, in 1605, by a speech of Menenius in the first Act, in which 
he endeavors to convince the seditious populace of their unreasonableness by 
the well-known apologue of the members of the body rebelling against the belly. 
This tale Shakespeare certainly found in the Life of Coriolamus as translated by 
North, and in general he has followed it as there given; but the same tale is also 
told of Adrian the Fourth by Camden in his Remaines, p. 199, under the head of 
Wise Speeches, with more particularity; and one or two of the expressions, as well 
as the enumeration of the functions by each of the members of the body, appear 
to have been taken from that book. 

In Camden the tale runs thus: “‘All the members of the body conspired against 
the stomach, as against the swallowing gulfe of all their labours; for whereas the 
eies beheld, the eares heard, the handes laboured, the feete travelled, the tongue 
spake, and all partes performed their functions; onely the stomache lay ydle and 
consumed all. Hereuppon they joyntly agreed al to forbeare their lazie and 
publike enemy. One day passed over, the second followed very tedious, but the 
third day was so grievious to them all, that they called a common counsel. The 
eyes waxed dimme, the feete could not support the body; the armes waxed lazie, 
the tongue faltered, and could not lay open the matter. Therefore they all with 
one accord desired the advice of the heart. There Reason layd open before 
them,” &c. 

The heart is called by one of the citizens, ‘‘the counsellor-heart”; and in making 
the counsellor-heart the seat of the brain or understanding, where Reason sits 
enthroned, Shakespeare has certainly followed Camden. 

The late date which I have assigned to Coriolanus derives likewise some sup- 


port from Volumnia’s exhortation to her son, whom she advises to address the 
Roman people— 


“——now humble as the ripest mulberry. 


Which cannot bear the handling.” 


In a preceding page I have observed that mulberries were not much known in 
England before the year 1609. Some few mulberry-trees, however, had been 
brought from France and planted before that period, and Shakespeare, we find, 
had seen some of the fruit in a state of maturity before he wrote Coriolanus, 


*W. A. Wricut (Clarendon Preface; Sh., p. ix.): But in Nashe there is only 
the word ‘lurch,’ which is of frequent occurrence, and the combination of this 
with ‘the garland’ by Ben Jonson seems to me to indicate that he had Shakespeare’s 
phrase in mind, whether he intended to sneer at it or not, and I am therefore 


inclined to attach to the coincidence more weight than Malone felt himself justified 
in doing. 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—HURDIS—CHALMERS 597 


Houropis (p. 38): I cannot agree with Mr Malone in ranking Timon of Athens, 
Antony and Cleopatra, and Coriolanus among the later productions of our author. 
Of Antony and Cleopatra I have already declared it to be my opinion that it was 
a very early performance, and I make no doubt but that Cortolanus was written 
soon after it. For though Dr Johnson has with great truth observed that the 
latter is a very amusing play, and embellished with great diversity of character, 
yet is it accompanied with a multitude of metrical faults almost equal in number 
to those of Antony and Cleopatra. The lines are always those of a young poet 
who is scarce a master of numbers, and are often made up in a manner which to 
a musical ear is ridiculous and disgusting. It was probably written a short time 
before Timon of Athens, since both these pieces abound in faults of the same com- 
plexion, There is in both an unskilful and sometimes a laughable confusion of 
British with Roman and Athenian customs, many anachronisms, many broken 
and ill managed lines, and a dissolute mixture of verse and prose. Add to this 
that the proper names in Coriolanus are often introduced in a manner truly awk- 
ward and bungling. It is nevertheless a performance of considerable merit. 
It has passages of true sublimity and poetical excellence; and here and there 
surprises us with a few of those delicate touches of nature by which the author 
renders himself so irresistible in his appeal to the heart. Timon of Athens takes 
place of it only as being a piece more correct in its metre and abounding more in 
observations drawn from nature. 


G. Cuaitmers (Supplemental Apology, p. 434): This Tragedy, which is said by 
Johnson to be one of the most amusing of our author’s performances, was neither 
entered in the Stationers’ Registers nor printed till the publication of the First 
Folio, in 1623. The writing of Coriolanus has been assigned, though with a hesi- 
tating tone, to the year 1610. Mr Malone seems to have proved, with some 
acuteness, indeed, that the speech of Menenius, in the first act, whereby he endeav- 
ored to convince the seditious populace of the unreasonableness of their clamours, 
on the account of the scarcity, by the apologue of the several members of the body 
rebelling against the belly, was copied from Camden’s Remains rather than from 
North’s Plutarch. Yet, this proof goes only the length of showing, that as Camden’s 
work was published in 1605, Shakspeare must have written his Coriolanus sub- 
sequent to that publication; we are still left to enquire, even admitting this proof 
in its full extent, for the particular year. 

Coriolanus opens with the entry of a company of mutinous citizens, who are 
‘all resolved rather to die than to famish.’? Caius Marcius, being deemed by 
them the chief enemy of the people, is, by a general verdict, sentenced, tumultu- 
ously, to death; the first citizen crying out: ‘Let us kill’ him; and we’ll have corn 
enough, at our ‘own price.’ Menenius, when he came to speak to the citizens, 


remarks: 
‘—__For your wants; 


Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well 
Strike at the Heaven with your staves, as lift them 
Against the Roman state: 

For the dearth, 

The Gods, not the patricians, make it.’ 


The dearth is afterwards acknowledged, in the senate-house, to be great. Now, 
the fact is, that the years 1608 and 1609 were times of great dearth; though the 


598 APPENDIX 


first was a year of greater dearth than the last.* King James, on account of the 
high prices of provisions, issued a proclamation against monopolists in 1608.f 
It is said, in Raleigh’s Remains, that two millions sterling were sent out during 
those two dear years for the importation of corn. The tragedy turns upon the 
existing dearth. And, therefore, the play was probably written in 1609, while the 
pressure was yet felt. 

Mr Malone tries, indeed, to support his own epoch of the year 1610 by saying 
that mulberry trees were not much known in England before the year 1609; Mr 
Steevens has some doubt, with regard to this position, about the mulberries. But 
the books upon horticulture, which were published during the reign of Elizabeth, 
had made the mulberry tree sufficiently familiar to our poets of every kind. Among 
several elegies on Sir Philip Sydney there is a pretty poem, by Mathew Roydon, 
which was published in The Phenix Nest, in 1503, and which speaks of— 


‘Alcides speckled poplar tree, 

The palme that monarchs do obtain, 
With love juice stain’d the Mulberie, 
The fruit that dews the poet’s braine, 
And Phillis philbert there away, 
Compar’d with myrtle and the bay.’ 


The fact, however, is that King James, in order to encourage the breeding of 
silk worms, sent circular letters all over England, in 1609, to incite the inhabitants 
to plant the mulberry tree. These letters, probably, induced Shakspeare, while he 
was writing his Coriolanus, to draw a comparison, from what was already known 
to graffers, and to poets: 


‘Now humble, as the ripest mulberry. 
That will not hold the handling.’ 


CoLERIDGE in his attempts at classification of the Plays limits these merely to 
periods without assigning any definite dates. In his earliest list, 1802, the Roman 
Plays are given under one head following Tro. & Cress. and preceding King John 
in the Fifth, or last, Epoch. In his later Classification, 1819, Coriolanus is again 
assigned to the Last Epoch, ‘when the energies of intellect in the cycle of genius 
were, though in a rich and more potentiated form, becoming predominant over 
passion and creative self-manifestation.’ In the Plays of this period Coleridge 
places Coriolanus third in order, preceded by Meas. for Meas. and Timon, and 
followed by Jul. Ces., Ant. & Cleo., and Tro. & Cress. He concludes with this 
remark: ‘Merciful, wonder-making Heaven! What a man was this Shakspere! 
Myriad-minded, indeed, he was!’ 


Drake places Coriolanus No. 31 in his list of thirty-five plays following Ant. & 
Cleo. and preceding Winter’s Tale, with the date 1609. 


Knicut: We state, unhesitatingly, that there is no internal evidence what- 
ever for the dates of any of the three Roman plays. We believe that they belong 
to the same cycle; but we would place that later in Shakspere’s life than is ordinarily 
done. Malone places them together, properly enough; but in assuming that they 


*Combrune’s Chron. Prices, p. 38. There was an insurrection, in Northamp- 
tonshire, on account of inclosures, in May, 1607. 
f Ib., 39. 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—COLLIER—WHITE 599 


were written in 1607, 1608, and 1609 his theory makes Shakspere almost absolutely 
unemployed for the last seven years of his life. We hold that his last years were 
devoted to these plays. The proof which Chalmers offers that Coriolanus was 
written in 1609 is one of the many ingenious absurdities with which he has sur- 
rounded the question of the chronological order of Shakspere’s plays. The citizens, 
he says, are resolved rather to die than to famish—they require corn cheap; there 
isadearth. He adds, very gravely, ‘Now the fact is, that the years 1608 and 1609 
were times of great dearth. . . . And therefore the play was probably written in 
1609 while the pressure was yet felt.’ We say, now the fact is, the original story 
turns upon the dearth. In North’s Plutarch we have the causes assigned ‘which 
made the extreme dearth’; and Plutarch also tells us there was great scarcity of 
corn within the city. If Shakspere found the dearth in the original story, what 
could the dearth of 1608 possibly have to do with the mode in which he drama- 
tized it? 


CoxirER: Malone supposed that Coriolanus was written in 1610; but we are 
destitute of all evidence on the point beyond what may be derived from the style 
of composition; this would certainly induce us to fix it somewhat late in the career 
of our great dramatist. 


Detius: The several passages in this play which are difficult of explanation 
are not so much so on account of misprints, although these are not lacking, as on 
account of the involved and elliptical style, which is characteristic of Shakespeare’s 
last period. And to this period, which begins about the year 1608, Coriolanus 
undoubtedly belongs; and while no definite year is furnished us by any notice 
of a representation of the tragedy during Shakespeare’s lifetime, the composition 
itself allows us to allot only an approximate date. 


Lioyp (ap. SINGER ii, p. 478): Malone points out that the Apologue of Shake- 
speare’s Menenius bears as evident traces of obligations to Camden’s Remains 
concerning Great Britain, &c., as to North’s Plutarch. If this be so, it fixes the 
date of the play at least after 1605, which is in every way probable—more so, I 
think, than that the coincidences are due to Camden’s memory of the play. 

It is with regret that I pass from the question of the date of the play with so 
unsatisfying result, but as matters stand there is no help for it. Not alone the 
excellence of the play in itself renders it desirable to fix it to a year, but from the 
subject matter of it there would be great interest and instruction in knowing pre- 
cisely the current page of contemporary history that was open before the dramatist 
when he embodied in living action this illustration of the virtues and the vices that 
are shared and contrasted in the factions of the many and the few. 


GERVINUS (p. 746): We have no certain external means of settling the date of 
Coriolanus, but the style, and a few expressions and passages which recall con- 
temporary plays, allow of a few conjectures, and these almost all combine to place 
the piece about the year 1610. 


R. G. Waite: This play first appeared in the folio of 1623; and as no mention 
of it at an earlier date is known, and it is without allusions to contemporary 
matters, the period of its production cannot be determined with any approach of 
accuracy. Its style, however, clearly shows that it is the fruit of Shakespeare’s 
later years. It was probably written after 1610. 


600 APPENDIX 


Hupson: As to the date of the writing of Coriolanus we have no external evi- 
dence whatsoever. The internal evidence of metre, diction, and temper refers it 
to the Poet’s latest period of composition. In all the qualities of style and versi- 
fication it clearly falls into the same class with The Tempest, The Winter’s Tale, 
and King Henry VIII. in being as nearly like them as the difference of the subject- 
matter would readily admit. Malone, accordingly, assigns the year 1610 as the 
probable date of the writing. We should be strongly inclined to place it some 
three or four years later, partly from the ease and texture of the workmanship 
itself, and partly from the tradition that Shakespeare continued to write for the 
stage after his retirement to Stratford. The most, however, that we can affirm 
with any great degree of confidence is that Coriolanus was written somewhere 
between 1410 and the time of the Poet’s death, which, as every reader ought to 
know, took place in April, 1616. 


FurRNIVALL and HALLiwELt-Puritirrs (New Sh. Trans., 1874, p. 367): Mr 
Halliwell—for that is still his name to Shaksperians, though he is now by law a 
Phillipps—had long promist me a Letter on the date of the Roman Plays. But 
family-business, and Stage- and Shakspere-searches, having prevented him from 
writing the letter, he was good enough to tell me last Wednesday-week, June 17, 
what he had intended to write, namely, that on comparing the different early 
editions—1579, 1595, 1603, 1612—of Sir Thomas North’s englishing of Amyot’s 
French translation of Plutarch’s Lives, to find out which of these editions Shakspere 
used for his Roman plays, he (Mr Halliwell) had noticed many small differences 
between these editions of North, and had in one case, in Cortolanus, hit on a word, 
‘ynfortunate,’ altered by the 1612 edition from the former one’s ‘vnfortunatly,’ 
which ‘vnfortunate’ was the word used by Shakspere in his Tragedy of Coriolanus. 
This was therefore primé facie evidence that Shakspere used the 1612 edition of 
North for his Coriolanus, if not for his other Roman Plays. Here are the ex- 
tracts: 

Shakspere. Coriolanus, Act V, sc. ili, ll. 94-98, Tragedies, p. 27, or 625, ed. 
Booth: 

‘Volum. Should we be silent & not speak, our Raiment 
And state of Bodies would bewray what life 
We haue led since thy Exile. Thinke with thy selfe, 
How more unfortunate then all liuing women 
Are we come hither.’ .. . 


Sir T. North’s Plutarch, 1612, p. 254: 
‘The oration of Volumnia, vnto her sonne Coriolanus.’ 

Then she spake in this sort: ‘If we held our peace (my sonne) and determined not 
to speake, the state of our poore bodies, and present sight of our raiment, would 
easily bewray to thee what life we haue led at home, since thy exile and abode 
abroad; but think now with thy selfe, how much more vnfortunate then all the 
women liuing, we are come hither,’ . 

Ed. 1603: 

‘But think now with thy selfe how much more vnfortunately then all the women 
liuing we are come hither.’ Calero: 

- 1595: 


‘But thinke now with thy selfe, how much more vnfortunately then all the 
women liuing we are come hither.’ 


a 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—FURNIVALL 601 


Ed. 1570: 


‘But thinke now with thy selfe, howe much more vnfortunately, then all the 
women liuinge we are come hether.’ 


Coupling this fact with the other that Mr Paton claims to have establisht, 
namely, that Shakspere’s own copy of the 1612 edition of North’s Plutarch, with 
his initials W. S., is now in the Greenock Library, we have a strong primé facie 
case for the use of that edition by Shakspere in his Coriolanus; for, as Dyce well 
says, this Play ‘is proved by the style to have been one of the author’s latest 
compositions.’ Now, as we know at present no other allusion or entry to fix the 
date of Coriolanus, we must all be grateful to Mr Halliwell for his discovery of 
the present one. But is the evidence anything more than priméd facie? Without 
doubt, Shakspere may have alterd the ‘vnfortunately’ of the earlier editions, to 
the happier ‘vnfortunate’ of his text, from his own instinct and ear, without 
seeing the edition of 1612, just as he altered, by ear, ‘the naughtie seede and 
cockle of insolencie and sedition’ (North, p. 229, ed. 1612) of the earlier editions 
(the 1595, at least) into 


“The cockle of Rebellion, Insolence, Sedition,’ ITI, i, 70. 
Mr Skeat tells me this. 


But if we compare the long line with ‘vnfortunately,’ with other like ones that Dr 
Abbott has collected, Shak. Gram., pp. 405-407, we may see that it is at least 
allowable. 
1. If the extra syllable is to come in the middle, the line being scanned with a 
central pause: 
How more | unfor|tunately | than all | living | women.—Cor. 
Shall I | attend | your lordship? | | at anly time | fore noon. 
M. for M., II, ii, 160; see II, iv, 141, 142. 
For end|ing thee | no sooner. | | Thou hast | nor youth | nor age. 
M. for M., III, i, 32. 
That I | am touch’d | with madness. | | Make not | impos|sible. 
Ib., V, i, sz. 
Did in | your name | receive it: | | pardon | the fault | I pray. 
Crs OL wl ho 40, 
Be gen|tle grave | unto me. | | Rather | on Nillus mud. 
A. and C., V, ii, 58. 
2. If the extra syllable is to come at the end, and the beats may run thus: 
How more | unfortunately than | all livjing wom|en.—Cor. 
Upon | our hous|es’ thatch, | whiles a | more fros|ty peop]le. 
Hen. V.:T10, vy, 24. 
Unto | a poor | but worthly gent|leman | she’s wed|ded. 
Cymb alas 
I do | beseech | you, par|don me, | I may | not show | it. 
Richelle) Vee 70s 
The monk | might be | receiv’d; | | and that | ’twas dang’ |rous for | him. 
Hen. VIII.: I, ii, 179, Shakspere. 
Anon | expect | him here; | | but if | she be | obdur|ate. 
Tt Richy Li? Hilo; 39. 


602 APPENDIX 


Neither Mr Halliwell nor I have any desire to special-plead the point, or to 
strain the evidence beyond the presumption for the late date of Coriolanus that 
it justifies. 


Professor J. R. Incram’s table of the numbers of the light and weak endings 
in the Plays (New Sh. Soc. Trans., p. 450) yields the following results: 

1. During the first three-fourths (or thereabouts) of Shakspere’s poetic life 
he used the light endings very sparingly, and the weak endings scarcely at all. 

2. The last fourth (or thereabouts) is obviously and unmistakably distinguished 
from the earlier stages by the very great increases of the number of light endings, 
and, still more, by the first appearance in any appreciable number, and afterwards 
the steady growth, of the weak endings. 

3. Hence, in any discrimination of periods which is founded on metrical con- 
sideration, this last may be called the ‘weak-ending Period.’ 

In this tabular list Coriolanus stands No. 27, with these percentages: Light 
endings, 2.34; Weak endings, 1.71; percentage of both, 4.05; following Ant. & Cleo. 
and preceding Pericles (Sh’s part); Tempest; Cymbeline, and Winter’s Tale. 


Fieay (Sk. Manual, p. 52): Cortolanus is usually dated 1609-10; I prefer 1609. 
Menenius’ fable (Act I, sc. i.) is taken from Camden’s Remaines (1605), and not 
from North’s Plutarch. The play must have been written before 1612 for this 
reason; Mr Halliwell has found that in every edition of North’s Plutarch up to 
1603 ‘unfortunately’ is printed for ‘unfortunate’ in the passage corresponding to 
Act V, sc. i, 1.98. This is an evident misprint, as it spoils the meaning. Shake- 
speare corrected it, and wrote ‘unfortunate,’ which was adopted in the 1612 edition 
of North’s Plutarch. As to Shakespeare’s own copy being the one in the Greenock 
library dated 1612, if it was so, he must have used another. He did not write 
Julius Cesar after that date. [This is, substantially, Fleay’s opinion as given in 
his Introduction to Sh. Study, published the following year, but in his Sh’s Life, 
Art, and Work issued four years later the date for this play is given as 1608, with no 
reasons or grounds for this change.—Eb.] 


BRANDES (ii, p. 231) takes exception to the use of a word being applied by 
Halliwell as a test of chronology, and says: ‘When we consider how very slight 
the deviation is, and how it was practically necessitated by the metre, we see what 
a poor criterion it is of the date of production. Moreover, precisely the opposite 
conclusion might be drawn from a comparison of North’s translation with other 
details of the play. In the fourth Act (sc. 5) we find, for example, 


“For if 
I had feared death, of all men i’ the world 
I would have ’voided thee; but in mere spite 
To be quit of those my banishers 
Stand I before thee here.” 


‘In the 1579 edition of North it stands thus: “For if I had feared death, I 
would not have come thither to have put myself in hazard, but prickt forward with 
spite.” 

In all later editions the italicised words are omitted, “with desire to be revenged” 
being substituted in their stead. According to this method a very much earlier 
date might be assumed for Coriolanus, but both arguments are equally worthless. 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—DOWDEN—WRIGHT 603 


We have, therefore, no occasion to abandon 1608 on that ground, and we have 
certainly no need to de so for the sake of a fanciful approximation of the position 
of Coriolanus to that of James at the dissolution of Parliament in 1614. 

Thus much, at any rate, can be declared with absolute certainty, that the anti- 
democractic spirit and passion of the play sprang from no momentary political 
situation, but from Shakespeare’s heart of hearts. We have watched its growth 
with the passing of years. A detestation of the mob, a positive hatred of the mass 
as mass, can be traced in the faltering efforts of his early youth. We may see its 
workings in what is undoubtedly Shakespeare’s own description of Jack Cade’s 
rebellion in the Second Part of Henry VI., and we divine it again in the conspicuous 
absence of all allusion to Magna Charta displayed in King John.’ 


DowvEN (Sh. Primer, p. 140): Coriolanus was written about 1608, as appears 
from the metrical characteristics. The light-ending test puts it next after Antony 
and Cleopatra, and it is probable that such is its actual place in the chronological 
order. 


STOKES (p. 149): We must allow for considerable change and growth of mind 
before Shakespeare would choose such a story as this, and treat it in the way he 
has treated it; that an interval should be allowed between, say, the emotional 
phases of Antony and the peculiar mental attitude of Coriolanus; and so with 
regard to minor characters, for instance, between the feeble and pompous gar- 
rulity of Polonius and the sarcastic wit and shrewd good sense of Menenius. Again, 
the fact that there is no entry of it on the Stationers’ Register, coupled with the 
circumstance that after 1609 no entry (with the single exception of Othello in 1621) 
of any of Shakespeare’s plays occurs, favours a date later than 1609; while I can- 
not but think, comparing the position of The Tempest (also late) in the arrange- 
ment of the comedies in the First Folio, with that of Coriolanus at the beginning of 
the tragedies, that this arrangement was due to the fact that each of these plays 
had been produced late in Shakespeare’s writing days. These facts, and the pecu- 
liar diction alluded to above, lead me to date the drama at least as late as 1610. 


W. A. Wricut (Clarendon Sh., p. v.): In the Register of the Stationers’ Com- 
pany for Nov. 8, 1623, Coriolanus is enumerated as one of sixteen plays of which 
copies had not been formerly entered to other men. Of the date of its composi- 
tion nothing is known. It is conjectured that it may have been written from about 
1608 to 1610, and although the evidence is not sufficiently strong for any positive 
conclusion, it appears that these limits represent with sufficient accuracy the time 
to which the play belongs, corresponding roughly to the close of the third period 
in Shakespeare’s career of authorship. Malone, in his essay on the ‘Chronological 
Order of Shakespeare’s Plays,’ assigned Coriolanus to the year 1610, but in his 
notes to the play itself he puts it to 1609. He seems to have been guided to the 
latter date by a theory that mulberries were not much known in England before 
1609, and that therefore the comparison in III, ii, 98, 99, to 


‘The ripest mulberry 
That will not hold the handling,’ 


could not have been written previously to that date. But Shakespeare was familiar 
with mulberries at least fifteen years before, as is evident by the mention of them 
in Venus and Adonis, 1103, and Midsummer Nighi’s Dream, III, i, 170; and a refer- 


604 APPENDIX 


ence to Gerarde’s Herball (1597) will shew that the mulberry-tree was well known 
in England before the end of the sixteenth century. It is quite true that in 1609 
especial attention was called to it by an attempt made by the King to encourage 
the breeding of silkworms, and ‘there were many hundred thousands of young 
Mulberrie trees brought out of France, and planted in many Shires of this land’ 
(Stow’s Annales, ed. Howes, 1615, p. 894). 

But to assume that, in consequence of this, Shakespeare wrote the line which 
has just been quoted is to infer too much; for if mulberry-trees were first planted 
in England in 1609 he would have had very little opportunity of observing how the 
fruit ripened and hung before writing his play or even before his own death seven 
years after, for the mulberry does not bear fruit till the tree is of a certain age. 
In all probability, however, he had a mulberry-tree in his own garden at New Place, 
Stratford, which he bought in 1597, whether it was the tree of which relics are still 
shewn or not. 


Rotre: We may place the date of composition of Coriolanus between 1607 
and 1610. 


STRATER (p. 174): I place Macbeth between the years 1606 to 1608, between 
Lear and Cymbeline. In the same period and directly after Macbeth I must place 
Coriolanus and Antony and Cleopatra—on external proofs of language and com- 
position, since in both pieces also there is no extant quarto, the Folio text of 1623 
being the first issue. Also there is no notice of any first performance in Shake- 
speare’s lifetime. Directly after this we must place Cortolanus, of which there is 
no external notice. Our modern poet (Freytag), who has perhaps the finest per- 
ception for technique of dramatic composition, places this tragedy very high, and 
says besides that the cumulative construction of the first scene and act is abso- 
lutely masterly. According to my own feelings Coriolanus has therein much of the 
greatness of composition of Macbeth. The commencement of elliptical and in- 
volved construction in language is manifest soon after the time of Macbeth. This 
is the last and highest point of Shakespeare’s poetical development. Directly 
after that there begins to be perceived a gradual decline of poetical craft, until in 
Troilus and Cressida and Timon of Athens the last period has already begun to 
mark clearly the ageing poet, that is, from 1608 to about 1609. 


Garnetr (Universal Review, April, 1889): We may, if we like, revert to the 
old belief that in ‘The Tempest’ Shakespeare took a formal leave of the stage, that 
his magic staff was broken along with Prospero’s, and that the wondrous book, 
drowned ‘deeper than did ever plummet sound,’ was no other than his own. A 
worthier consummation of the great magician’s career cannot be desired; and though 
‘Henry the Eighth’ was probably later than ‘The Tempest,’ being described as 
a new play in June, 1613, Fletcher’s share in it is so considerable that it hardly 
counts. One of Shakespeare’s greatest plays, however, may have been later still. 
‘Coriolanus,’ to our apprehension, manifestly reflects the feelings of a conservative 
observer of the contests between James and his refractory Parliaments. Two such 
conflicts occurred in Shakespeare’s time, in 1610 and 1614. The former date would 
at first sight seem the more probable. But a minute circumstance observed by 
Mr Halliwell suggests, though it does not quite prove, that Shakespeare read North’s 
‘Plutarch’ for this drama in the edition of 1612; and it is worthy of remark that 
he is known to have been in London in November, 1614, just at the time when a 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—BRANDES 605 


new play would begin to be rehearsed in preparation for the Christmas holidays. 
The dissolution of Parliament had taken place in June. 


BRANDES (ii, 228): Shakespeare’s mother was buried on the oth of September, 
1608. He had travelled about the country of late, playing with his company, 
from the middle of May until far into the autumn, during which period court and 
aristocracy were absent from the capital. 

In the midst of the prevailing gloom and bitterness of his spirit this fresh blow 
fell upon him, and, out of his weariness of life as his surroundings and experiences 
showed it to him, recalled this one mainstay to him—his mother. He remembered 
all she had been to him for forty-four years, and the thoughts of the man and the 
dreams of the poet were thus led to dwell upon the significance in a man’s life of 
this unique form, comparable to no other—his mother. 

Thus it was that, although his genius must follow the path it had entered upon 
and pursue it to the end, we find, in the midst of all that was low and base in his 
next work, this one sublime mother-form, the proudest and most highly wrought 
that he has drawn—Volumnia. 

The tragedy of Coriolanus was first published in 1623 in the folio edition, but 1608 
is the generally accepted date of its production, partly because a speech in Ben 
Jonson’s The Silent Woman (1609) seems to indicate a reminiscence of Coriolanus, 
and partly because many different critics concur in the opinion that its style and 
versification point to that year. 

How came this work to emerge from the depths of all the discontent, despond- 
ency, hatred of life, and contempt for humanity which went at this time to make 
up Shakespeare’s soul? He was angry and soured, and the sources of his em- 
bittered feelings are embodied in his plays, seeking outlet now under one, now under 
another form. In Troilus and Cressida it was the relation of the sexes; here it is 
social conditions and politics. 

His point of view is as personal as it well could be. Shakespeare’s aversion to 
the mob was based upon his contempt for their discrimination, but it had its deepest 
roots in the purely physical repugnance of his artist nerves to their plebeian at- 
mosphere. It was obvious in Troilus and Cressida that the irritation with public 
stupidity was at its height. He now, for the third time, finds in his Plutarch a 
subject which not only responds to the mood of the moment but also gives him 
an opportunity for portraying a notable mother; and he is irresistibly drawn to 
give his material dramatic style. 

It is the old traditional story of Coriolanus, great man and great general, who, 
in the remote days of Roman antiquity, became involved in such hopeless conflict 
with the populace of his native city, and was so roughly dealt with by them in 
return, that he was driven, in his bitterness, to reckless deeds. 

Was it Shakespeare’s intention to allude to the strained relations existing be- 
tween James and his Parliament? Does Coriolanus represent an aristocratically- 
minded poet’s side-glance at the political situation in England? I fancy it does. 
Heaven knows there was little resemblance between the amazingly craven and 
vacillating James and the haughty, resolute hero of Roman tradition, who fought 
a whole garrison single handed. Nor was it personal resemblance which sug- 
gested the comparison, but a general conception of the situation as between a 
beneficent power on the one hand and the people on the other. He regarded the 
latter wholly as a mob, and looked upon their struggle for freedom as mutiny, pure 
and simple. 


606 APPENDIX 


Garnett (Jahrbuch, 1901, p. 209): Although the main current of tradition 
respecting Shakespeare may be accepted as throwing real light on Shakespeare 
the man, it contributes hardly anything to illustrate Shakespeare the author. It 
is chiefly derived from Stratford, and but few of the people of Stratford can ever 
have seen his plays performed, nor can it be thought that First Folios were at 
any time very common among them. If the local tradition can tell us anything 
about the dramas, it must be on some point that brings these into connection with 
the poet’s native place, as in the tradition preserved by the Rev. John Ward, Vicar 
of Stratford in the latter part of the seventeenth century, that Shakespeare when 
living at New Place regularly supplied the London stage with two plays a year. 

The existence of a tradition to this effect is unquestionable. It comes to us 
from the man of all others most likely to have heard it, and least likely to have 
invented or disfigured it. But its authenticity is another matter. It is not, 
and it hardly could be, confirmed by any external testimony. The only way of 
testing it is to enquire whether it agrees with what we already know respecting 
the dramatic productiveness of Shakespeare’s latter years; and whether it does or 
does not involve any chronological impossibilities. 

As respects the first point, the tradition is entirely in harmony with a remark- 
able phenomenon attending Shakespeare’s later dramatic work which has not 
yet attracted sufficient attention. This is the extent to which he endeavours to 
diminish the labour of dramatic composition. In every play known with cer- 
tainty to have belonged to his later period, The Winter’s Tale only excepted, re- 
course is had to some device tending to save trouble to the author. In Troilus 
and Cressida, as now generally admitted, he revives a former play. The Tempest 
is much the shortest of his dramas. Parts of Cymbeline seem to be from another 
hand. In Antony and Cleopatra and Coriolanus he follows Plutarch, and, although 
with exquisite judgment, transcribes freely from his author. In Pericles and 
Timon he either adapts an old play, completes the work of a contemporary, or 
hands his own drafts over to be pieced out by another. In Henry the Eighth and 
The Two Noble Kinsmen (if he had any hand in the latter) he collaborates with 
Fletcher. Except for the use of Plutarch in Julius Cesar, and of Holinshed in 
the English historical plays, there is no trace in the earlier works of the procedure 
which we find so nearly universal in the later. 

The causes of this comparative slackness are in some measure obvious. Shake- 
speare had had enough of literary distinction; his share in his theatre made him 
independent of the proceeds of his pen; living more and more at Stratford he was 
gradually losing touch with the stage, and becoming a country gentleman. The 
addition of another reason may seem a transgression of Newton’s injunction not 
to assign more causes than are necessary to explain the phenomena. It must, 
nevertheless, be allowed that the tradition reported by Ward fits in admirably 
with the acknowledged cause for resort to extraneous aid. It would further 
solve the question why, when so many motives co-operated to render him indiffer- 
ent to the stage, Shakespeare did not retire from it, but, so far as regards the 
number of his pieces, evinced even more fertility than at any previous epoch. The 
obligation he had contracted would pull both ways. Its fulfilment would sometimes 
be irksome, but would always be necessary. The natural resource would be the 
employment of any device by which the dramatist’s labour might be diminished 
without lowering the standard of his art. A close analogy would be the conduct 
of Pope when, finding that no version of the Odyssey could enhance the fame he 
had won by the J/iad, he turned a portion of the work over to Fenton and Broome. 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—GARNETT 607 


Ward’s tradition, therefore, seems to harmonise with indubitable facts, and it 
does not require us to modify our estimate either of Shakespeare or of his plays 
in the smallest degree, except as regards chronology. The labour-saving tendency 
of his later period, although sufficient attention has not been paid to it, must be 
recognised as undeniable; and an obligation to produce two plays a year with or 
without the goodwill of Minerva affords as plausible a way of accounting for it as 
can be conceived. 

A few words may be said about Coriolanus, the present writer in the first edition 
of his essay on The Tempest having hazarded the opinion that it might be as late 
as1614. The arguments of Professor Brandes have convinced him that this theory 
is untenable, while at the same time he must continue to think that the drama 
has a distinct political tendency, bespeaking its production at a period of political 
excitement. Such excitement prevailed during the contests between James I. 
and his Parliament in 1610 and 1611, terminated by the dissolution in February of 
the latter year. The play, as Brandes points out, is strongly antidemocratic, and 
breathes exactly the spirit with which such a breach between the executive and 
legislative authorities might be expected to inspire a conservative statesman. 
Brandes places it in 1608, but to the present writer the difference in spirit and 
execution seems to forbid such close juxtaposition with Antony and Cleopatra, 
which we know to have been produced in or about that year. 

It may be that in this and other determinations of date criticism has relied too 
exclusively upon the metrical test, which will seem to many conclusive as regards 
the period of Othello and Macbeth as well as that of Coriolanus. This test is 
indeed a most important element in the question of chronology, but is itself sub- 
ject to limitation. It is too often forgotten that the preponderance of single or 
double endings is partly governed by the character of the play. The double 
ending, communicating a buoyant elasticity to the verse in virtue of the catalectic 
syllable, is more appropriate to lively spirits and enthusiastic romance; while the 
close ending rather befits tragic passion and solemn pathos. The character, 
therefore, of most of Shakespeare’s later compositions—Cymbeline, The Winter’s 
Tale, The Tempest—is sufficient reason for the growing fondness for double endings 
which they display, while he would instinctively recur to a stricter system of versi- 
fication when he had to deal with a Macbeth or a Coriolanus. 

We conclude, therefore, that the tradition recorded by Ward is intrinsically 
probable, that it explains some remarkable phenomena connected with Shake- 
speare’s later plays, and that it might very well be accepted if we could see our 
way to bring the dates of Othello and Macbeth a few years lower. Quite inde- 
pendently of Ward’s tradition there is, we think, sufficient reason for reconsidering 
the accepted chronology of these dramas, although it may never be possible to 
arrive at an entirely satisfactory solution of the question. Assuming provisionally 
that Ward is to be relied upon, and that Shakespeare did for some time contribute 
to the stage at the rate of two plays a year, we append a table showing the most 
probable order of their production: 

1607 
Pericles. 
Antony and Cleopatra. 


1608 
Timon of Athens. 
Othello. 


608 APPENDIX 


1609 
Troilus and Cressida (revival). 
Macbeth. 

1610 
Cymbeline. 


Winter’s Tale. 


1611 
Coriolanus. 
Two Noble Kinsmen (?). 


Here Shakespeare’s regular activity as a writer for the stage terminates. In 
1613 he produced The Tempest and King Henry VIII., but both are occasional 
pieces. The Tempest is entirely from his pen, but his share in Henry VIII. is not 
considerable. 


S. Leg (Jefferson Sh.: Introd., p.x.): Internal evidence points with no uncertain 
finger to the late months of 1608 or early months of 1609 as the period of the 
play’s birth. 

Ben Jonson’s Silent Woman, which is known to have been first acted in 1609, 
seems to echo a phrase of Shakespeare’s play. In II, ii, 105 Cominius says of the 
hero’s feats in youth that ‘he lurch’d [i. ¢., deprived] all swords of the garland.’ 
The phrase has an uncommon ring and it would be in full accordance with Jonson’s 
habit to have assimilated it when he penned the sentence, ‘Well, Dauphine, 
you have lurched your friends of the better half of the garland’ (Silent Woman, 
V, iv, 227, 228). It is difficult to take seriously the suggestion that 1612 must 
be the date of composition because in a new edition, first published in that year, 
of North’s translation of Plutarch’s Lives, a passage which had previously read 
‘How more unfortunately than all living women’ was altered to ‘How more un- 
fortunate than all living women,’ in which shape the line figures in Shakespeare’s 
play (V, ili, 97). It is fatuous to deny Shakespeare the power of making for him- 
self (without recourse to the 1612 edition of North) a correction which metrical 
exigencies made almost imperative. 

The tragedy forms with Julius Cesar and Antony and Cleopatra a virtual trilogy 
which is based in its main features on Plutarch’s biographical narratives of Roman 
history. Although Coriolanus’ career belongs to a far earlier period of history 
than either of the two companion pieces, there is reason to believe that it was 
undertaken last. The irregularities of metre, the ellipses of style, closely associate 
it with Antony and Cleopatra and separate it by a wide interval from Julius Cesar. 
But alike in prosody and verbal construction, Coriolanus seems to accentuate the 
peculiarities of Antony and Cleopatra, and encourage the inference that it followed 
rather than preceded that great tragedy of passion. Statistics show that weak or 
unaccented syllables, the presence of which at the end of lines marks for the most 
part a new departure in Antony and Cleopatra, are perceptibly greater in Coriolanus. 
A similar ratio of increase may be assigned to the syntactical ellipses and harsh 
contractions of language. It cannot be asserted that the dramatist’s thought flows 
through Coriolanus with any such distinctive acceleration of pace as positively to 
indicate a precise sequence in workmanship. Rather the flashing intellectual 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—LEE—PORTER 609 


vigour gives in Coriolanus new signs of restraint, but the development of control 
may well mark a stage of advance in the flood of inspiration. 

The sharp contrast, too, between the subject-matter of Antony and Cleopatra 
and that of Coriolanus points plainly to some intervening space of time in the 
composition of the two plays, and suggests that Coriolanus is the later of the two. 
The simple austerity of Coriolanus’ tragic career is the ethical antithesis of the 
passionate subtlety of the story of Antony and his mistress. Turbulent as are 
the emotional storms which overwhelm Coriolanus, they break in an atmos- 
phere of sombre clarity, out of which the voluptuous fire may well have lately 
died. 

The imagery, which reflects the sterner sentiment, confirms the impression that 
the tide of emotional impulse is just on the ebb. The metaphors and similes of 
Coriolanus are hardly less abundant than in Antony and Cleopatra and no less vivid. 
But, save in the final crisis, they lack the lyric warmth of colour which characterises 
the former piece. Their vitality is often due to their unromantic homeliness; they 
are at times impressive from an almost prosaic directness. Coriolanus’ wounds 
are compared to ‘graves i’ the holy churchyard’ (III, iii, 69). He conquers like 
the osprey, who takes the fish ‘by sovereignty of nature’ (IV, vii, 37). There is 
no more pity in him than ‘milk in a male tiger’ (V, iv, 28). Soldiers follow him 


‘with no less confidence 
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies 
Or butchers killing flies’ (IV, vi, 118-120). 


In his most impassioned moods the hero develops a noble grandeur of figurative 
utterance. But, in spite of its dignity and its magnificent range, it still savours 
for the most part of a sculpturesque, albeit colossal, severity. He goes into solitary 
banishment ‘like to a lonely dragon’ (IV, i, 35). His mother on her knees at his 
feet is ‘Olympus nodding in supplication to a molehill’ (V, ili, 34,35). Hisemotions, 
strained almost to breaking point by Volumnia’s appeal, make it difficult for him 
to believe the sight of her prostration, and his incredulity carries him involuntarily 
beyond the limits of earth to celestial altitudes: 


Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach 
Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds 
Strike the proud cedars ’gainst the fiery sun’ (V, ili, 64-66). 


But such outbursts are rare. In his penultimate utterance he resumes the more 
normal and more mundane strain, and meets death with the glorious boast 


‘That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I 
Flutter’d your Volscians in Corioli; 
Alone I did it’ (V, vi, 137-139). 


Lyric digression is outside the scope of the play, and the lyric glow which fires 
the emotional speech of Antony and Cleopatra is exchanged for the chastened heat 
of classic sublimity. 


Miss C. Porter (First Folio Sh.): The likelihoods given by Malone, involving a 
date towards the close of the Poet’s career, are reinforced by general characteristics 


39 


610 APPENDIX 


of maturity in style, diction, and metre denoting 1608-1610 as the probable period 
of composition. 


MacCattum (p. 459): To begin with, there is what Coleridge describes in 
Antony and Cleopatra as the ‘happy valiancy of style,’ which first becomes marked 
in that play, which is continued in this, and which henceforth in a greater or less 
degree characterises all Shakespeare’s work. Then even more conclusive are the 
peculiarities of metre, and especially the increase in the total of weak and light 
endings, together with the decrease of the light by themselves. Finally, there is 
the conduct of the story to a conclusion that proposes no enigma and inflicts no 
pang, but even more than in the case of Macbeth satisfies, and even more than in 
the case of Antony and Cleopatra uplifts the heart, without troublesome question- 
ings on the part of the reader. ‘As we close the book,’ says Mr Bradley, ‘we feel 
more as we do at the close of Cymbeline than as we do at the close of Othello.’ 
We cannot be far wrong in placing it in the last months of 1608 or the first months 
of 1609. 


Gorvon (Introd., p. xxiv.): Are there any events to which Shakespeare may be 
thought to refer in the course of the play? To this question, as might be expected, 
there is no lack of answers. It is no sooner asked than the air is filled with voices. 
The play was written about 1608, shout three at once; or at any rate not much 
later. This is fair enough. But why? Because, says one, Shakespeare talks of 
‘the coal of fire upon the ice’ (I, i, 185), and in January, 1608, the Thames was 
frozen over. Very well, says another; but you have not observed the still more 
curious fact that when Coriolanus lived there was a famine in Rome, and that in 
1608-09 there was a famine in England! You have both missed it, says the third; 
the true reason is much more pretty and sad: Shakespeare’s mother died in Sep- 
tember, 1608; that is why he makes Volumnia so prominent. After listening to 
these voices it would be undemocratic not to listen to all. There is the 1609 
faction to be heard. It has less to say, but it belongs to the same school of thought. 
It relies neither on ice nor famine nor autumn. It rests its whole case on mul- 
berries. ‘Humble thy head,’ says Volumnia to her son, 

‘as the ripest mulberry 
That will not bear the handling’ (III, ii, 98, 99). 


Who does not see in this the compliment to King James for his bringing out of 
France in the year 1609 so many hundred thousands of young mulberry trees to 
feed silkworms? These are strange voices. To refute them is no part of my 
design, though they may still be heard echoing in our text-books. They refute 
themselves, for they have indeed the very accent of folly. 

The critics who look for parallels in political history are on safer ground. There 
is a constitutional problem in Corfolanus, and there was a constitutional problem 
in the reign of James. It was certainly a critical time. The struggle of King and 
Commons, which broke the Stuarts and changed the Constitution, had begun 
before Shakespeare left London. In r610 one Parliament was dissolved; in 1614 
James dissolved another. Was it likely, we are asked, when events of such con- 
sequence were being enacted, that Shakespeare would sit still and say nothing? 
This is an odd question. I cannot think that it would have been understood in 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—GORDON 611 


Shakespeare’s age. The dramatists of that age, however freely they may have 
disputed in their taverns and merry meetings about affairs of state, were seldom 
tempted to exhibit them on the boards. It is one thing to ‘sit by the fire and pre- 
sume to know what’s done i’ the Capitol’; it is quite another thing to put your 
presumptions on the stage. The law on the matter was sharp and sudden; and 
nothing is better known than that contemporary politics make bad plays. That 
Shakespeare shared these feelings in a degree unusual even in that age has never 
been doubted. He is the last man we go to if we wish to hear the din of Tudor 
and Jacobean controversy. To suppose, therefore, that in a play concerned with 
a well-known story of early Rome, fully set forth in an author whom he discreetly 
follows, he should have been dependent for his motive on a parliamentary struggle 
which was still far from assuming an appearance of national danger, is to distort 
the evidence of human nature. No one would deny that in dealing with politics 
in his plays Shakespeare must have drawn on his experience of politics in life. 
In this matter, as in others, the citizen helped the playwright. But we cannot 
proceed on that ground alone to cite particular events as the inspiration of par- 
ticular plays. Even the advocates of 1610 and 1614 must confess that there is 
nothing in the political situation of Coriolanus which may not come out of Plutarch, 
and that it is an odd way of expressing one’s mind about James and his parliaments 
—James who shuddered at a sword, and his unwilling assemblies of country gentle- 
men—to select for the one part Coriolanus, and for the other the tribunes and 
their mob. 

Let us, then, relinquish these hopes, and since other events have failed us, let 
us study the play as an event in its author’s life. Here is a play written by Shake- 
speare, in a certain style of diction, of metre, and of sentiment, one of more than 
thirty of which he was the undoubted author. We are asked to tell its age. The 
problem is a familiar one. We solve it daily when we tell the age of men by their 
looks. For a sincere piece of writing may be as tell-tale as a face, and to a man 
who has followed the sincerest of authors (as Shakespeare is) through his twenty 
years of incessant writing, a line may be as good as a wrinkle to tell its age by, and 
a jest, a speech, a sentiment, the same thing as your three gray hairs on your bald 
crown. To such a man Shakespeare’s plays pass as definitely through the series 
of the ages as he does himself, and are young, not so young, mature, and middle 
aged, like his acquaintances in life. 

Coriolanus, it is readily seen, is a play of middle life, of the settled years on the 
other side of maturity. We feel it in the moral gravity of the piece and its military 
march of action, in its senatorial disregard for the niceties of speech and the vanities 
of poetry, in its knotty language, its heavy irony, and its sarcastic humour. Of 
these signs of age I shall examine only two—its speech and its verse. They are 
equally removed from the style of speech and verse with which readers of Shake- 
speare are most familiar, the style of the plays in the ten years between The 
Merchant of Venice (1595-96) and Macbeth (1606). ‘The difference shows itself 
in a very practical way. You could fill an anthology with extracts from these 
plays, extracts that could give pleasure by themselves, that could be recited by 
themselves, often without regard either to the character who spoke them or to the 
situation which gave them birth. There are no such extracts to be made from 
Coriolanus, no set speeches, no polished declamations, no flights of poetry rising 
above the matter and scorning to be relevant. The anthologist must go elsewhere 
for his posies and the reciter for his periods, for there is literally nothing in Corto- 
lanus that will bear removal. Every word uttered is rooted in its context, ‘an 


A 


612 APPENDIX 


oak, not to be wind-shaken.’ If you take anything you must take everything. 
It is the whole scene or nothing. 

The verse of Coriolanus has the same character as its speeches, of which it may 
be said that though they are as fine as any in Shakespeare, yet no one knows them 
apart from the play. No one learns them, no one quotes them. The reason is 
that they are most of them business speeches, which begin and end with the 
occasion. The verse of the play is equally business-like and self-denying. To 
linger in the memoryand live in random quotation is no part of its function. Its 
function, which it discharges to admiration, is to fit the speech of the actors, 
nothing more. The meditative and romantic graces of Shakespeare’s earlier verse 
are all absent from these scenes, and they are absent for the best of reasons, because 
they are not wanted. Fancy, meditation, and romance have no part in the motives 
of the play. The current of the verse is like the current of the action, now sullen, 
now torrential. It stays to kiss no sedges on its way to the sea. To be poetry, it 
might almost be said, is not so much its concern as to be the perfectly expressive 
servant of thoughts and deeds. That such verse could only be written late no one 
can doubt. None but an old craftsman could so subjugate his verse to the ex- 
pression of pure action and idea. Julius Cesar, which was written in 1601, reads 
like a young man’s work beside it. 

We are now within sight of a conclusion. We agreed to think, on external evi- 
dence, that the play was written between 1605 and 1610. We are inclined to 
think, on the evidence of style and idea, that the date which we seek is the latest 
possible between these years. The confirmation desired is furnished by a peculiar- 
ity in the verse of Coriolanus, a peculiarity which it shares with all Shakespeare’s 
latest plays: I mean the great number of unemphatic monosyllables at the end of 
lines. This had long been observed and remarked upon as one of several devices 
employed by Shakespeare to assimilate his verse to the rhythm of dramatic con- 
versation. Extra syllables, both within and at the end of the lines and trisyllabic 
feet, are other devices which might be named; devices designed to the same end, 
the loosening of the blank verse line, and used by Shakespeare more frequently the 
longer he wrote. 


Verity (Introd., p. x.): We can hardly be far wrong in accepting 1608 (late) 
or 1609 (early) as the year when Coriolanus was written; preferably, I think, 1609. 

It is ill-luck that the date of Timon of Athens, and Shakespeare’s share in it, 
should be uncertain. The play has much affinity to Coriolanus. The story comes 
in North’s Plutarch, and Timon’s railing at humanity in general is of a piece with 
Coriolanus’s railing at the Roman ‘people.’ The banishment of Alcibiades, even 
his retort to the Senate at his banishment (III, v, 98, 99), and their embassy 
(V, i.) to Timon, praying him return to Athens and intercede for them with Alci 
biades, all have a pretty close parallel in Coriolanus. 


Ruopves (Sh’s First Folio, p. 131): Coriolanus is the last exception to the general 
rule that no locality was indicated in stage-directions. Now, the ‘stagery’ of 
Coriolanus, with its continuous exploitation of the peculiar features of the old 
Elizabethan playhouse, bears a close affinity to that of r King Henry VI. The 
text is corrupt, perhaps, because of revision, which, however, does not prove that 
the abridgment was not the author’s. There is no reason that its first form should 


not belong to the days before 1598, for in many ways it is one of the worst of the 
tragedies. 


eae 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—COURTENAY 613 
RECAPITULATION: 
Fe OOmE VL SL ONE ACPA e: Pe SAINT (icc Stats RSH ASC eT ates Mecporoe epceseee LEW 1609 
BCR APE MEMES RO Ned J. ses BSH OSE on. td, nit DOOR Wiel de Mem Aare nc Pideie Os see? before 1609 
MEO OMNE TAEMERG wis raat coi gad. don Slo Nika Son dee DAS CHAAR ay ele aed es 1609 
Bee UE REGEN: actrees Acces Fault, sc BERN ul AAO Ite s in last epoch 
POLE OR AKT Perens Sorte ys gainer e.eyaa 16 
SO a nes 6 Sisto aie Man rae 09 
TANS IN PNAC Oe Gane One See eee MEMO OR ie ener oan irae 1610 
PE UME GUL fr Fess ests Ew As hayershatclh% ein  SRURE TS i a RC are STE after 1609 
OAM OLIETE Ry get pay as cn ate yr Fae RL, Toler coer Ans among late plays 
LO MeL BEL USI¥s, Mensa there cose rats Shay chi avcRseae eey tene ove ats, eed gon MOREA ceri A doce 1608 
OS OM LGD OMD ee ley scare oye ck ie lctojays cA OH a aaa dhe Re oe Sk after 1605 
FS Om (rE BVSENTU Sire teats sca sV sete o Biya stg ACTS Se sta gee SSSR aT IE NS 1610 
1865 WHITE 
1867 Hunson [7 teteetete renee teen e es after 1610 
ROL LEU NCIN Gas Dhe Rive ee ors citics fo CCE ne BE OES Drone after 1612 
Hs aime ON GRA Meee at at ie fo (ayo 2 as sasrs, Sore tonn. arava ew Rhone auacseeeay esas among late plays 
1876 FLEAY 
fem, Downun| 0 ee enter nate. 1608 
IS OM SCHMID Lyte ob vr dhs mtoseseyels 3 fsravarel sede tae aisieis xhepoves braneve nase between 1606 and 1610 
iO OMS LOK ES min Sion cite keke reersys aus as eA ters tater nia A saa ore ceeiloty crete schon aes s col onects 1610 
MS OMNV RIGID 2 case ty sir. “ole ied5 os: oi5?¢ fd ails .o(e pints. autes. Risks, SLORUarO between 1608 and 1610 
Fe Ra EN OLIN x. ie w Joe sUsjepie4s al ojaiis pales aise Sine. sieetavelinns weave between 1607 and 1610 
Gr Gay Bape eens Sd ee eee Sora at scree eee after 1608 
WERey Gach BE Ce AG Oe OTC RR OTA CR CI nay anno anne ene 1614 
LOOOMERANDD EG 5 A. sjcisVoraiiste Sua\ichp lie! e\s.loierasnilgis) sue auerere ton chake tes Se eaters actione Stace 1608 
ROOMMGARNE TD (Si GMs OUCH) S execs sateen: crsiersalsek eter a sitemeter Bs Weeth any sateoten 1611 
OG OOMO MOLE E fe tee ch szat nisi orcs levee 5 aisle wala aja whose elonapaiers late in 1608 or early in 1609 
OCS IGSS Cc LOR TERS. 6 35:2, fo) niniesote socaVousiatieys iste a1 xeon: Sara sean omae rears 1608-1610 
TAFE MV WAC OAT UM ers wel sts cis'siee  a/ainie 's.sce sieysiedu's oy oteis late in 1608 or early in 1609 
HUM Ie eMC ORDION 17 bts Se rsias musteia, otsys,oeis'ais 47s) elspsyes s\si si ss. sit saGlo Siefen a\siei sola o ea kouet etn 1610 
ASHES IER UD Vora let averclocouare oc ai(aissie oie, ns: $1 ore 15:4 ein cA co a, 0 oi 8) 4 Aueye) chal # oy aheyie) iano ieRe 1609 
HORE, IRD Gs cSeckndy abo MO CED ODN OMIn oonn auancanmanmenag¢e oe be das 1598 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT 


Courtenay (ii, 224): It has been often, and correctly, observed that Volumnia’s 
earnest and finally successful address to her son is taken from Plutarch. And 
the murder of the Roman general by the Volscians, at the instigation of the jealous 
Tullus Aufidius, is equally conformable to the old book. 

Such is the use which Shakespeare has made of that which is now called The 
Legend of Coriolanus. Certainly the story must be founded upon legends or 
traditions, and these passing over a great number of years; for its date is given 
at the 260th or, according to some, the z9oth year of Rome, being nearly five 
hundred years before the Christian era. Plutarch flourished in the time of the 
Emperor Claudius; nor have we any historian earlier than Livy, who preceded 
Plutarch by little more than a century. The story in Livy is not materially 
different from Plutarch’s, and includes the enmity between Coriolanus and the 
commons, the successful embassy of the women, and various other particulars. 


614 APPENDIX 


But the Greek has improved upon the Roman almost as much as the Englishman 
has improved upon the Greek; the hero’s peculiar devotion to his mother, and all 
the nicer traits of his character, are worked out by Plutarch. Of those who pre- 
ceded, Dionysius Halicarnessensis comes nearest to him, who describes Coriolanus 
as one of the ‘oligarchical patricians,’ who spoke openly and boldly against the 
plebeians and their tribunes. 

Plutarch’s work is more evidently wrought up for effect; otherwise Livy is 
hardly better authority for what passed in the third century of Rome. He is 
said to have founded his history, in great part, upon the writings of older authors, 
of which extracts have been given; but none of these go farther back than the 
sixth century; indeed, if any written annals of the early Roman history existed, 
it is not probable that they survived the burning of Rome by the Gauls in the 
year of Rome 372. If any less perishable records of brass or stone survived the 
conflagration they can be depended upon for nothing beyond a name or a date. 


F. A. Leo (Four Chapters of North, etc.: Introd.): If we consider the minuteness 
with which our poet utilized his sources, and keep in mind that he never forbore 
from availing himself of the smallest effect that could impart a new and char- 
acteristic life to his portrait, we are forced to suppose that, had he perused the 
edition in question, he would have made use of some highly interesting touches 
in the likeness of Octavius Cesar, found among the ‘newly added lives’ of the 
edition of 1603. And if these touches be wanting in the picture, otherwise so true 
to its original, we are entitled to believe that the painter had no opportunity of 
seeing them, 7. ¢., that he made use of an edition into which this new biography 
of Octavius Cesar was not yet admitted. 

So our researches are confined to the two editions of 1579 and 1595, and there 
I have found one word that induces me to fix my opinion upon the present ques- 
tion. In the edition of 1579, page 237, we read: 


Of the same house were Publius, and Quintus, who brought to 
ROME their best water they had by conducts. 
In the margin: 
Publius and Quintus Martius, brought the water by conducts to 
Rome. 
In the edition of 1595, page 235: 
Of the same house were Publius, and Quintus, who brought to 
ROME their best water they had by conduites. 
In the margin: 
Publius and Quintus Martius, brought the water by conduites to 
Rome. 


In the I. Folio, Coriolanus, Act II, page 14, we read: 


Of the same House Publius and Quintus were, 
That our best Water, brought by Conduits hither, 


and so perhaps we have some right, or at least some inducement, to receive the 
conformity of the text of 1595 with the I. Folio, concerning the orthography of 
the word ‘conduits’ as a support of some moment for the opinion that the edition 
of Plutarch of 1595 has been Shakespeare’s source. I will not lay too great a stress 
on this perhaps accidental conformity, especially since Shakespeare uses the same 
word ‘conduits,’ even in plays prior to the year 1595; but perhaps I shall be per- 


: 
d 
| 
j 


a 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—VERITY 615 


mitted to pronounce this conjecture the best, so long as no better shall have been 
advanced. 


Verity (Introd., p. xvii.): It has been justly said that Shakespeare’s deviations 
from history in his historical plays, Roman and English, are mainly changes of 
time and place, and seldom involve misrepresentation of character or fact. I pre- 
sume that Shakespeare regarded Plutarch’s story of Coriolanus as not less historical 
than his story of Julius Cesar or Antony and Cleopatra. Shakespeare’s Coriolanus 
seems to me essentially, if with some heightened traits, the Coriolanus of Plutarch; 
and he reproduced no less closely Plutarch’s picture of the son’s subjection to the 
mother. Plutarch puts this relation in the foreground. He tells us at the outset 
that Coriolanus’s deeds were done for Volumnia’s sake alone, and ‘at her desire 
he took a wife also, and yet never left his mother’s house therefore.’ From this 
presentment of Volumnia’s fatal sway and from her great speech Shakespeare 
built up his characterisation of Volumnia, adding the one point which distinguishes 
her, not to her advantage, from her son. The admirable scene in which Volumnia 
urges Coriolanus to dissimulate has no parallel in Plutarch’s Life. 

The Aufidius-element in Coriolanus is an expansion of Plutarch’s account. We 
see in Shakespeare’s Aufidius the struggle between a certain generosity of nature, 
which compels him, as a soldier, to admire Coriolanus’ soldierly grandeur, and the 
gradual ascendancy of his personal bitterness. This struggle is outlined by 
Plutarch. He speaks of Aufidius first as ‘a man of a great mind,’ and then shows 
how this greatness of mind succumbed to that last infirmity—jealousy. ‘Though 
he had received no private injury or displeasure of Martius, yet the common fault 
and imperfection of man’s nature wrought in him, and it grieved him to see his 
own reputation blemished through Martius’ great fame and honour.’ Observe 
how early in the tragedy the Aufidius-element is brought in. 

Virgilia and Menenius are practically new characters. In Plutarch Virgilia is 
a muta persona, referred to on two or three occasions, once by name. The fact 
that in Plutarch’s narrative she is so overshadowed by Volumnia gave Shakespeare 
his cue. Also, insight would tell him what type of woman were most likely to 
be chosen for wife by a mighty warrior. Somehow Virgilia and Coriolanus turn 
our thoughts to Desdemona and Othello. 

Menenius illustrates more than any other character in Shakespeare that occurs 
to me how a seed of suggestion will fructify in Shakespeare’s imagination. All 
that Plutarch says about Menenius is that he was ‘chief man’ of the embassy 
of ‘the pleasantest old men and the most acceptable to the people’ who were sent 
by the Senate to remonstrate with them after their secession to the Mons Sacer 
outside Rome; that he used successfully ‘many good persuasions and gentle requests 
to the people’; and ended with his ‘notable tale’ of the belly and the other members 
of the body. 

Of Valeria we may just note that in Plutarch it is she, not Volumnia, who pro- 
poses the embassy of the Roman ladies to plead with Coriolanus. Shakespeare 
does not expressly say that the idea originated with Volumnia, but he certainly 
creates that impression in our minds. The dramatic scheme required that the 
credit should be transferred to Volumnia; subordinate characters must not detract 
from the importance of the protagonists. 

In the construction of the tragedy the great thing is the concentration of the 
interest on Coriolanus himself. The historical material furnished by Plutarch 
appeals to Shakespeare only in so far as it shows up the character of Coriolanus 


616 APPENDIX 


and the causes of his downfall. Everything is subordinated to this purpose, 
everything alien to it eliminated. This method runs throughout his dramatisa- 
tions of history. What fascinates Shakespeare is history as the revelation of 
individual character: of personal strength, as in Henry V.; of personal weakness, as 
in Richard II. 

Some of Shakespeare’s omissions are interesting. Thus, Plutarch says that 
directly after Coriolanus’s banishment, when ‘Rome was in marvellous uproar 
and discord’ between nobles and people, the Senate was further troubled by reports 
of ‘sights and wonders.’ Perhaps the reason why Shakespeare does not allude to 
these omens, though he could easily have done so in IV, vi. or V, i, was that he had 
worked this motive so thoroughly in the first two acts of Julius Cesar. The relation 
of plays which have some community of source or subject is always interesting. 

Plutarch mentions that when Coriolanus first invaded the Roman territory ‘he 
was very careful to keep the noblemen’s lands and goods safe from harm and 
burning, but spoiled all the whole country besides,’ and that he acted thus ‘to 
increase still the malice and dissension between the nobility and the commonalty.’ 
The Coriolanus of the tragedy rages against Rome with a resentment that disdains 
such devices, and he curses not least the pusillanimous betrayers among his own 
class. 

Of actual additions to the story the most notable are the scenes of ‘relief,’ 
viz., the domestic interlude, the unconscious absurdities of the servants of Aufidius’s 
house, and the humour (culminating in pathos) of Menenius’s self-assurance with 
the sentinels. The whole representation, too, of the Roman people imparts an 
element of humour edged with raillery. And Shakespeare may claim for his own 
the handling of the child-motive, so wonderfully effective, especially where the 
boy’s high paternal spirit serves to break the tension. Plutarch mentions several 
times Coriolanus’s ‘young children’ (two); for dramatic purposes the half was 
certainly better than the whole. 

Finally, even where Shakespeare draws largely upon North’s Plutarch, he lends 
his own heightening touches that spell ‘Shakespeare,’ e. g., 


‘Come, let us go: 
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother.’ 


What a contrast too between Menenius’s ‘tale’ as told by Plutarch and as 
worked up into a vivid and closer parallel by means of dialogue and interruptions 
and picturesque expansion, such as the First Citizen’s enumeration of the ‘dis- 
contented members.’ 


Gorpon (Jntrod., p. vi.): North was a master of English. In many places 
Shakespeare found his language too good to be improved. No man could open 
a narrative better than North. ‘It was even twilight when he entered the city of 
Antium, and many people met him in the streets, but no man knew him’ (p. 154). 
This has the unmistakable mark of all great openings; there is the hush of listeners 
in it. You may hear it again, among the moderns, in the opening of Stevenson’s 
Pavilion on the Links: ‘I was a great solitary when I was young.’ North is more 
vigorous and vernacular than Amyot, as befits the genius of our tongue. His 
epithets are more picturesque and his sentences more concrete. Everything must 
be definite in North. An ordinary writer would have been content to say of 
Coriolanus at Antium that ‘no man could ever have known him, seeing him in 
that apparel.’ What North says is this: ‘no man could ever have known him for 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—MacCALLUM 617 


the person he was, seeing him in that apparel he had upon his back.’ Even fact 
must bend to his passion for reality. Plutarch and Amyot speak of Coriolanus’s 
‘children.’ North, impatient of so indefinite a plural, made the children ‘two.’ 
He is the same in words. He will have nothing technical or colourless in his 
vocabulary. Rather than use a dull name he will describe the thing. Plutarch 
speaks somewhere in his Life of Coriolanus of ‘gladiatorial shows.’ Amyot, height- 
ening a little, makes it ‘fencers to the death’ (escrimeurs 4 oultrance). North 
makes a picture of it: ‘the cruel fight of fencers at unrebated swords.’ He is never 
the mere servant of his original. He takes sides. When his blood is up he has 
his fling. Amyot, speaking of the priests who went on embassy to Coriolanus, 
calls them simply ‘men of religion’ (ces gens de religion). To North, seeing them 
in his mind’s eye and scorning them, they are ‘this goodly rabble of superstition 
and priests’; a hendiadys which would scarcely have approved itself to Bishop 
Amyot. His imagination seldom sleeps. He is on his feet at every turn of the 
drama to assist the speakers. Finding in Amyot the sentence, ‘for necessity de- 
mands that your wife and children should be deprived of one of the two, either of 
you or of their country’ (pour ce qu’il est force 4 ta femme & 4 tes enfans qu’ilz 
soient privez de l’un des deux, ou de toy, ou de leur pais), he must needs turn it 
into such great-hearted rhetoric as this: ‘for the bitter sop of most hard choice is 
offered thy wife and children, to forgo the one of the two: either to lose the person 
of thy self, or the nurse of their native country.’ One of the most vivid phrases 
in the whole Life is wholly his. It is a wonder that Shakespeare did not use it. 
It is in that part of the narrative where Coriolanus invades the Antiates and 
brings back ‘all his men that went out with him safe and sound to Rome, and 
every man rich and loaden with spoil.’ Then, says North, ‘the home-tarriers and 
house-doves that kept Rome still, began to repent them that it was not their 
hap to go with him.’ Of ‘home-tarriers’ and ‘house-doves’ there is not a sug- 
gestion in either Plutarch or Amyot. They are the contribution of that Thomas 
North who captained a volunteer band of three hundred men from the Isle of Ely 
in the days of the Great Armada. North, indeed, treated Amyot as Amyot had 
treated Plutarch. They had a common desire to make Plutarch a national pos- 
session. Both were successful. North’s Plutarch is as certainly English as Amyot’s 
is French. This was the old theory of translation, and a noble one. Translation 
in this view became a form of patriotism comparable to the opening of new trade- 
routes and the annexing of islands in the name of the Virgin Queen. To enrich 
one’s country with the best that the Ancients had thought and done seemed a 
mission worthy of a lifetime. Plutarch, so treated, lost his Graeco-Roman look, 
and became in the sixteenth century what he had been in his own, a citizen of 
the world. It is to this result that we owe the plays of Shakespeare, for this was 
the only Plutarch whom Shakespeare would have cared to read. 


MacCativum (p. 484): The first impression produced by a comparison of the 
biography and the play is that the latter is little more than a scenic replica of the 
former. Shakespeare has indeed absorbed so many suggestions from the transla- 
tion that it is difficult to realise how much he has modified them, or to avoid 
reading these modifications into his authority when we try to distinguish what 
he has received from what he has supplied. And the illusion is confirmed by the 
frequency with which we light on familiar words, familiar traits, familiar incidents. 
For the similarity seems at first to pervade the language, the characterisation, and 
the action. 


618 APPENDIX 


It is unfair to quote the parallel passages without the context, for, apart from 
the subtle transmutation they have undergone, they are preludes to original 
utterance, and almost every one of them is a starting point rather than the goal. 
Shakespeare’s normal practice is illustrated in the fable of Menenius, in which, 
with every allowance made for possible assistance from Camden, the words of his 
authority or authorities are only so many spur-pricks that set his own imagination 
at a gallop. And what goes before and comes after is pure Shakespeare. 

And it should be noticed that his textual appropriations from North, long or 
short, obvious or covert, never clash with his more personal contributions, which 
in bulk are far more important. They are all subdued to the tone that the pur- 
pose of the dramatist imposes. Delius says with absolute truth: ‘This harmonious 
colouring would make it impossible for us, in respect of style, to discover real or 
supposititious loans from Plutarch in Shakespeare’s drama, and definitely identify 
them as such, if by chance North’s translation were inaccessible.’ Yet this har- 
monious colouring, that has its source in the author’s mind and that is required 
by the theme, does not prevent an individualisation in the utterance, whether 
wholly original or partly borrowed, that fits it for the lips of the particular speaker. 
The language, even when it is suggested by North, is not only spontaneous and 
consistent, it is dramatic as well, and apposite to the strongly marked characters 
of whom the story is told. 

To these characters, and their development by Shakespeare, we now turn. It 
may be remarked that all of them, except the quite episodical Adrian and Nicanor, 
are nominally to be found in Plutarch, by whom the hero himself is drawn at full 
length and in great detail. For his delineation then there was a great deal to 
borrow, and Shakespeare has borrowed a great deal. In his general bearing and 
in many of his features the Coriolanus of the play is the Coriolanus of the Life, 
though, of course, imagined with far more firmness and comprehension. Only on 
very close scrutiny do we see that each has a physiognomy of his own, and that the 
difference in the impressions they produce is due, not merely to the execution, but 
to the conception. This will become clear as the general discussion proceeds and 
will incidentally occupy our attention from time to time. Meanwhile it should 
be noticed that, Coriolanus excepted, Plutarch’s persons are very shadowy and 
vague. If we compare this biography with those that Shakespeare had used for 
his earlier Roman plays, it is obvious that it is much more of a monograph. In the 
others room is found for sketches of many subordinate figures in connection with 
the titular subject, but Marcius stands out alone and the remaining personages 
are scarcely more than names. In the tragedy, too, he is in possession of the scene, 
but his relatives, his friends, and his enemies are also full of interest and life; and 
for their portraiture Shakespeare had to depend almost entirely on himself. 

Next to the hero, for example, it is his mother who is most conspicuous in the 
play; and how much did Plutarch contribute to the conception of her concrete 
personality? He supplies only one or two hints, some of which Shakespeare dis- 
regards or contradicts. They both attribute to her the sole training of the boy, 
but Plutarch implies that her discipline was slack and her instruction insufficient, 
while in Shakespeare she incurs no such blame except in so far as we infer a certain 
lack of judiciousness from her peculiar attitude to her grandson and from her son’s 
exaggeration of some of her own traits. But injudiciousness is not quite the same 
as the laxity that Plutarch’s apologetic paragraph would insinuate. 

In the play it is not with tears of joy that Volumnia welcomes her warrior 
home. 


oT - Wiis 2 Sa 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—SHERMAN 619 


In Shakespeare there is no word of Marcius’s marrying at his mother’s desire, 
and though she apparently lives with him, it is in his, not in her house. 

All these notices occur in the first pages of the Life. Thenceforward till her 
intervention at the close there is only a passing mention of her affliction at her son’s 
banishment. 

Even in regard to the intercession, where Shakespeare follows Plutarch most 
closely, he makes one significant omission. In the original it is the suggestion 
of Valeria, ‘through the inspiration of some god above,’ that the women should 
sue for peace, and she visits Marcius’s kinswomen to secure their help; by the 
suppression of this circumstance the prominent place is left to Volumnia. And 
in the appeal itself Shakespeare, besides the various vivifying and personal touches, 
makes one important addition. In Plutarch her words are throughout forcible 
and impassioned, but they do not burst into the wrathful indignation of the close, 
which alone is sufficient to break down Coriolanus’ resolution. 

Now it is clear that the presence of Volumnia does not pervade the Life as it 
does the play, and she has not nearly so much to do. Moreover, besides being less 
important, she is less masculine and masterful. Indeed, from Plutarch’s hints it 
would be possible to construct for her a character that differed widely from that 
of Shakespeare’s heroine. She is like the latter in her patriotism, her love for the 
delight in her son, and, at the critical moment, in her influence over him. But 
even her influence is less constant, and seems to be stronger in the way of uncon: 
scious inspiration than of positive direction. It would be quite legitimate to 
picture her as an essentially womanly woman, high-souled and dutiful, but finding 
her chosen sphere in the home, overflowing with sympathy and affection, and 
failing in her obligations as widowed mother only by a lack of sternness. 

And if Shakespeare has given features to Volumnia, much more has he done so 
to Virgilia and young Marcius. Both, of course, are presented in the merest 
outline, but in Plutarch the wife is only once named and the children are not 
named at all. Shakespeare’s Virgilia, on the other hand, by the few words she 
speaks and the few words spoken to her, by her very restraint from speech and the 
atmosphere in which she moves, produces a very definite as well as a very pleasing 
impression. Ruskin, after enumerating some other of Shakespeare’s female 
characters, concludes that they ‘and last and perhaps loveliest, Virgilia, are all 
faultless; conceived in the highest heroic type of humanity.’ This enthusiasm 
may be, as Ruskin’s enthusiasms sometimes were, exaggerated and misplaced, but 
it could not be roused by a non-entity; and a non-entity Plutarch’s Virgilia is. 

Young Marcius, again, is not merely one of the two children mentioned in the 
Life. As Mr Verity remarks, in this case ‘the half is certainly better than the 
whole’; and the named half has a wholeness of his own that an anonymous brace 
can lay no claim to. He is a thorough boy, and an attractive though boisterous 
one. If he is cruel to winged things, he is brave and circumspect withal. He has 
a natural objection to be trodden on even for a patriotic cause; if the risk is too 
great, ‘he’ll run away till he’s bigger, but then he’ll fight.’ 


S. P. Saerman (Tudor Sh.: Introd., p. ix.): The relationship between the tragedy 
and the life of Caius Martius Coriolanus in North’s Plutarch is remarkably close. 
On a casual comparison one might be tempted to assert that Shakespeare merely 
translates his material from the biographical to the dramatic form. He adds 
scarcely a stroke to the richly detailed characterization of the hero, and he is 
anticipated in the names and at least a hint of the nature of virtually all the other 


620 APPENDIX 


actors. The main incidents—the struggle between the classes, the siege of Corioli 
and the disposition of the battle, the candidacy for the consulship, the banishment, 
the union with Tullus Aufidius, the siege of Rome, the embassy of friends and 
family, the compromise, the conspiracy of the Volscians—all these are to be found 
in the original. Furthermore, the essence of the tragedy for Plutarch no less than 
for Shakespeare is moral rather than political; the strife of patricians and populace 
is but as the sound of drums and cymbals accompanying the conflict in the spirit 
of the protagonist. Finally, Shakespeare takes over from North’s translation 
many passages almost word for word, including parts of some of the finest speeches. 
It is not more than justice to say that he must share his triumph with two brilliant 
coadjutors, North and Plutarch. 

Yet there is a great gulf between biographical narration and dramatic action. 
Examined more narrowly, Coriolanus reveals everywhere as compared with 
Plutarch—in suppression as well as in addition, in compression, emphasis, and 
intensification—a more exigent mind controlling a far more difficult art, a genius 
of higher pitch evoking a far more complex harmony. 

Thus at the beginning of the play Shakespeare condenses the three popular 
uprisings recorded by Plutarch into one, because that suffices for his purpose. 
In Plutarch the banishment of Coriolanus follows some time after his failure to 
secure the consulship and in consequence of his opposition to a free distribution 
of corn. Shakespeare makes the banishment fall on his hero at the pinnacle of 
glory, hot on the heels of his candidacy. The omens and supernatural visions 
following the exile and made prominent by Plutarch, Shakespeare suppresses in 
the interest of the sternly realistic mood in which he has conceived the drama. 
He makes no use of ‘Martius Coriolanus’s crafty accusation of the Volscians,’ 
perhaps thinking it inconsistent with the fiery frankness of his hero. He trans- 
fers the scene of the Volscian conspiracy from Antium to Corioli in the interest 
of tragic irony. His are the speeches of citizens and officers interpreting the mind 
of the people; the dialogue of servants in the house of Aufidius; the household 
scene between Volumnia, Virgilia, and Valeria; the effective scene in which Corio- 
lanus reveals his poignant physical repugnance to exhibiting his scars to the 
people; the scene in which Coriolanus’s family and friends entreat him to tempor- 
ize and assume humility; the scene in which Menenius is rebuffed. Most impor- 
tant of all is his development of the minor characters. Menenius, save for a hint 
two or three lines long, is his own creation. He replaces the vague ‘children’ 
of Plutarch by the delightful sketch of the young Marcius. He subdues Valeria, 
who is the real heroine of the original, and brings Volumnia into the foreground, 
transforming her from a tearful suppliant into a matron of heroic mould and 
temper—such a woman as Cato would have a Roman mother. He disposes all 
the persons of the play in such a way that like so many mirrors they reflect the 
countenance of the hero and flash their light back upon his face. 

The more closely these alterations are studied—the list is by no means exhaustive 
—the more indispensable they appear, and the more clearly it becomes evident that 
Shakespeare did not, as some of the elder commentators declared, take Plutarch 
over bodily and exactly, but, highly as he prized his material, transformed it to his 
own uses, dealt with it freely, imaginatively, creatively in his own imperial way. 


TucKER Brooke (Sh’s Plutarch, ii, x.): A comparison of the many passages in 
the lives of Antonius and of Coriolanus with the corresponding lines in Shakespeare 
shows that the dramatist was satisfied in no small number of cases to incorporate 


ee 


‘ee 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—BROOKE—PLUTA RCH 621 


whole speeches from North with the least change consistent with the production 
of blank verse. The description of Cleopatra’s first visit to Antony, the dying 
speech of Antony, and the few noble lines that glorify the passing of Cleopatra, 
the address of Coriolanus to Tullus Aufidius when he throws himself upon the 
latter’s hospitality, and the last all-decisive speech of Volumnia to her son—these 
passages, all of which rank among the special treasures of Shakespearean poetry, 
come straight and essentially unaltered out of North. 

Nowhere else in Shakespeare is there an instance of verbal borrowing at the 
height of dramatic intensity which is comparable to these. Even the speech of 
Portia to Brutus in Julius Cesar offers no parallel, for there we can see plainly 
the deliberate poetic handling which North’s words suffered, fine though they are, 
before they were allowed a place in the drama. In the passages I have cited 
there is little evidence of any attempt at improvement; indeed, it may be held 
in regard to several of them that the palm belongs rather to North’s prose than to 
Shakespeare’s poetry. That this should be so is a fact worthy of all wonder and 
attention, for the like can be said of no other of Shakespeare’s rivals or assistants. 

Yet it is easy to misinterpret woefully the meaning of phenomenon. The 
criticism that blatantly advertises North as the writer who has surpassed Shake- 
speare in his own art is illogical as well as foolish. It rests on a wrong conception 
of the nature of Shakespeare’s latest work. The probable date of Antony and 
Cleopatra is 1607, and Coriolanus is somewhat later. During this his last period 
the poet’s manner is characterized; it is not, however, marked by minute attention 
to details. In structure as in versification we find a certain looseness; the care- 
lessness of conscious mastery overrides trifling rules before which immaturity 
had bent. After all, North’s style, as we see it in these four Lives, is pretty much 
of a piece, and what Shakespeare had been able to improve on in 1601, when he 
wrote Julius Cesar, was assuredly not beyond him in 1607. The truth is that 
Shakespeare’s interest in the last two Roman plays is centred nearly exclusively 
in character, in Antony and Cleopatra, Volumnia, and Coriolanus. He has earned 
the right to ignore rules of syntax and of scansion. He may at this time appro- 
priate without scruple whatever North has written that will serve his purpose 
and would cost him pains to write better. It is no more than the assertion of 
genius’s privilege of indifference to non-essentials—the natural corollary of the 
‘infinite capacity for taking pains,’ where the pains are worth the taking. 

The borrowing is a deservedly high compliment to North; it is far from being a 
reproach to Shakespeare. It is as Archibshop Trench has said in his lectures on 
Plutarch: ‘Shakespeare does not abdicate his royal pre-eminence, but resumes it 
at any moment that he pleases.’ To take the dying speech of Charmion and fit 
it indistinguishably into a setting worthy of it, to borrow nearly unchanged the 
words of Coriolanus to Aufidius, and then to give them their needed consummation 
in the answer of Aufidius—this surely is a greater achievement than to have new- 
written the two scenes. 

[The following Transcript is taken from the Photolithograph of Four Chapters 
of North’s Plutarch, of the edition of 1595, published in 1878 by Dr F. A. Leo 
of Berlin.] 


PLUTARCH 
The house of the Martians at Rome was of the number of the Patricians, out 


of the which hath sprong many noble personages, whereof Ancus Martius was 
one, king Numaes daughters sonne, who was king of Rome after Tullus Hos- 


622 APPENDIX 


tilius. Of the same house were Publius, & Quintus, who brought to Rome their 
best water they had by conduites. Censorinus also came of that 
familie, that was so surnamed, because the people had chosen him Cen- 
sor twise. ‘Through whose persuasion they made a lawe, that no man 
from thenceforth might require, or enjoy the Censorshippe twise. Caius Martius, 
whose life we intend now to write, being left an orphan by his father, was brought 
up under his mother a widowe, who taught us by experience, that orphanage 
bringeth many discommodities to a childe, but doth not hinder him to become 
an honest man, and to excell in vertue above the common sorte: as they that 
are meanely borne, wrongfully doe complaine, that it is the occasion of their 
casting awaye, for that no man in their youth taketh any care of them to see them 
well brought up, and taught that were meete. This man also is a good proofe to 
confirme some mens opinions. That a rare and excellent witte untaught, doth 
bring forth many good and evill things together: like a fat soile bringeth forth 
herbes & weedes that lieth unmanured. For this Martius naturall wit and great 
hart did marvellously sturre up his courage to doe and attempt notable actes. 
But on the other side for lacke of education, he was so chollericke and impacient, 
that he would yeeld to no living creature: which made him churlishe, uncivil, and 
altogether unfit for any mans conversation. Yet men marvelling much at his 
constancie, that he was never overcome with pleasure, nor money, and how he 
would endure easilie all manner of paines and travailles: thereupon they well 
liked and commended his stowtnes and temperancie. But for all that, they could 
not be acquainted with him, as one citizen useth to be with another in the cittie. 
His behaviour was so unpleasant to them by reason of a certaine insolent and 
sterne manner he had, which because it was too lordly, was disliked. And to say 
truly, the greatest benefite that learning bringeth men unto, is this: that it teacheth 
men that be rude and rough of nature, by compasse and rule of reason, to be civill 
and curteous, & to like better the meane state, then the higher. Now in those 
dayes, valiantnes was honoured in Rome above all other vertues: 

II, ii, 95-97. which they call virtus, by the name of vertue it selfe, as including 
in that generall name, all other speciall vertues besides. So that 

virtus in the Latin, was as much as valiantnesse. But Martius being more inclined 
to the warres, then any other gentleman of his time: beganne from his childehood 
to give himselfe to handle weapons, and dayly did excercise himselfe therein. 
And outward he esteemed armour to no purpose, unles one were naturally armed 
within. Morover he did so excercise his bodie to hardnes and all kind of activitie, 
that he was very swift in running, strong in wrestling, & mightie in griping, so 
that no man could ever cast him. Insomuch as those that would trie masteries 
with him for strength and nimblenes, would saye when they were overcome: that 
al was by reason of his natural strength, and hardnes of warde, that never yeelded 
to any paine or toyle he tooke upon him. The first time he went to the warres, 
being but a stripling, was when Targuine surnamed the prowde (that 

HI, ii, roo. had bene king of Rome, and was driven out for his pride, after many 
attemptes made by sundry battelles to come in againe, wherein he 

was ever overcome) did come to Rome, with all the ayde of the Latines, & many 
other people of Italie: even as it were to set up his whole rest upon a battell by 
them, who with a great & mightie armie had undertaken to put him into his king- 
dome againe, not so much to pleasure him, as to overthrow the power of the 
Romaines, whose greatness they both feared and envied. In this battell, wherein 
were many hotte and sharpe encounters of either partie, Martius valliantly fought 


Il, iii, 
253-262. 


a 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PLUTARCH 623 


in the sight of the Dictator: & a Romaine souldier being thrown to the ground 
even hard by him, Martius straight bestrid him, and slew the enemie 
with his owne handes that had before overthrown the Romaine. 
Hereupon, after the battell was wonne, the Dictator did not forget 
so noble an acte, and therefore first of all he crowned Martius with a garland of 
oken boughs. For whosoever saueth the life of a Romaine, it is a maner among 
them, to honour him with such a garland. This was, either because the lawe 
did this honour to the oke, in favour of the Arcadians, who by the oracle of A pollo 
were in olde time called eaters of akornes: or else because the souldiers might easily 
in every place come by oken boughes: or lastly, because they thought it very 
necessarie, to give him that had saved a cittizens life, a crowne of this tree to 
honour him, being properly dedicated unto Jupiter, the patron and protectour 
of their citties, and thought amongst other wilde trees to bring forth a profitable 
frute, and of plantes to be the strongest. . . . Moreover, it is daily seene, that 
honour and reputation lighting on yong men before their time, and before they 
have no great courage by nature: the desire to winne more, dieth straight in 
them, which easily happeneth, the same having no deepe roote in them before. 
Where contrarie wise, the first honour that valliant mindes do come unto, doth 
quicken up their appetite, hasting them forward as with force of winde, to enter- 
prise thinges of high deserving praise. For they esteeme not, to receive reward 
for service done, but rather take it for a remembrance and encouragement, to 
make them doe better in time to come: and be ashamed also to cast their honour 
at their heeles, not seeking to increase it still by like desert of worthie valiant 
deedes. This desire being bred in Martius, he strained still to passe himselfe in 
manlines: and being desirous to shew a daylie increase of his valiantnesse, his 
noble service did still advance his fame, bringing in spoyles upon spoyles from 
the enemie. Whereupon, the captaines that came afterwards (for envie of them 
that went before) did contend who should most honour him, and who should 
beare most honorable testimonie of his valiantnes. Insomuch the Romaines 
having many warres and battells in those dayes, Coriclanus was at them all: and 
there was not a battell fought, from whence he returned not without some reward 
of honour. And as for other, the only respect that made them valiant, was they 
hoped to have honour: but touching Martius, the onely thing that made him to 
love honour, was the joy he sawe his mother did take of him. For 

he thought nothing made him so happie and honorable, as that his I, i, 40-42. 
mother might heare everie body praise and commend him, that shee 

might alwayes see him returne with a crowne upon his head, and that she might 
still imbrace him with teares running downe her cheekes for joye. ... But 
Martius thinking all due to his mother, that had bene also due to his father if 
he had lived: did not only content himselfe to rejoyce and honour her, but at 
her desire took a wife also, by whome he had two children, and yet never left his 
mothers house therefore. Now he being growen to great credit & authoritie in 
Rome for his valiantnes, it fortuned there grewe sedition in the 

cittie, because the Senate did favour the rich against the people, I, i, 83-88. 
who did complaine of the sore oppression of usurers, of whom they 

borrowed money. For those that had litle, were yet spoyled of that litle they 
had by their creditours, for lacke of abilitie to paye the usurie: who offered their 
goodes to be solde to them that would give most. And such as had nothing left, 
their bodies were layed hold on, and they were made their bondmen, notwith- 
standing all the woundes and cuttes they shewed, which they had received in 


’ ii, 
104-110. 


624 APPENDIX 


many battells, fighting for defence of their countrie and common wealth: of the 
which, the last warre they made was against the Sabines, wherein they fought 
upon the promise the rich men had made them, that from thenceforth they would 
intreate them more gently and also upon the word of Marcus Valerius chiefe of 
the Senate, who by authoritie of the Counsell, & in the behalfe of the rich, sayed 
they should performe that they had promised. But after that they had faith- 
fully served in this last battell of all, where they overcame their enemies, seeing 
they were never a whit the better, nor more gently intreated, and that the Senate 
would give no care to them, but made as though they had forgotten their former 
promise, and suffered them to be made slaves and bondemen to their creditors, 
and besides, to be turned out of all that ever they had: they fell 

I, i, 3. then even to flat rebellion and mutinie, and to sturre up daungerous 
tumults within the cittie. The Romaines enemies hearing of this 

rebellion did straight enter the territories of Rome with a marvellous great power, 
spoyling and burning all as they came. Whereupon the Senate immediatly made 
open proclamation by sound of trumpet, that all those that were of lawfull age 
to carie weapon, should come and enter their names into the muster masters 
booke, to goe to the warres: but no man obeied their commaundement. Where- 
upon their chiefe magistrates, and many of the Senate, began to be of divers opinions 
among themselves. For some thought it was reason, they should somewhat 
yeelde to the poore peoples request, and that they should a little qualifie the severitie 
of the lawe. Other held hard against that opinion, and that was Martius for one. 
For he alleged, that the creditours losing their money they had lent, was not the 
worst thing that was thereby: but that the lenitie that was favored, was a begin- 
ning of disobedience, and that the proude attempt of the communaltie, was to 
abolish law, and to bring all to confusion. Therefore he sayed, if the Senate 
were wise, they should betimes prevent and quench this ill favored & worse ment 
beginning. The Senate met many dayes in consultation about it: but in the 
end they concluded nothing. The poore common people seeing no redresse, 
gathered themselves one day together, and one encoraging another, 

I, i, 60-63. they all forsooke the cittie, and encamped themselves upon a hill, 
called at that daye the holy hill, alongest the river of Tyber, offring 

no creature any hurt or violence, or making any shewe of actual rebellion: saving 
that they cried as they went up and downe, that the rich men had driven them out 
of the cittie, and that all Italie through they should find aire, water, and ground 
to burie them in. Moreover, they sayed, to dwell at Rome was nothing else 
but to be slaine, or hurt with continuall warres, and fighting for defence of the 
rich mens goodes. The Senate being afeard of their departure, did send unto 
them certaine of the pleasantest olde men, and the most acceptable 
to the people among them. Of those Menenius Agrippa was he, 
who was sent for chiefe man of the message from the Senate. He, 
after many good persuasions and gentle requestes made to the 
people, on the behalfe of the Senate: knit up his oration in the end, with a notable 
tale, in this manner. That on a time all the members of mans body did rebell 
against the bellie, complaining of it, that it onely remained in the middest of 
the bodie, without doing anything, neither did beare any labour to the mainte- 
naunce of the rest: whereas all other partes and members did labour paynefully, 
& were very carefull to satisfiie the appetites and desires of the bodie. And so 
the bellie, all this notwithstanding laughed at their follie, and sayed. It is true, I 
first receive ell meanes that norish mans bodie: but afterwardes I send it againe 


I, i, 53. 


I, i, 99. 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PLUTARCH 625 


to the norishment of other partes of the same. Even so (quoth he) 6 you, my 
maisters, and citizens of Rome: the reason is alike betweene the Sen- 


ate & you. For matters being wel digested, their counsells throughly Laney 

examined, touching the benefite of the common wealth: the Sena- Li 

tours are cause of the common comoditie that cometh unto every 58. -; 
158-163. 


one of you. These persuasions pacified the people, condition- 
ally, that the Senate would graunt there should be yerely chosen five magis- 
trates, which they now call Tribuni plebis, whose office should be to 
defend the poore people from violence and oppression. So Junius 
Brutus, and Sicinius Vellutus, were the first Tribunes of the people 
that were chosen, who had onely bene the causers & procurers of this sedition. 
Hereupon the citie being grown againe to good quiet and unitie, the people imme- 
diately went to the warres, shewing that they had a good will to do better than 
ever they did, and to be very willing to obey the magistrates in that they would 
commaund, concerning the warres. Martius also, though it liked him nothing to 
see the greatnes of the people thus increased, considering, it was to the prejudice, 
and imbasing of the nobilitie, and also sawe that other noble Patricians were 
troubled as well as himselfe: he did persuade the Patricians, to shew themselves 
no lesse forward and willing to fight for their countrie, then the common people 
were: and to let them know by their deedes and actes, that they did not so much 
passe the people in power and riches, as they did exceede them in true nobilitie 
and valiantnesse. In the countrie of the Volsces against whom the Romaines 
made war at that time, there was a principall cittie & of most fame, that was 
called Corioles, before the which the Consul Cominius did laye siege. 

Wherefore al the other Volsces fearing least that cittie should be I, iv. 
taken by assault, they came from all partes of the countrie to save it, 

entending to give the Romaines battell before the cittie, and to give an onset on 
them in two severall places. The Consul Cominius understanding this, devided 
his armie also into two partes, and taking the one part with himself, he marched 
towards them that were drawing to the cittie, out of the countrie: and the other 
part of the armie he left in the campe with Titus Latius (one of the valiantest men 
the Romaines had at that time) to resist those that would make any saly out of 
the cittie upon them. So the Coriolans making small accompt of them that 
laye in campe before the cittie, made a salye out upon them, in the 

which at the first the Coriolans had the better, and drave the I, iv, 38-45. 
Romaines backe againe into the trenches of their campe. But 

Martius being there at that time, running out of the campe with a fewe men with 
him, he slew the first enemies he met withal, and made the rest of them stay upon 
the sodain, crying out to the Romaines that had turned their backes, and calling 
them againe to fight with a loud voyce. For he was even such another, as Cato 
would have a souldier and a captaine to be, not only terrible, and 

fierce to lay about him, but to make the enemie afearde with the I, iv, 82. 
sounde of his voyce, and grimnes of his countenance. Then there 

flocked about him immediately, a great number of Romaines: whereat the enemies 
were so afeard, that they gave backe presently. But Martius not staying so, did 
chase and followe them to their owne gates, that fled for life. And 

there perceiving that the Romaines retired backe, for the great number I, iv, 61-65. 
of dartes and arrowes which flew about their eares from the walles of 

the cittie, & that there was not one man amongest them that durst venter him- 
selfe to follow the flying enemies into the cittie, for that it was full of men of warre, 


40 


rly 
230-232. 


626 APPENDIX 


very well armed, and appointed: he did encorage his fellowes with wordes and 
deedes, crying out to them, that fortune had opened the gates of the cittie, more 
for the followers then the flyers. But all this notwithstanding, few had the hartes 
to follow him. Howbeit Martius being in the throng among the enemies, thrust 
himselfe into the gates of the cittie; and entred the same among them that fled, 
without that any one of them durst at the first turne their face upon him, or else 
offer to stay him. But he looking about him, & seeing he was entred the cittie 
with very fewe men to helpe him, and perceiving he was environed by his enemies 
that gathered round about to set upon him: did thinges as it is written, wonderfull 
and incredible, as well for the force of his hand, as also for the agilitie of his body 
and with a wonderfull corage and valiantnes, he made a lane through the middest 
of them, and overthrew also those he layed at: that some he made runne to the 
furthest part of the cittie and other for feare he made yeeld themselves, and to let 
fall their weapons before him. By this means, Martius that was gotten out, had 
some leisure to bring the Romaines with more safetie into the cittie. The cittie 
being taken in this sorte, the most part of the souldiers beganne incontinently to 
spoile, to carry away, and to looke up the bootie they had wonne. 

I, v, 1-17. But Martius was marvellous angry with them, and cryed out of them, 
that it was no time now to looke after spoyle, and to runne stragling 

heere and there to enrich themselves, whilest the other Consul and their fellowe 
cittizens peradventure were fighting with their enemies: and how that leaving the 
spoyle, they should seeke to winde themselves out of danger and perill. Howbeit 
crie, and saye, to them what he could, very fewe of them would harken to him. 
Wherefore taking those that willingly offered themselves to follow him, he went 
out of the cittie, and tooke his waye towardes that part, where he understoode the 
rest of the armie was: exhorting and intreating them by the waye that followed 
him not to be fainte harted, and ofte holding up his handes to heaven, he be- 
sought the goddes to be gracious and favorable unto him, that he might come 
in time to the battell, and in a good houre to hazarde his life in defence of his 
countrie-men. Now the Romaines when they were put in battell raye, and readye 
to take their targettes on their arms, and to girde them upon their arming coates, 
had a custome to make their willes at that very instant, without any manner of 
writing, naming him only whom they would make their heir in the presence of 
three or foure witnesses. Martius came just to that reckoning, whilest the souldiers 
were doing after that sorte, and that the enemies were approached 

I, vi, 26. so neere, as one stoode in viewe of the other. When they sawe him 
at his first comming, all blouddy, and in a swet, and but with a fewe 

men following him: some thereupon beganne to be afeard. But soone after, 
when they sawe him runne with a lively cheere to the Counsul, and to take him 
by the hande, declaring howe he had taken the cittie of Corioles, and that they 
sawe the Consul Cominius also kisse and imbrace him: then there was not a man 
but tooke harte againe to him, and beganne to be of a good courage, some hearing 
him report from poynt to poynt, the happie successe of this exployte, and other 
also coniecturing it by seeing their gestures a farre off. Then they all beganne 
to call upon the Consul to martch forward, and to delaye no longer but to give 
charge upon the enemie. Martius asked him howe the order of their enemies 
battell was, and on which side they had placed their best fighting 

I, vi, 63-68. men. The Consul made him aunswer, that he thought the bandes 
which were in the vowarde of their battell, were those of the Antiates, 

whom they esteemed to be the warlikest men, and which for valiaunt corage 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PLUTARCH 627 | 


would give no place, to any of the hoste of their enemies. Then prayed Martius, 
to be set directly against them. The Consul granted him, greatly praysing his 
courage. Then Martius, when both armies came almost to joyne, advaunced 
himselfe a good space before his companie, and went so fiercely to give charge 
on the voward that came right against him, that they could stand no longer in 
his handes: hee made such a lane through them, and opened a passage into the 
battell of the enemies. But the two winges of either side turned one to the other, 
to compasse him in between them: which the Consul Cominius perceiving, he 
sent thither straight of the best souldiers he had about him. So the battell was 
marvellous blouddie about Martius, and in a very shorte space many were slaine 
in the place. But in the end the Romaines were so strong, that they distressed 
the enemies, and brake their arraye: and scattering them, made them flye. Then 
they prayed Martius that he would retire to the campe, because they sawe he 
was able to do no more, he alreadie so wearied with the great paine he had taken, 
and so fainte with the great woundes he had upon him. But Martius aunswered 
them, that it was not for conquerours to yeelde, nor to be fainte harted: and 
thereupon beganne a freshe to chase those that fledde, untill such time as the 
armie of the enemies was utterly overthrowne, and numbers of them slaine and 
taken prisoners. The next morning betimes, Martius went to the Consul, and the 
other Romaines with him. There the Consul Cominius going up to his chayr of 
state, in the presence of the whole armie, gave thankes to the goddes 

for so great, glorious, and prosperous a victorie: then he spake to I, ix, 5-15. 
Martius, whose valiantnesse he commended beyond the moone, both 

for that he himselfe sawe him do with his eyes, as also for that Martius had re- 
ported unto him. So in the ende he willed Martius, that he should choose out 
of all the horses they had taken of their enemies, and of all their 

goodes they had wonne (whereof there was great store) tenne of everie I, ix, 4o. 
sorte which he liked best, before any distribution should be made to 

other. Besides this great honourable offer he had made him, he gave 

him testimonie that he had wonne that daye the price of prowesse I, ix, 18. 
above all other, a goodly horse with a capparison, and all furniture 

to him: which the whole armie beholding, did marvellously praise and commend. 
But Martius stepping forth, told the Counsull, he most thankefully 

accepted the gift of his horse, and was a glad man besides, that his I, ix, 46. 
service had deserved his generalles commendation: and as for his 

other offer, which was rather a mercenarie rewarde, then an honorable recompence, 
he would have none of it, but was contented to have his equal part with other 
souldiers. Onely, this grace (sayed he) I crave and beseech you to graunt me. 
Among the Volsces there is an olde friend and hoast of mine, an honest 
wealthie man, and now a prisoner, who living before in great wealth 
in his owne countrie, liveth nowe a poore prisoner, in the hands of 
his enemies: and yet notwithstanding all this his miserie and misfortune, it would 
do me great pleasure if I could save him from this one danger: to keepe him from 
being solde as a slave. The souldiers hearing Martiws wordes, made a marvellous 
great shoute among them: and there were more that wondred at his great con- 
tentation and abstinence, when they sawe so little covetousnes in him, then they 
were that highly praised and extolled his valiantnes. For even they themselves, 
that did somewhat malice and envie his glorie, to see him thus honoured, and 
passingly praysed did thinke him so much the more worthie of an honorable 
recompence for his valiant service, as the more carelesly he refused the great offer 


Tix 
98-103. 


628 APPENDIX 


made unto him for his profitte: and they esteemed more the vertue that was in 
him, that made him refuse such rewards, then that which made them to be offered 
to him, as unto a worthie person. For it is farre more commendable, to use riches 
well, then to be valiant: and yet it is better not to desire them then to use them 
well. After this shoute and noyse of the assembly was somewhat appeased; the 
Consul Cominius beganne to speake in this sorte. We cannot compell artius 
to take these giftes wee offer him if he will not receive them: but we will give him 
such a reward for the noble service he hath done, as he cannot refuse. Therefore 
we do order and decree, that henceforth he be called Coriolanus, 

I, ix, 71-78. unlesse his valiant actes have wonne him that name before our 
nomination. And so ever since, he still bare the third name of Corio- 

lanus. And thereby it appeareth, that the first name the Romaines have, as 
Caius: was our Christian name now. The second as Martius: was the name of 
the house and familie they came of. The third, was some addition given, either 
for some act or notable service, or for some marke on their face, or of some shape 
of their bodie, or else for some speciall vertue they had. Even so did the Grecians 
in olde time give additions to Princes, by reason of some notable acte worthie 
_memorie. . . . Now when this warre was ended, the flatterers of the people began 
to sturre up sedition againe, without any new occasion, or just matter offered of 
complaint. For they did ground this second insurrection against the Nobilitie 
and Patricians, upon the peoples miserie and misfortune, that could not but 
fall out, by reason of the former discorde and sedition betweene them and the 
Nobilitie. Because the most part of the arable land within the territorie of Rome, 
was become heathie and barren for lacke of plowing, for that they had no time 
nor meane to cause corne to be brought them out of other countries to sowe, by 
reason of their wars which made the extreame dearth they had among them. 
Now those busie pratlers that sought the peoples good will, by such flattering 
words, perceiving great scarcitie of corne to be within the citie, and though there 
had bene plenty enough, yet the common people had no money to buie it: they 
spread abroad false tales and rumors against the Nobilitie, that they 

I, i, 74. in revenge of the people, had practised and procured the extreame 
dearth among them. Furthermore, in the middest of this stir, there 

came ambassadours to Rome from the citie of Velitres, that offered up their citie 
to the Romaines, and praied them they would send new inhabitants to replenish 
the same: because the plague had bene so extreame among them, and had killed 
such a number of them, as there was not left alive the tenth person of the people 
that had bene there before. So the wise men of Rome began to thinke, that the 
necessitie of the Velitrians fell out in a most happy houre, and how by this occasion 
it was very meere in so great a scarcitie of victuals, to disburden 

I, i, 243. Rome ofa great number of citizens: and by this meanes as well to take 
away this new sedition, and utterlie to rid it out of the citie, and also 

to cleare the same of many mutinous and seditious persons, being the superfluous 
ill humours that greevouslie fedde this disease. Hereupon the Consuls prickt 
out all those by a bill, whom they intended to send to Velitres, to go dwell there 
as in forme of a colonie: and they leavied out of all the rest that remained in the 
citie of Rome, a great number to go against the Volsces, hoping by the meanes 
of forraine warre, to pacifie their sedition at home. Moreover they imagined, 
when the poore with the riche, and the meane sorte with the Nobilitie, should by 
this devise be abroad in the warres, and in one campe, and in one service, and in 
one like danger: that then they would be more quiet and loving together. But 


OE — ee 


ee ee eee eee ee a a a rn’ 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PLUTARCH 629 


Sicinius and Brutus, two seditious Tribunes, spake against either of these devises, 
and cried out upon the noble men, that under the gentle name of a colonie: they 
would cloake and colour the most cruell and unnaturall fact as might be: because 
they sent their poore citizens into a sore infected citie and pestilent ayre, full of 
dead bodies unburied, and there also to dwell under the tuition of a strange god, 
that had so cruelly persecuted his people. This were (said they) even as much 
as if the Senate should headlong cast downe the people into a most bottomlesse 
pit. And are not yet contented to have famished some of the poore citizens here- 
tofore to death, and to put other of them even to the mercie of the plague: but a 
fresh, they have procured a voluntarie warre, to the end they would leave behinde 
no kinde of miseries and ill, wherewith the poore sillie people should not be plagued, 
and onely because they are wearie to serve the riche. The common people being 
set on a broile and braverie with these wordes, would not appeare when the Con- 
suls called their names by a bill, to prest them for the warres, neither would they 
be sent out to this new colonie: in so much as the Senate knewe not well what to 
say or do in the matter. Martius then, who was now growne to great credit, and 
a stoute man besides, and of great reputation with the noblest men of Rome, rose 
up, and openly spake against these flattering Tribunes. And for the replenishing 
of the citie of Velitres, he did compell those that were chosen, to go thither, and to 
depart the citie, upon great penalties to him that should disobey: but to the 
warres, the people by no meanes would be brought or constrained. So Martius 
taking his friends and followers with him, and such as he could by 

faire words intreate to go with him, did runne certaine forreys into III, iii, 5. 
the dominion of the Antiates, where he met with great plentie of 

corne, and had a marvellous great spoile, as well of cattell, as of men he had 
taken prisoners, whom he brought away with him, and reserved nothing for him- 
selfe. Afterwards, having brought backe againe all his men that went out with 
him, safe and sound to Rome, and every man riche and loden with spoile: then 
the home-tarriers and house-doves that kept Rome still, began to repent them that 
it was not their hap to go with him, and so envied both them that had sped so 
well in this journey, and also of malice to Martius, they spighted to see his credit 
and estimation increase still more and more, because they accounted him to be a 
great hinderer of the people. Shortly after this, Martius stood for the Consulship: 
and the common people favoured his sute, thinking it would be a shame to them 
to denie, and refuse the chiefest noble man of bloud, and most worthie person of 
Rome, and specially him that had done so great service and good to her common- 
wealth. For the custome of Rome was at that time, that such as did sue for any 
office, should for certaine dayes before be in the market place, onely 
with a poore gowne on their backes, and without any coate under- 
neath, to pray the citizens to remember them at the day of election: 
which was thus devised, either to move the people the more, by requesting them 
in such meane apparell, or else because they might shew them their wounds they 
had gotten in the warres in the service of the commonwealth, as manifest markes 
and testimonie of their valiantnesse. Now it is not to be thought that the suters 
went thus lose in a simple gowne in the market place, without any coate under it, 
for feare, and suspition of the common people: for offices of dignitie in the citie 
were not then given by favour or corruption. It was but of late time, and long 
after this, that buying and selling fell out in election of officers, and that the voices 
of the electours were bought for money. . . . Now Martius following this custome, 
shewed many woundes and cuts upon his bodie, which he had received in 


Il, ii, 
155-165. 


630 APPENDIX 


seventeene years service at the warres, and in many sundrie battels, being ever the 
foremost man that did set out feete to fight. So that there was not 
a man among the people, but was ashamed of himselfe, to refuse so 
valiant a man: and one of them said to another, we must needes choose 
him Consull, there is no remedie. But when the day of election was come, and 
that Martius came to the market place with great pompe, accom- 

Ill, i, 35. panied with all the Senate, and the whole Nobilitie of the citie about 
him, who sought to make him Consul, with the greatest instance and 

intreatie they could, or ever attempted for any man or matter: then the love 
and good will of the common people, turned straight to hate and envie toward 
him, fearing to put this office of soveraigne authoritie into his hands, being a 
man somewhat partiall toward the nobilitie, and of great credit and authoritie 
amongst the Patricians, and as one they might doubt would take away altogether 
the libertie from the people. Whereupon for these considerations, they refused 
Martius in the end, and made two other that were suters, Consuls. The Senate 
being marvellously offended with the people, did accompt the shame of this re- 
fusall, rather to redound to themselves, then to Martius: but Martius tooke it 
in farre worse parte then the Senate, and was out of all pacience. For he was a 
man too full of passion and choller, and too much given to over selfe will and 
opinion, as one of a high minde and great courage, that lacked the gravitie, and 
affabilitie that is gotten with judgement of learning and reason, which onely is 
to be looked for in a governour of state: and that remembred not how wilfulnesse 
is the thing of the world, which a governour of a commonwealth for pleasing should 
shun, being that which Plato called solitarinesse. As in the end, all men that are 
wilfully given to a selfe opinion and obstinate minde, and who will never yeeld 
to others reason, but to their owne: remaine without companie, and forsaken of 
all men. For a man that will live in the world, must needs have patience, which 
lustie blouds make but a mocke at. So Martius being a stoute man of nature, 
that never yeelded in any respect, as one thinking that to overcome alwaies, 
and to have the upper hand in all matters, was a token of magnanimitie, and of 
no base and faint courage, which spitteth out anger from the most weake and 
passioned part of the heart, much like the matter of an impostume: went home to 
his house, full fraighted with spight and malice against the people, being accom- 
panied with all the lustiest young gentlemen, whose mindes were nobly bent, as 
those that came of noble race, and commonly used for to follow and honour him. 
But then specially they flockt about him, and kept him companie, to his much 
harme: for they did but kindle and inflame his choller more and more, being sorie 
with him for the injurie the people offered him, because he was their captaine 
and leader to the warres, that taught them all marshall discipline, and stirred 
up in them a noble emulation of honour and valiantnesse, and yet without envie, 
praising them that deserved best. In the meane season, there came great plentie 
of corne to Rome, that had been bought part in Italie, and part was sent out of 
Sicile, as given by Gelon the tyrant of Syracusa: so that many stood in great 
hope, that the dearth of victuals being holpen, the civill dissention would also 
cease. The Senate sate in counsell upon it immediately, the common people stood 
also about the pallace where the counsell was kept, gaping what resolution would 
fall out: perswading themselves, that the corne they had bought should be solde 
good cheape, and that which was given should be devided by the polle, without 
paying any pennie, and the rather, because certaine of the Senatours amongst 
them did so wishe and perswade the same. But Martius standing upon his feete, 


Il, ii, 
I10-113. 


; 
3 
| 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PLUTARCH 631 


did somewhat sharpely take up those, who went about to gratifie the people 
therein: and called them people pleasers, and traitours to the nobil- 

itie. Moreover, he saied, they nourished against themselves, the II, i, 57-59. 
naughtie seede and cockle of insolencie and sedition, which had bene 

sowed and scattered abroade amongst the people whom they should have cut off, 
if they had bene wise, and have prevented their greatnesse: and not 

to their owne destruction to have suffered the people, to stablish a III, i, 88-95. 
magistrate for themselves, of so great power and authoritie, as that 

man had, to whome they had granted it. Who was also to be feared, because he 
obtained what he would, and did nothing but what he listed, neither 
passed for any obedience to the Consuls, but lived in all libertie, 
acknowledging no superiour to commaund him, saving the onely heads 
and authours of their faction, whom he called his magistrates. Therefore saied 
he, they that gave counsell, and perswaded that the corne should be given out to 
the common people gratis, as they used to do in the cities of Greece, 
where the people had more absolute power: did but onely nourish 
their disobedience, which would breake out in the ende, to the utter 38-140. 
ruine and overthrowe of the whole state. For they will not think it is done in 
recompense of their service past, sithence they know well enough they have so 
oft refused to go the warres, when they were commanded: neither 
for their mutinies when they went with us, whereby they have rebelled 
and forsaken their countrie: neither for their accusations which their 
flatterers have preferred unto them, and they have received, and made good 
against the Senate: but they will rather judge, we give and grant them this, as 
abasing ourselves, and standing in feare of them, and glad to flatter 
them every way. By this meanes, their disobedience will still growe 
worse and worse: and they will never leave to practise new sedition, 
and uprores. Therefore it were a great follie for us, me thinkes to do it: yea, 
shall I say more? we should if we were wise, take from them their 
Tribuneship, which most manifestly is the embasing of the Consul- 
ship, and the cause of the division of the citie. The state whereof as 
it standeth, is not now as it was wonte to be, but becommeth dismembred in two 
factions, which maintains alwaies civill dissention and discorde 
betweene us, and will never suffer us againe to be united into one 
body. Martius dilating the matter with many such like reasons, 
wonne all the young men, and almost all the riche men to his opinion: in so much 
they range it out, that he was the only man, and alone in the city, who stood 
out against the people, and never flattered them. There were only a fewe old 
men that spake against him, fearing least some mischiefe might fall out upon it, 
as indeed there followed no great good afterward. For the Tribunes of the people, 
being present at this consultation of the Senate, when they sawe that the opinion 
of Martius was confirmed with the more voices, they left the Senate, and went 
downe to the people, crying out for helpe, and that they would assemble to save 
their Tribunes. Hereupon the people ran on head in tumult together, before 
whom the words that Martius spake in the Senate were openly reported: which 
the people so stomaked, that even in that furie they were ready to flie upon the 
whole Senate. But the Tribunes laide all the fault and burthen 
wholly upon Martius, and sent their sergeants forthwith to arrest 
him, presently to appeare in person before the people, to answer the 
words he had spoken in the Senate. Martius stoutly withstood these officers that 


It, i, 
128-132. 


III, i, 


100 St 
147-157- 


Il, i, 
160-166. 


II, i, 
195-201. 


II, i, 
131-136. 


Il, i, 
205-260. 


632 APPENDIX 


came to arrest him. Then the Tribunes in their owne persons, accompanied 
with the Acdiles, went to fetche him by force, and so laide violent hands upon 
him. Howbeit the noble Patricians gathering together about him, made the 
Tribunes give back, and laid it sore upon the Aédiles: so for that time, the night 
parted them, and the tumult appeased. The next morning betimes, the Consuls 
seeing the people in an uprore, running to the market place out of all parts of the 
citie, they were affraide least all the citie would together by the eares: wherefore 
assembling the Senate in all hast, they declared how it stood them upon, to appease 
the furie of the people, with some gentle words, or gratefull decrees in their favour: 
and moreover, like wise men they should consider, it was not no time to stand at 
defence and in contention, nor yet to fight for honour against the communaltie: 
they being fallen to so great an extremitie, and offering such imminent danger. 
Wherefore they were to consider temperately of things, and to deliver some present 
and gentle pacification. The most part of the Senatours that were present at this 
counsell, thought this opinion best, and gave their consents unto it. Whereupon 
the Consuls rising out of consull, went to speake unto the people as gently as they 
could, and they did pacifie their furie and anger, purging the Senate of all the unjust 
accusations laid upon them, and used great modestie in perswading them, and also 
in reproving the faults they had committed. And as for the rest, that touched the 
sale of corne: they promised there should be no disliking offered them in the price. 
So the most part of the people being pacified, and appearing so plainly by the great 
silence and still that was among them, as yeelding to the Consuls, and liking well 
of their words: the Tribunes then of the people rose out of their seates, and said. 
Forasmuch as the Senate yeelded unto reason, the people also for their part, as 
Ih i became them, did likewise give place unto them: but notwith- 

>” standing, they would that Martius should come in person to aunswer 
390-398. to the articles they had devised. First, whether he had not solicited 
and procured the Senate to change the present state of the commonweale, and to 
take the soueraigne authoritie out of the peoples hands. Next, when he was 
sent for by authoritie of their officers, why he did contemptuously resist and dis- 
obey. Lastly, seeing he had driven and beaten the Atdiles into the market place 
before all the world: if in doing this, hee had not done as much as in him lay, to 
raise civill warres, and to set one citizen against another. All this was spoken to 
one of these two endes, either that Martius against his nature should be con- 
strained to humble himself, and to abase his haughtie and fierce mind: or else if 
Il, iii he continued still in his stoutnesse, he should incurre the peoples dis- 
Reese. pleasure and ill will so farre, that he should never possibly win them 
againe. Which they hoped would rather fall out so, then otherwise: 
as in deede they gest unhappily, considering Martius nature and disposition. 
So Martius came, and presented himselfe, to answere their accusations against 
him, and the people held their peace, and gave attentive eare, to heare what he 
would say. But where they thought to have heard very humble and lowly wordes 
Il, iii come from him, he beganne not only to use his wonted boldness of 

’ _’ speaking (which of itselfe was very rough and unpleasant, and did 

more aggravate his accusation, then purge his innocencie) but also 
gave himselfe in his wordes to thunder, and looke therewithall so grimly, as though 
he made no reckoning of the matter. This stirred coales among the people, who 
were in wonderfull furie at it, & their hate and malice grew so toward him, that 
they could hold no longer, beare, nor indure his braverie and carelesse boldnes. 
Whereupon Sicinius, the cruellest and stoutest of the Tribunes, after he had 


91-97- 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PLUTARCH 633 


whispered a litle with his companions, did openly pronounce in the face of all the 
people, Martius as condemned by the Tribunes to die. Then pres- 
ently he commaunded the A&ediles to apprehend him, and carie him 
straight to the rocke Tarpeian, and to cast him hedlong downe the 
same. When the Atdiles came to lay handes upon Martius to do that they were 
commanded, divers of the people themselves thought it too cruell 
and violent a deede. The noble men also being much troubled to 
see such force and rigour used, beganne to crie aloude, helpe Martius: 
so those that laide handes on him being repulsed, they compassed him in round 
among themselves, and some of them holding up their handes to the people, be- 
sought them not to handle him thus cruelly. But neither their words, nor crying 
out could ought prevaile, the tumult and hurly burley was so great, untill such 
time as the Tribunes owne friends and kinsemen weying with themselves the 
impossiblenesse to convey Martius to execution, without great slaughter & murder 
of the nobilitie: did perswade and advise not to proceede in so violent and ex- 
traordinarie a sort, as to put such a man to death, without lawfull processe in 
lawe, but that they should referre the sentence of his death, to the free voice of the 
people. Then Sicinius bethinking himselfe a litle, did aske the Patricians, for 
what cause they tooke Martius out of the officers handes that went 
to doe execution? The Patricians asked him againe, why they 
would of themselves so cruelly and wickedly put to death, so noble 
and valiant a Romaine as Martius was, and that without law or justice? Well, 
then said Sicinius, if that be the matter, let there be no more quarrell or dis- 
sention against the people: for they do grant your demaund, that 
his cause shall be heard according to the law. Therefore said he to 
Martius, we doe will and charge you to appeare before the people, 
the third day of our next sitting and assembly here, to make your purgation for 
such articles as shall be objected against you, that by free voice the people may 
give sentence upon you as shall please them. The noble men were glad then 
of the adjornment, and were much pleased they had gotten Martius out of this 
danger. In the meane space, before the third day of their next cession came about, 
the same being kept every ninth day continually at Rome, whereupon they call 
it now in Latin, Nundina: there fell out warre against the Antiates, which gave 
some hope to the nobilitie, that this adjornment would come to litle effect, thinking 
that this warre would hold them so long, as that the furie of the people against 
him would be well swaged, or utterly forgotten, by reason of the trouble of the 
warres. But contrarie to expectation, the peace was concluded presently with 
the Antiates, and the people returned again to Rome. Then the Pairicians assem- 
bled oftentimes together, to consult how they might stand to Martius, and keepe 
the Tribunes from occasion to cause the people to mutinie againe, and rise against 
the nobilitie. And there Appius Clodius (one that was taken ever as an heavie 
enemie to the people) did avow and protest, that they would utterly abase the 
authoritie of the Senate, and destroy the common weale, if they would suffer the 
common people to have authoritie by voices to give judgement against the nobilitie. 
On the other side againe, the most auncient Senatours, and such as were given to 
favour the common people, saide: that when the people should see they had 
authoritie of life and death in their handes, they would not be so cruell and fierce, 
but gentle and civill. More also, that it was not for contempt of nobilitie or the 
Senate, that they sought to have the authoritie of justice in their handes, as a 
preheminence and prerogative of honour: but because they feared, that them- 


III, iii, 
100-107. 


LIT, i; 
250-278. 


III, i, 
338-361. 


III, i, 
395-412. 


634 APPENDIX 


selves should be contemned and hated of the nobilitie. So as they were perswaded, 
that so soone as they gave them authoritie to judge by voices: so soone would 
they leave all envie and malice to condemne any. Martius seeing the Senate in 
great doubt howe to resolve, partly for the love and good will the nobilitie did 
beare him, and partly for the feare they stoode in of the people: 
asked aloud of the Tribunes, what matter they would burden him 
with? The Tribunes aunswered him, that they would shewe howe 
he did aspire to be king, and would prove that all his actions tended to usurpe 
tyrannicall power over Rome. Martius with that, rising up on his feete, saide: 
that thereupon he did willingly offer himselfe to the people, to be tried upon that 
accusation. And that if it were proved by him, he had so much as once thought 
of any such matter, that hee would then refuse no kinde of punishment they 
would offer him: conditionally (quoth he) that you charge me with nothing else 
besides, and that ye doe not also abuse the Senate. They promised they would 
not. Under these conditions the judgement was agreed upon, and the people 
assembled. And first of all the Tribunes would in any case (whatsoever became 
of it) that the people would proceede to give their voices by Tribes, 
and not by hundreds: for by this meanes the multitude of the poore 
needy people (and all such rable as had nothing to loose, and had 
lesse regard of honestie before their eies) came to be of greater force (because 
their voices were numbred by the polle) then the noble honest citizens, whose per- 
sons and purse did dutifully serve the common wealth in their warres. And 
then when the Tribunes saw they could not prove he went about to make himselfe 
King: they beganne to broach a fresh the former wordes that Martius had spoken 
in the Senate, in hindering the distribution of the corne at meane price unto the 
common people, and perswading also to take the office of Tribuneship from them. 
And for the third, they charged him a new, that he had not made the common 
distribution of the spoyle he had gotten in the invading the territories of the 
Antiates: but had of his owne authoritie devided it among them, who were with 
him in that journey. But this matter was most straunge of all to Martius, looking 
least to have bene burdened with that, as with any matter of offence. Whereupon 
being burdened on the sodaine; and having no readie excuse to make even at that 
instant: he beganne to fall a praising of the souldiers that had served with him 
in that journey. But those that were not with him, being the greater number, 
cried out so loud, and made such a noise that he could not be heard. To conclude, 
when they came to tell the voices of the Tribes, there were three 
voices odde, which condemned him to be banished for life. After 
declaration of the sentence, the people made such joy, as they never 
rejoyced more for any battell they had wonne upon their enemies, 
they were so brave and lively, and went home so jocondly from the 
assembly, for triumph of this sentence. The Senate againe in contrarie manner 
were as sad and heavie, repenting themselves beyond measure, that 
they had not rather determined to have done and suffered anything 
whatsoever, before the common people should so arrogantly and 
outragiously have abused their authoritie. There needed no difference of gar- 
ments I warrant you, nor outward shewes to know a Plebeian from a 

IV, ii, 3-5. Patrician, for they were easily discerned by their lookes. For he 
that was on the peoples side, looked cheerely on the matter: but he 

that was sad, and hung downe his head, he was sure of the noble mens side. Saving 
Martius alone, who neither in his countenance nor in his gate, did ever shew him- 


Ill, iii, 130. 
Ill, iii, 
168-176. 


IV, iii, 
21-25. 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PLUTARCH 635 


selfe abashed, or once let fall his great courage: but he onely of all other gentlemen 
that were angry at his fortune, did outwardly shew no manner of passion, nor 
care at all of himselfe. Not that he did patiently beare and temper 

his good hap, in respect of any reason he had, or by his quiet con- IV, i, 19-38. 
dition: but because he was so caried away with the vehemencie of 

anger, and desire of revenge, that he had no sense nor feeling of the hard state 
he was in, which the common people judge not to be sorow, although indeed it 
be the very same. For when sorow (as you would say) is set a fire, then it is 
converted into spite and malice, and driveth away for that time all faintnesse of 
heart and naturall feare. And this is the cause why the cholericke man is so 
altered and mad in his actions, as a man set on fire with a burning agew: for 
when a mans heart is troubled within, his pulse will beate marvellous strongly. 
Now that Martius was even in that taking, it appeared true soone after by his 
doings. For when he was come home to his house againe, and had taken his 
leave of his mother and wife, finding them weeping and shreeking 

out for sorrow, and had also comforted and perswaded them to be IV, i, 3-17. 
content with his chaunce: he went immediately to the gate of the 

citie, accompanied with a great number of Patricians that brought him thither, 
from whence he went on his way with three or foure of his friendes onely, taking 
nothing with him, nor requesting anything of any man. So he remained a few 
daies in the countrie at his houses, turmoyled with sundry sorts and kinds of 
thoughts, such as the fire of his choller did stirre up. In the end, seeing he could 
resolve no way, to take a profitable or honourable course, but onely was pricked 
forwarde still to be revenged of the Romaines: he thought to raise up some great 
wars against them, by their neerest neighbours. Whereupon he thought it his 
best way, first to stirre up the Volsces against them, knowing they were yet able 
enough in strength and riches to encounter them, notwithstanding their former 
losses they had received not long before, and that their power was not so much 
impaired, as their malice and desire was increased to be revenged of the Romaines. 
Now in the citie of Antium, there was one called Tullus Aufidiws, who for his 
riches, as also for his nobilitie and valiantnesse was honoured among 


the Volsces as a King. Martius knewe very well that Tullus did se 
more malice and envie him, then he did all the Romaines besides: : 
because that many times in battels where they met, they were ever I. viii 
at the encounter one against another, like lustie couragious youthes, taary 
striving in all emulation of honour, and had encountered many ts. 


times together. Insomuch as besides the common quarrell betweene 
them, there was bred a marvellous private hate one against another. Yet not- 
withstanding, considering that Tullus Aufidius was a man of a great mind, and 
that he above all other of the Volsces most desired revenge of the Romaines, for 
the injuries they had done unto them: hee did an acte that confirmed the true 
wordes of an auncient Poet, who saide: 
It is a thing full hard, mans anger to withstand, 
if it be stiffely bent to take an enterprise in hand. 
For then most men will have, the thing that they desire, 
although it cost their lives therefore, such force hath wicked ire. 

And so did he. For he disguised himselfe in such array and attire, as he thought 
no man could ever have knowen him for the person he was, seeing IV, iy 
him in that apparell he had upon his backe: and as Homer said of ©’ : 
Ulysses, So did he enter into the enemies towne. 


I-30. 


636 APPENDIX 


It was even twy-light when he entred the citie of Antium, and many people 
met him in the streets, but no man knew him. So he went directly to Tullus 
Aufidius house, and when he came thither, he got him up straight to 

IV, v, 27. the chimney harth, and sate him downe, and spake not a word to 
any man, his face all muffled over. They of the house spying him, 

wondered what he should be, and yet they durst not bid him rise. For ill favour- 
edly muffled and disguised as he was, yet there appeared a certaine 
majestie in his countenance, and in his silence: whereupon they 
went to Tullus who was at supper, to tell him of the strange disguising 
of this man. Tullus rose presently from the board, and comming towards him, 
asked him what he was, and wherefore he came. Then Martius unmufiled himselfe, 
and after he had paused a while, making no answere, he said unto him. If thou 
knowest me not yet, Tullus, and seeing me, dost not perhappes beleeve me to be 
the man I am indeede, I must of necessitie bewray myselfe to be that Iam. I 
am Caius Martius, who hath done to thy selfe particularly, and to all the Volces 
generally, great hurt and mischief, which I cannot denie for my surname of 
Coriolanus that I beare. For I never had other benefite nor recompence, of all 
the true and painefull service I have done, and the extreme daungers I have bene 
in, but this only surname: a good memorie and witnesse of the malice and dis- 
pleasure thou shouldest beare me. Indeede the name onely remaineth with me: 
for the rest, the envie and crueltie of the people of Rome have taken from me, 
by the sufferance of the dastardly nobilitie and magistrates, who have forsaken 
me, and let me be banished by the people. This extremitie hath now driven me 
to come as a poore suter, to take thy chimney harth, not of any 
hope I have to save my life thereby. For if I had feard death, I 
would not have come hither to have put my life in hazard: but prickt 
forward with spite and desire I have to be revenged of them that thus have banished 
me, whom now I beginne to be avenged on putting my person betweene thy 
enemies. Wherefore, if thou hast any heart to be wrecked of the injures thy 
enemies have done thee, speede thee now, and let my miserie serve thy turne, 
and so use it, as my service may be a benefite to the Volsces: promising thee, that 
I will fight with better good will for all you, then I did when I was against you, 
knowing that they fight more valiantly, who knowe the force of the enemie, then 
such as have never proved it. And if it be so that thou dare not, and that thou 
art wearie to prove fortune any more: then am I also wearie to live any longer. 
And it were no wisdome in thee, to have the life of him, who hath bene heretofore 
thy mortall enemie, and whose service now can nothing helpe nor pleasure thee. 
Tullus hearing what he said, was a marvellous glad man, and taking him by the 
hande, he saide unto him. Stand up, o Martius, and be of good cheere, for in 
profering thyselfe unto us, thou dost us great honour: and by this meanes thou 
maiest hope also of greater things, at all the Volsces handes. So he feasted him 
for that time, and entertained him in the honourablest manner he could, talking 
with him in no other matters at that present: but within few daies after, they 
fell to consultation together in what sort they should beginne their warres. Now 
on the other side, the citie of Rome was in marvellous uprore & discord, the 
nobilitie against the communaltie, and chiefely for Martius condemnation and 
banishment. . . . Now Tullus and Martius had secret conference with the greatest 
personages of the citie of Antium, declaring unto them, that now they had good 
time offered them to make warre with the Romaines, while they were in dis- 
sention one with another. They answered them, they were ashamed to breake 


IV, v, 
162-165. 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PLUTARCH 637 


the league, considering that they were sworne to keepe peace for two years. How- 
beit shortly after, the Romaines gave them great occasion to make warre with them. 
For on a holy day common playes being kept in Rome, upon some suspicion, 
or false report, they made proclamation by sound of trumpet, that all the Volsces 
should avoide out of Rome before sunne set. Some thinke this was a craft and 
deceipt of Martius, who sent one to Rome to the Consuls, to accuse the Volsces 
falsely, advertising them how they had made a conspiracy to set uppon them, 
whilest they were busie in seeing these games, and also to set their city a fire. This 
open proclamation made all the Volsces more offended with the Romaines, then 
ever they were before: and Tullus aggravating the matter, did so inflame the 
Volsces against them, that in the end they sent their ambassadours to Rome, to 
summon them to deliver their lands and townes againe, which they had taken 
from them in times past, or to looke for present warres. The Romaines hearing 
this, were marvellously netled: and made no other aunswer but thus. If the 
Volsces be the first that beginne warre: the Romaines will be the last will end it. 
Incontinently upon returne of the Volsces ambassadours, and deliverie of the 
Romaines aunswer: Tullus caused an assembly generall to be made of the Volsces, 
and concluded to make warre uppon the Romaines. This done, Twllus did counsell 
them to take Martius into their service, and not to mistrust him for the remem- 
braunce of any thing past, but boldly to trust him in any matter to come: for he 
would doe them more service in fighting for them, then ever he did them dis- 
pleasure in fighting against them. So Martius was called forth, who spake so 
excellently in the presence of them all, that he was thought no lesse eloquent in 
tongue, then warlike in shew: and declared himselfe both expert in warres, and 
wise with valiantnes. Thus he was joyned in commission with Twllus as generall 
of the Volsces, having absolute authority between them to follow and pursue the 
warres. But Martius fearing least tract of time to bring this army IV. vi 

together with all the munition and furniture of the Volsces, would A sect 

tobbe him of the meane he had to execute his purpose and intent: eM 
left order with the rulers and chiefe of the city, to assemble the rest of their power, 
and to prepare all necessary provision for the campe. Then he with the lightest 
souldiers he had, and that were willing to follow him, stale away uppon the sodaine, 
and marched with all speede, and entred the territories of Rome, before the 
Romains heard any newes of his comming. In so much as the Volsces found 
such spoile in the fields, as they had more then they could spend in their campe, 
and were weary to drive and cary away that they had. Howbeit the gaine of 
the spoile and the hurt they did to the Romaines in this invasion, was the least 
part of his intent. For his chiefest purpose was, to increase still the malice and 
dissention between the nobility, and the communalty: and to draw that on, he 
was very carefull to keepe the noble mens landes and goods safe from harme and 
burning, but spoiled all the whole countrey besides, and would suffer no man to 
take or hurt any thing of the noble mens. This made greater sturre and broile 
between the nobility & the people, then was before. For the noble IV, vi 

men fell out with the people, because they had so unjustly banished y 
a man of so great valure and power. The people on the other side, 
accused the nobility, how they had procured Martius to make these wars, to be 
revenged of them: because it pleased them to see their goods burnt IV, vi, 

and spoiled before their eyes, whilest themselves were well at ease, 
and did behold the peoples losses and misfortunes, and knowing 
their owne goods safe and out of daunger: and how the warre was not made against 


137-143. 


I05-III. 


638 APPENDIX 


the noble men, that had the enemy abroad, to keepe that they had in safety. Now 
Martius having done this first exploite (which made the Volsces bolder, and lesse 
fearefull of the Romaines) brought home all the army againe, without losse of any 
man. After their whole army (which was marvellous great, and very forward 
to service) was assembled in one campe: they agreed to leave part of it for garrison 
in the country about, and the other part should goe on, and make the warre upon 
the Romaines. So Martius bad Tullus choose, and take which of the two charges 
he liked best. Tudlus made him aunswere, hee knew by experience that Martius 
was no lesse valiant than himselfe, and how hee ever had better fortune and good 
happe in all battells, then him selfe had. Therefore he thought it best for him 
to have the leading of those that should make the warres abroad: and him selfe 
would keep home, to provide for the safetie of the cities and of his countrey, and 
to furnish the campe also of all necessary provision abroade. So Martius being 
stronger then before, went first of all unto the city of Cercees, inhabited by the 
Romaines, who willingly yeelded them selves, and therefore had no hurt. From 
thence he entred the countrey of the Latines, imagining the Romaines would 
fight there, to defend the Latines, who were their confederates, & had many times 
sent unto the Romaines for their aide. But on the one side, the people of Rome 
were very ill willing to goe: and on the other side the Consuls being upon their 
going out of their office, would not hazard them selves for so small a time: so that 
the ambassadours of the Latines returned home againe, and did no good. Then 
Martius did besiege their cities, and having taken by force the townes of the 
Tolerinians, Vicanians, Pedanians, and the Bolanians, who made resistaunce: hee 
sacked all their goods, and tooke them prisoners. Such as did yeeld them selves 
willingly unto him, he was as carefull as possible might be, to defend them from 
hurt: and because they should receive no damage by his will, he removed his 
campe as farre from their confines as he could. Afterwards, he tooke the city of 
Boles by assault, being about an hundred furlong from Rome, where he had a 
marvellous great spoile, and put every man to the sword that was able to carie 
weapon. The other Volsces that were appointed to remaine in garrison for defence 
of their countrey, hearing this good news, would tary no longer at 
home, but armed themselves, and ranne to Martius campe, saying they 
did acknowledge no other captaine but him. Hereupon his fame 
ranne through al Italie, and every one praised him for a valiant captaine, for that 
by change of one man for another, such and so straunge events fell out in the 
state. In this while, all went still to wracke at Rome. For, to come 

V, i, 20-22. into the field to fight with the enemy, they could not abide to heare 
of it, they were one so much against another, and full of seditious 

wordes, the nobility against the people, and the people against the nobility. 
Untill they had intelligence at the length that the enemies had laide siege to the 
city of Lavinium, in the which were all the temples and images of the goddes their 
protectours, and from whence came first their auncient originall, for that Aineas 
at his first arrivall into Italie did builde that citie. Then fell there out a mar- 
IV, vi, vellous sodaine chaunge of minde among the people, and farre more 
ios: straunge and contrary in the nobility. For the people thought good 

to repeale the condemnation and exile of Martius. The Senate 

assembled uppon it, would in no case yeeld to that. Who either did it of a selfe 
will to bee contrary to the peoples desire: or because Martius should not returne 
through the grace and favour of the people. Or else, because they were throughly 
angry and offended with him, that he would set uppon the whole, being offended 


IV, vii, 
I-35. 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PLUTARCH 639 


but by a few, and in his doinges would shew him selfe as open enemy besides unto 
his countrey: notwithstanding the most part of them tooke the wrong they had 
done him, in marvellous ill part, and as if the injurie had beene done unto them- 
selves. Report being made of the Senates resolution, the people found them- 
selves in a straight: for they coulde authorise and confirme nothing by their 
voices, unlesse it had beene first propounded and ordained by the Senate. But 
Martius hearing this sturre about him, was in a greater rage with them then 
before: in so much as he raised his siege incontinently before the city of Lavinium, 
and going towardes Rome, lodged his campe within forty furlong of the citie, 
at the ditches called Cluilie. His incamping so neare Rome, did put all the whole 
city in a wonderfull feare: howbeit for the present time it appeased the sedition 
and dissention betwixt the Nobility and the people. For there was no Consull, 
Senatour, nor Magistrate, that durst once contrary the opinion of the people, 
for the calling home againe of Martius. When they saw the women in a mar- 
vellous feare, running up and downe the city: the temples of the goddes full of 
olde people, weeping bitterly in their prayers to the goddes: and finally, not a 
man either wise or hardy to provide for their safety: then they were all of opinion, 
that the people had reason to call home Martius againe, to reconcile them selves 
to him, and that the Senate on the contrary part, were in marvellous great fault 
to bee angry and in choller with him, when it stoode them uppon rather to have 
gone out and intreated him. So they all agreede together to send ambassadours 
unto him, to let him understand how his countrey men did call him 

home againe, and restored him to all his goods, and besought him to V, i. 
deliver them from this warre. The ambassadours that were sent, were 

Martius familiar friends, and acquaintaunce, who looked at the least for a curteous 
welcome of him, as of their familiar friend and kinseman. Howbeit they found 
nothing lesse. For at their comming, they were brought through the campe, 
to the place where he was set in his chaire of state, with a marvellous 

and an unspeakeable majesty, having the chiefest men of the Volsces V, iv, 21-44. 
about him: so hee commaunded them to declare openly the cause of 

their comming. Which they delivered in the most humble and lowly wordes 
they possibly could devise, and with all modest countenaunce and behaviour 
agreable for the same. When they had done their message: for the injury they 
had done him, he aunswered them very whotly, and in great choller. But as 
generall of the Volsces, he willed them to restore unto the Volsces, all their landes 
and cities they had taken from them in former warres: and moreover, that they 
should give them the like honour and freedome of Rome, as they had before given 
to the Latines. For otherwise they had no other meane to end this warre, if they 
did not graunt these honest and just conditions of peace. Thereupon he gave 
them thirty daies respit to make him aunswere. So the ambassadours returned 
straight to Rome, and Martius forthwith departed with his army out of the terri- 
tories of the Romaines. This was the first matter wherewith the Volsces (that 
most envied Martius glory and authority) did charge Martius with. Among 
those, Tullus was chief: who though hee had received no private injurie or dis- 
pleasure of Martius, yet the common fault and imperfection of mans nature 
wrought in him, and it grieved him to see his owne reputation blem- 
ished, through Martius great fame and honour, and so him selfe to be 
lesse esteemed of the Volsces, then he was before. This fell out the 
more, because every man honoured Martius, and thought he only could do all, 
and that all other governors and captaines must be content with such credite 


IV, vii, 
18-28. 


640 APPENDIX 


and authority, as he would please to countenaunce them with. From hence they 
derived all their first accusations and secret murmurings against Martius. For 
private captains conspiring against him, were very angry with him: and gave it 
out, that the removing of the campe was a manifest treason, not of 
the townes, nor fortes, nor of armes, but of time and occasion, which 
was a losse of great importaunce, because it was that which in treason 
might both lose and binde all, and preserve the whole. Now Martius having given 
the Romaines thirty daies respit for their answer, and specially because the wars 
have not accustomed to make any great changes, in lesse space of time then that: 
hee thought it good yet, not to lie a sleepe and idle all the while, but went and 
destroyed the lands of the enemies allies, and tooke seven great cities of theirs 
well inhabited, and the Romaines durst not once put themselves into the fielde, 
to come to their aide and helpe: they were so fainte hearted, so mistrustfull, and 
loth besides to make warres. In so much as they properly resembled the bodies 
paralyticke, and losed of their limmes and members: as those which through the 
palsey have lost all their sence and feeling. Wherefore, the time of peace expired, 
Martius being returned into the dominions of the Romaines againe 
with all his army, they sent another ambassade unto him, to pray 
peace, and the remove of the Volsces out of their countrey: that 
afterwardes they might with better leysure fall to such agreementes together, as 
should bee thought most meete and necessary. For the Romaines were no men 
that would ever yeelde for feare. But if he thought the Volsces had any ground 
to demaund resonable articles and conditions, all that they would reasonably 
aske should be graunted unto, by the Romaines, who of them selves would will- 
ingly yeelde to reason, conditionally, that they did lay downe armes. Martius 
to that aunswered: that as generall of the Volsces he would reply 

V, i, 78-82. nothing unto it. But yet as a Romaine citizen, he would counseli 
them to let fall their pride, and to be conformable to reason, if they 

were wise: and that they should returne againe within three daies, delivering up 
the articles agreed upon, which he had first delivered them. Or otherwise, that 
hee would no more give them assuraunce or safe conduite to returne againe into 
his campe, with such vaine and frivolous messages. When the ambassadours 
were returned to Rome, and had reported Martius aunswer to the Senate: their city 
being in extreame daunger, and as it were in a terrible storme or tempest, they 
threw out (as the common proverbe saieth) there holy ancker. For then they 
appointed all the bishoppes, priestes, ministers of the gods, and keepers of holy 
thinges, and all the augures or soothsayers, which foreshew thinges to come by 
observation of the flying of birdes (which is an olde auncient kinde of prophecying 
and divination amongest the Romaines) to goe to Martius apparelled, as when they 
doe their sacrifices: and first to intreate him to leave off warre, and then that hee 
would speake to his countrey men, and conclude peace with the Volsces. Martius 
suffered them to come into his campe, but yet he granted them nothing the more, 
neither did he entertaine them or speake more curteously to them, then he did 
the first time that they came unto him, saving onely that hee willed them to take 
the one of the two: eyther to accept peace under the first conditions offered, or 
else to receive warre. When all this, goodly rable of superstition and priestes 
were returned, it was determined in counsell that none should goe out of the gates 
of the citie, and that they should watch and ward uppon the walls, to repulse their 
enemies if they came to assault them: referring themselves and all their hope to 
time, and fortunes uncertaine favour, not knowing otherwise how to remedy the 


IV, vii, 
3-10. 


ath cies 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PLUTARCH 641 


daunger. Now all the city was full of tumult, feare, and marvellous doubt what 
would happen: untill at the length there fell out such a like matter, 

as Homer oftimes saide they would least have thought of. For in : 
great matters, that happen seldome, Homer saieth, and crieth out So AO: 
in this sort. 


The goddesse Pallas she, with her faire glistering eyes, 
did put into his minde such thoughts, and made him so devise... . . 


Now the Romaine ladies and gentlewomen did visite all the temples and gods 
of the same, to make their praiers unto them: but the greatest ladies (and more 
part of them) were continuallie about the aulter of Jupiter Capitolin, among which 
troope by name, was Valeria, Publicolaes owne sister. The selfe same Publicola, 
who did such notable service to the Romaines, both in peace and _ ... 

warres: and was dead also certaine yeares before, as we have declared Meth Tete: 
in his life. His sister Valeria was greatly honoured and reverenced among all 
the Romaines: and did so modestly and wisely behave herselfe, that she did not 
shame nor dishonour the house she came off. So she sodainly fell into such a 
fansie, as we have rehearsed before, and had (by some god as I thinke) taken hold 
of a noble devise. Whereupon she rose, and the other ladies with her, and they 
all together went straight to the house of Volumnia, Martius mother: and comming 
in to her, found her, and Martius wife her daughter in law set together, and having 
her husband Martius young children in her lap. Now all the traine of these ladies 
sitting in a ring round about her: Valeria first began to speake in this sort unto her. 
We ladies, are come to visite you ladies (my lady Volumnia and Virgilia) by no 
direction from the Senate, nor commaundement of other magistrate: but through 
the inspiration (as I take it) of some god above. Who having taken compassion 
and pittie of our praiers, hath moved us to come unto you, to intreate you in a 
matter, as well beneficiall for us, as also for the whole citizens in general: but to 
yourselves in especiall (if it please you to credit me) and shall redound to our more 
fame and glorie, then the daughters of the Sabynes obtained in former age, when 
they procured loving peace, instead of hatefull war, between their fathers and their 
husbands. Come on good ladies, and let us go altogether unto Martius, to intreat 
him to take pittie upon us, and also to report the trothe unto him, how much you 
are bound unto the citizens: who notwithstanding they have sustained great 
hurt and losses by him, yet they have not hitherto sought revenge upon your 
persons by any discourteous usage, neither ever conceived any such thought or 
intent against you, but do deliver you safe into his hands, though thereby they 
looke for no better grace or clemencie from him. When Valeria had spoken this 
unto them, all the other ladies together with one voice confirmed that she had 
said. Then Volumnia in this sort did aunswer her. My good ladies, we are 
partakers with you of the common miserie and calamitie of our countrie, and yet 
our griefe exceedeth yours the more, by reason of our particular misfortune: to 
feele the losse of my sonne Martius former valiancie and glorie, and to see his person 
environed now with our enemies in armes, rather to see him forth comming & 
safe kept, then of any love to defend his person. But yet the greatest griefe of 
our heaped mishaps is, to see our poore country brought to such extremitie, that 
all the hope of the safetie and preservation thereof, is now unfortunately cast 
upon us simple women: because we know not what account he will make of us, 
since he hath cast from him all care of his naturall countrie and common weale, 
which heretofore he hath holden more deere and precious, then either his mother, 


41 


642 APPENDIX 


wife or children. Norwithstanding, if ye thinke we can do good, we will willingly 
do what you will have us: bring us to him I pray you. For if we cannot prevaile, 
we may yet dye at his feete, as humble suters for the safetie of our countrie. Her 
aunswer ended, she tooke her daughter in lawe, and Martius children with her, 
and being accompanied with all the other Romaine ladies, they went in troupe 
together unto the Volsces campe: whom when they sawe, they of themselves did 
both pitty and reverence her, and there was not a man among them that once 
durst say a word unto her. Now was Martius set then in his chaire of state, with 
all the honours of a generall, and when he had spied the women coming a farre 
off, he marvelled what the matter ment: but afterwards knowing his wife which 
came formost, he determined at the first to persist in his obstinate and inflexible 
ae rancker. But overcome in the end with natural affection, and being 

¥, a altogether altered to see them: his heart would not serve him to tarie 
aac their comming to his chaire, but comming downe in hast, he went 

to meete them, and first he kissed his mother, and imbraced her a prety while, 
then his wife and little children. And nature so wrought with him, that the 
teares fell from his eyes, and he could not keepe himself from making much of 
them, but yeelded to the affection of his bloud, as if he had bene violently caried 
with the furie of a most swift running streame. After he had thus lovingly received 
them, and perceiving that his mother Volumnia would begin to speake 

V, iii, 102. to him, he called the chiefest of the counsell of the Volsces to heare 
what she would say. Then she spake in this sort. If we helde our 

peace (my sonne) and determined not to speake, the state of our poore bodies, 
and present sight of our raiment, would easily bewray to thee what 
life we have led at home, since thy exile and abode abroad. But 
thinke now with thy selfe, how much more unfortunately, then all 
the women living we are come hither, considering that the sight which should be 
most pleasant to all other to behold, spightfull fortune hath made most fearefull 
to us: making my selfe to see my sonne, and my daughter here, her husband, be- 
sieging the walles of his native countrie. So as that which is the onely comfort 
to all other in their adversitie and miserie, to pray unto the gods, and to call to 
them for aide: is the onely thing which plungeth us into most deepe perplexitie. 
For we cannot (alas) together pray, both for victorie, for our countrie, and for 
safetie of thy life also: but a world of grievous curses, yea more then any mortall 
enemie can heape upon us, are forcibly wrapt up in our praiers. For the bitter 
sop of most harde choice is offered thy wife and children, to forgo the one of the 
two; either to lose the person of thy selfe, or the nurse of their native countrie. 
For my selfe (my sonne) I am determined not to tarie, till fortune in my life time 
do make an end of this warre. For if I cannot perswade thee, rather to do good 
unto both parties, then to overthrow and destroy the one, preferring love and 
nature, before the malice and calamitie of warres: thou shalt see, my sonne, 
and trust unto it, thou shalt no sooner marche forward to assault thy countrie, 
but thy foote shall treade upon thy mothers wombe, that brought thee first into 
this world. And I may not deferre to see the day, either that my sonne be led 
prisoner in triumph by his naturall countrymen, or that he himselfe do triumphe 
of them, and of his naturall countrie. For if it were so, that my request tended 
to save thy country, in destroying the Volsces: I must confesse, thou wouldst 
hardly and doubtfully resolve on that. For as to destroy thy naturall countrie, 
it is altogether unmeete and unlawfull: so were it not just, and lesse honorable, 
to betray those that put their trust in thee. But my only demaund consisteth, 


V, iii, 


104-135. 


Se 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—PLUTARCH 643 


to make a gaile deliverie of all evils, which delivereth equall benefit and safetie, 
both to the one and the other, but most honorable for the Volsces. For it shall 
appeare, that having victorie in their hands, they have of speciall favour granted 
us singular graces: peace, and amitie, albeit themselves have no lesse part of 
both, then we. Of which good, if so it came to passe, thy selfe is the onely author, 
and so hast thou the only honour. But if it faile, and fall out contrarie: thy selfe 
alone deservedly shall carie the shamefull reproach and burthen of either partie. 
So, though the end of warre be uncertaine, yet this notwithstanding is most cer- 
taine: that if it be thy chance to conquer, this benefit shalt thou reape of thy goodly 
conquest, to be chronicled the plague and destroier of thy countrie. And if fortune 
also overthrow thee, then the world will say, that through desire to revenge thy 
private injuries, thou hast for ever undone thy good friends, who did most lovingly 
and courteouslie receive thee. Martius gave good eare unto his mothers words, 
without interrupting her speach at all: and after she had said what she would, 
he held his peace a prety while, and answered not a word. Hereupon she began 
againe to speak unto him, and said. My sonne, why doest thou not 
answer me? doest thou thinke it good altogether to give place unto 
thy choller and desire of revenge, and thinkest thou it no honestie 
for thee to graunt thy mothers request, in so weighty a cause? doest thou take 
it honorable for a noble man, to remember the wrongs and injuries done him: 
and doest not in like case thinke it an honest noble mans parte, to be thankfull 
for the goodnesse that parents do shew to their children, acknowledging the dutie 
and reverence they ought to beare unto them? No man living is more bound 
to shew himselfe thankefull in all parts and respects, then thy selfe: who so 
unnaturally sheweth all ingratitude. Moreover (my sonne) thou hast sorely 
taken of thy country, exacting grievous paiments upon them, in revenge of the 
injuries offered thee: besides, thou hast not hitherto shewed thy poore mother any 
courtesie. And therefore, it is not only honest, but due unto me, that without 
compulsion I should obtaine my so just and reasonable request of thee. But 
since by reason I cannot perswade thee to it, to what purpose do I defer my last 
hope? And with these words, her selfe, his wife and children, fell downe upon 
their knees before him. Martius seeing that, could refraine no longer, but went 
straight and lift her up, crying out: Oh mother, what have you done 

to me? And holding her hard by the right hand, oh mother, said __V, iii, 

he, you have wonne a happy victorie for your countrie, but mortall 195-200. 
and unhappy for your sonne: for I see my selfe vanquished by you 

alone. These words being spoken openly, he spake a litle apart with __V, iii, 

his mother and wife, and then let them returne againe to Rome, for 211-213. 
so they did request him: and so remaining in campe that night, the 

next morning he dislodged, and marched homewards into the Volsces countrie 
againe, who were not all of one minde, nor all alike contented. For some mis- 
liked him, and that he had done. Other being well pleased that peace should 
be made, said: that neither the one, nor the other, deserved blame nor reproche. 
Other, though they misliked that was done, did not thinke him an ill man for that 
he did, but said: he was not to be blamed, though he yeelded to such a forcible 
extremitie. Howbeit no man contraried his departure, but all obeied his com- 
mandement, more for respect of his worthinesse and valiancie, then for feare of 
his authoritie. Now the citizens of Rome plainly shewed, in what feare and 
danger their citie stood of this war, when they were delivered. For so soone as 
the watch upon the wals of the citie perceived the Volsces campe to remove, there 


V, iii, 
165-193. 


644 APPENDIX 


was not a temple in the citie but was presently set open, and full of men, wearing 
garlands of flowers upon their heads sacrificing to the gods, as they 
were wont to do upon the newes of some great obtained victorie. And 
this common joy was yet more manifestly shewed, by the honour- 
able courtesies the whole Senate, and people did bestow on their ladies. For they 
were all throughly perswaded, and did certainly beleeve, that the ladies onely 
were cause of the saving of the citie, and delivering themselves from the instant 
danger of the war. Whereupon the Senate ordained, that the magistrates to 
gratifie and honour these ladies, should grant them all that they would require. 
And they onely requested that they would builde a temple of Fortune 
of the women, for the building whereof they offered themselves to 
defray the whole charge of the sacrifices, & other ceremonies belonging 
to the service of the gods. Neverthelesse, the Senate commending their good 
will and forwardnesse, ordained, that the temple and image should be made at the 
common charge of the citie. . . . Now when Martius was returned againe into 
the citie of Antium from his voyage, Tullus that hated and could no longer abide 
him for the feare he had of his authoritie: sought diverse meanes to make him 
out of the way, thinking if he let slip that present time, he should 
V, vi, 2-56. never recover the like and fit occasion againe. Wherefore Tullus 
having procured many other of his confederacie, required Martius 
might be deposed from his estate, to render up account to the Volsces of his charge 
& government. Martius fearing to become a private man again under Tullus 
being generall (whose authority was greater otherwise, then any other among all 
V.vi the Volsces) answered: he was willing to give up his charge, and 

, Vi, eigen P ; 
racee: would resigne it into the hands of the lords of the Volsces, if they did 
all command him, as by all their commandement he received it. 
And moreover, that he would not refuse even at that present to give up an account 
unto the people, if they would tarie the hearing of it. The people hereupon called 
a common counsell, in which assembly there were certaine oratours appointed, 
that stirred up the common people against him; & when they had told their tales, 
Martius rose up to make them answer. Now, notwithstanding the mutinous people 
made a marvelos great noise, yet when they saw him, for the reverence they bare 
unto his valiantnesse, they quieted themselves, and gave still audience to alledge 
with leasure what he could for his purgation. Moreover, the honestest men of 
the Antiates, and who most rejoyced in peace, shewed by their countenance that 
they would heare him willingly, and judge also according to their conscience. 
Whereupon Tullius fearing that if he did let him speake, he would prove his inno- 
cencie to the people, because amongst other things he had an eloquent tongue, 
besides that the first good service he had done to the people of the Volsces, did 
win him more favour, then these last accusations could purchase him displeasure: 
and furthermore, the offence they laide to his charge, was a testimonie of the good 
will they ought him, for they would never have thought he had done them wrong 
for that they tooke not the citie of Rome, if they had not bene very neere taking 
of it, by meanes of his approache and conduction. For these causes Tullus 
thought he might no longer delay his pretence and enterprise, neither to tarie 
for the mutining and rising of the common people against him: wherefore, those 
V, vi, that were of the conspiracie, beganne to crie out that he was not to 
be heard, nor that they would not suffer a traytour to usurpe ty- 
rannicall power over the Tribe of the Volsces, who would not yeeld up 
his estate and authoritie. And in saying these words, they all fell upon him, and 


V, iv, 
42-69. 


V, iii, 
221, 222. 


145-156. 


6 


———= © 


FABLE OF BELLY AND MEMBERS—JACOBS 645 


killed him in the market place, none of the people once offering to rescue him. 
Howbeit it is a clere case, that this murder was not generally con- 
sented unto, of the most part of the Volsces: for men came out of 
all partes to honour his bodie, and did honourably burie him, set- *Tartb9. 
ting out his tombe with great store of armour and spoiles, as the tombe of a 
worthy person and great captaine. 


V, vi, 


FABLE OF BELLY AND MEMBERS 


Jacoss (Fables of Asop, i, 82) gives the following variants of this fable, begin- 
ning with the earliest version (see his note on I, i, 99): 

‘Trial of Belly v. Head—wherein are published the pleadings made before the 
supreme judges—while their President watched to unmask the liar—his eye 
never ceased to watch. The due rites having been done—in honour of the god 
who detests iniquity—after the Belly had spoken his plea—the Head began a 
long harangue: 

“Tis I, the rafter of the whole house—whence the beams issue and where they 
join together—all the members . . . on me and rejoice. My forehead is joyous— 
members are vigorous—the neck stands firm beneath the head—my eye sees afar 
off—the nostril expands and breathes the air—the ear opens and hears—the 
mouth sends forth sound and talks—the two arms are vigorous—and cause a man 
to be respected—he marches with head erect—looks the great in the face as well 
as the lowly. . . . ’Tis I that am their queen—’tis I the head of my companions. 
. . . Who would play a trick—or is there any would say—‘‘Is it not false?” Let 
them call me the head—’tis I that cause to live... .’ 

‘Here,’ adds Jacobs, ‘the fragment breaks off, and we cannot tell if judgment 
went with the plaintiff as in the Roman fable.’ 

He continues with the fable as in the Upanishads: 


Dispute of the Senses and the Soul. 


The senses disputed among themselves saying, ‘I am the first, I am the first.’ 
They said: ‘Let us go out of the body, whichever shall cause the body to fall by 
its departure shall be the first.’ The word departed, the man spoke no more, but 
he still ate, drank, and lived; the sight departed, the man saw not, but still ate, 
drank, and lived; (and so with the hearing, &c.); the mind went forth, intelligence 
left the man, but he still ate, drank, and lived. The soul departed, no sooner was 
it without than the body fell. (They again disputed and tried who could raise 
the body, with the same result.) 

Jacobs says further that a somewhat similar fable exists in the Chinese Budd- 
histic work Avadanas (No. 105); and it occurs also in the Pantschatantra: 


The Bird with Two Heads. 


‘Once on a time on Mount Himavat there was a bird named Jivanjiva. This 
had one body and two heads, one of which used to eat fine fruit to give strength 
and vigour to the body. The other became jealous and thought, ‘‘Why should 
that head always eat fine fruit, of which I never taste one?” Accordingly it ate a 
poisonous fruit and the two heads perished at the same time. 


646 APPENDIX 


‘T have also found a Jewish variant, though with a somewhat different moral: 


The Tongue and the Members. 
(Schocher Tob on Ps. xxxix, I.). 


‘A Persian King sick unto death was ordered the milk of a lioness (Heb. Lebia). 
(A man obtains it after many adventures.) On his return the members disputed 
in the night. The feet said, ‘Had we not gone the milk had not been got”: the 
hands, “‘We milked; that was the chief thing”: the eyes, “But for us the lioness 
could not have been found out.” The heart reminds them of her wise counsels. 
At last spoke the tongue, ‘‘But for me where would you have been?” To the 
retorts of the other members, the only reply is, ‘‘ You’ll soon see!” * Next morning 
the man came before the King and handing him the milk, said, “There is the milk 
of the bitch” (Heb. Kalba). (The man is ordered off to execution.) On the scaffold 
the members wept, but the tongue laughed. ‘‘What did I tell you? Are you not 
all in my power? However, I’ll take pity on you.” The tongue called out, 
“Lead me once more to the King.” In his presence it said, ‘‘I have truly brought 
you the milk of a lioness, Sire. Kalba is Arabic for lioness.” They tasted, and 
tried, and found it right, and sent the man away with great gifts. Then said the 
tongue, ‘‘See now, life and death are in my hand” (Prov. xviii, 21). 

‘There still remain a number of Indian parallels to our fables, in what I call 
the Mesozoic stratum of the Bidpai literature—passages, that is, which formed 
part of the original form of the book, but cannot be traced back among the Jatakas. 
Taken by themselves, they could scarcely be adduced as valid evidence, as they 
cannot be traced back even as early as 300 A. D., when the Greco-Roman collec- 
tions were already in existence. But the Jatakas have shown us evidence of 
similar stories being current in India from five to seven centuries before that, 
and the analogues from the Indian epic can trace back nearly as far. Besides 
Indian writers were veritable Jeremy Diddlers in the way of literary borrowing, 
and the whole of the Bidpai, even in its earliest form, strikes one as a vast plagiar- 
ism. It becomes, therefore, probable that the Bidpai stories of the Mesozoic 
stratum have the same antiquity as the Jatakas or the Mahabharata. We may 
therefore proceed to add to our previous parallels such of these as have close 
analogy with Greek fables, being somewhat more particular as to the closeness of 
the parallelism than we were in the case of the Jatakas or the epic references.’ 


KELLEtTT? (p. 27): We will consider the speech of the Second Citizen to Menenius 
in Coriolanus (I, i, 119-122), in reference to the latter’s fable of the ‘Belly and the 
Members’: 

‘The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye, 
The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier, 
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter, 
With other muniments and petty helps’— 


a speech to which Menenius retorts by calling the citizen the great toe of the 
assembly. 

It hardly needs to be said that this is medieval, in the full style of medieval 
allegory. It resembles the symbolism of the Two Lights, the Sun and the Moon, 
on which so much of the argumentation between the Empire and the Papacy was 
based, or that other symbolism of the Two Swords, of which Christ said ‘It:is 
enough,’ and on which plenty will be found said in the controversies of Dante with 


FABLE OF BELLY AND MEMBERS—KELLETT 647 


the Pope. The analogy of the body politic with the body physical is of course not 
only very old, but very natural; but in the Middle Ages it shared the fate of many 
analogies and was pressed to its utmost limits with scholastic thoroughness. As 
Taylor tells us (Medieval Mind, II, 276) it was used to symbolize the mystery of 
the oneness of all mankind in God, and the organic co-ordination of all sorts and 
conditions of men with one another in the divine commonwealth on earth; it 
was also drawn out into every detail of banal anthropomorphic comparison. 
From John of Salisbury to Nicholas Cusanus, Occam and Dante, no point of 
fancied analogy between the parts and members of the body and the various func- 
tions of Church and State was left unexploited. 

And similarly Gierke (Political Theories of the Middle Ages, trans. Maitland, 
pp. 22 sq.) tells us that John of Salisbury made the first attempt to find some mem- 
ber of the natural body which would correspond to each portion of the State... . 
Later writers followed him, but with many variations in minor matters. The most 
elaborate comparison comes from Nicholas of Cusa, who for this purpose brought 
into play all the medical knowledge of his time. 

As, in fact, we read the medieval political treatises, we are reminded of the 
monkish work, De partibus Virginis Marie, in which the limbs of the Virgin are 
tortured one by one into the most extraordinary mystical meanings. Some of 
the parallels, of course, are natural enough: that the head, for instance, should be 
the King is not surprising. The eye, again, might well be a sentry or a watchful 
magistrate, and the arm is easily supposed to be a soldier. But that the heart 
should be the counsellor or senator does a little astonish us; and it is precisely 
here that we begin to suspect Shakspere of medievalism, and to see that he is not 
drawing out a symbolism of his own, but adopting one ready-made. For, in the 
medieval writings on law or politics, it is almost always cor or pectus that is 
Senatus. Take, for example, the Policraticus of John of Salisbury—perhaps the 
most representative of all these writings. Basing himself, as he professes, on the 
so-called Plutarch’s Institutio Trajani, John writes as follows (Policraticus, ed. 
Webb, I, 283, section 540 c): ‘Princeps vero capitis in re publica optinet locum uni 
subjectus Deo et his qui vices illius agunt in terris, quoniam et in corpore humano 
ab anima vegetatur caput et regitur. Cordis locum senatus optinet, a quo bonorum 
operum et malorum procedunt initia. Oculorum aurium et linguae officia vendicant 
sibi judices et praesides provinciarum. Officiales et milites manibus coaptantur. 
Qui semper adsistunt principi, lateribus assimilantur. Quaestores et commenta- 
rienses (non illos dico qui carceribus praesunt, sed comites rerum privatarum) ad 
ventris et intestinorum refert imaginem. Quae, si immensa aviditate congesserint 
et congesta tenacius reservaverint, innumerabiles et incurabiles generant morbo, ut 
vitis eorum totius corporis ruina immineat. Pedibus vero solo jugiter inherentibus 
agricolae coaptantur.’ 

Here then we have the kingly-crowned head, the soldier hand, and above all 
the counsellor heart; while the slight differences between John and Shakspere tend 
to diminish as we read the hundred odd following pages in which the conception is 
worked out in fuller detail. We even notice in a later sentence a suggestion for 
Menenius’s gibe at the ‘great toe of the assembly’: ‘Pedes quidem qui humiliora 
exercent officia, appellantur, quorum officia totius rei publicae membra per terram 
gradiuntur. His etiam aggregantur multae species lanificii artesque mechanicae, 
quae in ligno ferro ere metallisque variis consistunt’ (Webb, II, 58, section 618 d), 
while the way in which Shakspere’s thoughts dwelt upon the symbolism is clearly 
shown in the famous passage in Henry V. about the advised head that defends 


648 APPENDIX 


itself at home while the armed hand doth fight abroad: ‘Manus itaque rei publicae 
aut armata est aut inermis. Armata quidem est quae castrensem et cruentam 
exercet militiam, inermis quae justitiam expedit’ (Webb, II, 2, section 589 a); 
and the Archbishop’s speech on the honey-bees, though doubtless directly derived 
from Lyly, owes something to the same metaphor. This is not, of course, to 
maintain that Shakspere, like Chaucer, had studied John of Salisbury for himself; 
all we are here contending for is that, by some process of permeation or other, 
such medieval ideas as John expresses in a scholastic manner had reached Shakspere 
as part and parcel of the general intellectual equipment of his time. It may well 
have been some homily or sermon that formed the channel of transmission—just 
as, in a very probable view, stories like those of the ‘Cock and the Fox’ came to the 
common people and to Chaucer through the sermons of Holkot. Theologians 
of the type of Dr Shaw or Vice-Chancellor Perne, preaching on politics as they 
so often did in those days, may well have made the conception familiar; nor is it 
the habit of preachers, when once they have got hold of a parable, to refrain from 
pressing its details. 

It may be desirable here to say that I do not believe in a Jewish origin of the idea 
of the ‘body politic.’ In a note on the passage of Coriolanus which we are here 
considering Aldis Wright remarks that of the ten sephiroth or Intelligences spoken 
of in the Kabbala, the first, which is called the crown, is placed in the head, while 
the heart is the seat of understanding; and every reader of the Old Testament 
knows that ‘men of heart’ are really men of brain, while fools are spoken of as 
destitute of ‘heart.’ But in the form the idea assumes in the Kabbala there is 
every reason to believe that it was the Jews who borrowed from classical authors, 
and not vice verséd. Though Jewish scholars may have helped to spread such 
notions, yet (whatever we may think of the ‘Plutarch’ on whom John of Salisbury 
professes to rely) the ultimate source was certainly classical, and the method of 
developing it ecclesiastical. 

Bearing in mind, then, that Shakspere’s view of the body politic was identical 
with this medieval one which we have sketched, we are now able to see a closer 
aptness than we might have expected in the speech of King Claudius to Laertes 
(Hamlet, I, ii, 45): 

“What wouldst thou beg, Laertes, 
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking? 
The head is not more native to the heart, 
The hand more instrumental to the mouth, 
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.’ 


This is not a series of vague and general metaphors, but symbolism precise, defi- 
nite, and technical; as technical, in fact, as one of Donne’s medical or scientific 
similes. The ‘head’ is the King as the crowned chief of the State, Claudius him- 
self; the ‘heart’ is the counsellor—it is indeed Polonius in his capacity as the 
Burleigh of Denmark. The next line puts the same thing once more, but with 
a slight alteration in the symbolism. Claudius now appears as ‘hand,’ that is, the 
King as soldier, who beareth not the sword in vain; while Polonius, who had just 
before been the senator or counsellor, takes now the allied character of the ‘mouth’ 
or orator—a description which, so far as it can be earned by verbosity, no one, 
surely, ever better deserved. 

It is perhaps not too fanciful to compare here Milton’s famous designation of 
the ‘corrupted clergy’ as ‘blind mouths’: gentry who, like Polonius, know how to 


CRITICISMS—GILDON 649 


talk, but in their lack of foresight prove very bad sentries. This explanation is at 
any rate far less fantastic than that of Ruskin in Sesame and Lilies. It may 
interest Baconians to observe that Bacon’s idea of Fortune, as given in his Essays, 
is quite different from Shakespere’s. 


CRITICISMS 


GiLpon (ili, p. 362): The Character of Martius is truly Dramatic, for his Man- 
ners are not only equal but necessary to his Misfortunes. His Pride and Rashness 
are what History gives him, but his Modesty and Aversion to Praise I cannot find 
in Plutarch, who makes him very well satisfy’d with the Praise given by Cominius. 
And indeed it seems something opposite to his Pride, which both in the Play and 
History was so signal in him. Our Poet seems fond to lay the Blame on the 
People, and everywhere is representing the Inconstancy of the People, but this 
is contrary to Truth; for the People have never discover’d that Changeableness 
which Princes have done. And Plutarch in the Life of Pyrrhus seems sensible 
of this when he says: Thus Kings have no Reason to Condemn the People for 
changing for their Interest, who in that do but imitate them, as the great Teachers 
of Unfaithfulness and Treachery, holding him the Bravest who makes the least 
Account of being an honest Man. And any one that will look over the Roman 
History will find such Inconstancy and such a perpetual Changeableness in the 
Emperors as cannot be parallel’d in the People of any Time or Country. What 
the Greeks or Romans have ever done against any of their fortunate or great 
Generals is easily vindicated from a guilty Inconstancy and Ingratitude. For 
the fault has always been in the great Men, who swelling in the Pride of their Suc- 
cess, have thought in deference to that, that they might and ought to do whatever 
they pleas’d; and so often attempted the Ruin of that Liberty themselves for the 
Preservation of which their warlike Actions were only valuable. And so it was 
their changing their Manners, and not the People, that produc’d their Misfor- 
tunes; they lov’d them for Defending their Country and Liberties, but by the same 
Principle must hate them when they sought by their Ambition and Pride to sub- 
vert them, and this by a Constancy, not variableness, of Principle or Temper. 

This is plain in the very Story of this Play, for their Anger was just against 
Coriolanus, who thought so well of his own Actions as to believe that ev’n the 
Rights, Customs, and Priviledges of his Country were his due for his Valour and 
Success. His turning a Traytor to his Country on his Disgrace is a Proof of his 
Principle. Camillus, on the contrary, banish’d on far less Occasion or Ground, 
brought his Country in Distress Relief against the Gauls so far was he from joining 
them. 

This Contempt of the People often proceeds from an over Value of our selves, 
and that not for our superiour Knowledge, Virtue, Wisdom, etc., but for the good 
Fortune of our Birth, which is a Trifle no farther valuable in Truth, than it is 
join’d to Courage, Wisdom or Honour; yet what, when blindly valu’d by the 
Possessor, sets aside all Thoughts and endeavour to obtain those nobler Advantages. 

Our English Poets indeed to flatter Arbitrary Power have too often imitated 
Shakespear in this Particular, and preposterously brought the Mob on the Stage 
contrary to the Majesty of Tragedy, and the Truth of the Fact. Shakespear has 


650 APPENDIX 


here represented, as in Julius Cesar, the Commons of Rome, as if they were the 
Rabble of an Irish Village, as senseless, ignorant, silly and cowardly, not remem- 
bring that the Citizens of Rome were the Soldiers of the Common-wealth, by 
whom they Conquer’d the World; and who in Julius Czsar’s time were at least 
as Polite as our Citizens of London; and yet if he had but consulted them, he 
wou’d have found it a difficult Matter to have pick’d out such ignorant unlick’d 
Cubbs to have fill’d up his Rout. 

It is no hard Matter to prove that the People were never in the Wrong but 
once, and then they were byass’d by the Priest to choose Barabas and cry out 
Crucify. 

I have not room here to examine this Point with that Clearness that I might; 
nor is it so much to our present Purpose; and yet I presume the Digression is not 
so foreign to the Matter as to deserve a judicious Censure. 

The Character of Martius is generally preserv’d, and that Love of their Country 
which is almost peculiar to Rome and Greece shown in the principal Persons. The 
Scene of the Mother, Wife, and Valeria is moving and noble; there are a great 
many fine Lines in this Play, tho’ the Expression or Diction is sometimes obscure 
and puffy. 


Jounson: The tragedy of Coriolanus is one of the most amusing of our 
author’s performances. The old man’s merriment in Menenius; the lofty lady’s 
dignity in Volumnia; the bridal modesty in Virgilia; the patrician and military 
haughtiness in Coriolanus; the plebeian malignity and tribunitian insolence in 
Brutus and Sicinius make a very pleasing and interesting variety, and the various 
revolutions of the hero’s fortune fill the mind with anxious curiosity. There is, 
perhaps, too much bustle in the first Act and too little in the last. 


Dennis (Letters, ii, 371): Shakespear was one of the greatest Genius’s that the 
World e’er saw for the Tragick Stage. Tho’ he lay under greater Disadvantages 
than any of his Successors, yet had he greater and more genuine Beauties than 
the best and greatest of them. And what makes the brightest Glory of his Char- 
acter, those Beauties were entirely his own, and owing to the Force of his own 
Nature; whereas his Faults were owing to his Education, and to the Age that he 
liv’d in. One may say of him as they did of Homer, that he had none to imitate, 
and is himself inimitable. His Imaginations were often as just, as they were bold 
and strong. He had a natural Discretion which never cou’d have been taught him, 
and his Judgment was strong and penetrating. He seems to have wanted nothing 
but, Time and Leisure for Thought to have found out those Rules of which he 
appears so ignorant. His Characters are always drawn justly, exactly, graph- 
ically, except where he fail’d by not knowing History or the Poetical Art. He 
has for the most part more fairly distinguish’d them than any of his Successors 
have done, who have falsified them, or confounded them, by making Love the 
predominant Quality in all. He had so fine a Talent for touching the Passions, 
and they are so lively in him, and so truly in Nature, that they often touch us 
more without their due Preparations than those of other Tragick Poets, who have 
all the Beauty of Design and all the Advantage of Incidents. His Master-Passion 
was Terror, which he has often mov’d so powerfully and so wonderfully that we 
may justly conclude that, if he had had the Advantage of Art and Learning, he 
would have surpass’d the very best and strongest of the Ancients. His Paintings 
are often so beautiful and so lively, so graceful and so powerful, especially where 


CRITICISMS—DENNIS 651 


he uses them in order to move Terror, that there is nothing perhaps more accom- 
plish’d in our English Poetry. His Sentiments for the most part in his best Trag- 
edies are noble, generous, easie and natural, and adapted to the Persons who use 
them. His Expression is in many Places good and pure after a hundred Years; 
simple tho’ elevated, graceful tho’ bold, and easie tho’ strong. He seems to have 
been the very Original of our English Tragical Harmony; that is, the Harmony 
of Blank Verse, diversifyed often by Dissyllable and Trisyllable Terminations. 
For that Diversity distinguishes it from Heroick Harmony, and bringing it nearer 
to common Use makes it more proper to gain Attention and more fit for Action 
and Dialogue. Such Verse we make when we are writing Prose; we make such Verse 
in common Conversation. 

If Shakespear had these great Qualities by Nature, what would he not have been 
if he had join’d to so happy a Genius Learning and the Poetical Art. For want 
of the latter, our Author has sometimes made gross Mistakes in the Characters 
which he had drawn from History, against the Equality and Conveniency of 
Manners of his Dramatical Persons. Witness Menenius in the following Tragedy, 
whom he has made an errant Buffoon, which is a great Absurdity. For he might 
as well have imagin’d a grave majestick Jack-Pudding, as a Buffoon in a Roman 
Senator. Aufidius the General of the Volscians is shewn a base and a profligate 
Villain. He has offended against the Equality of the Manners even in his Hero 
himself. For Coriolanus who in the first part of the Tragedy is shewn so open, so 
frank, so violent, and so magnanimous, is represented in the latter part by Aufidius, 
which is contradicted by no one, a flattering, fawning, cringing, insinuating Traytor. 

For want of this Poetical Art, Shakespear has introduced things into his Trag- 
edies, which are against the Dignity of that noble Poem, as the Rabble in Julius 
Cesar, and that in Cortolanus; tho’ that in Coriolanus offends not only against 
the Dignity of Tragedy, but against the Truth of History likewise, and the Customs 
of Ancient Rome, and the Majesty of the Roman people, as we shall have occasion 
to shew anon. 

For want of this Art he has made his Incidents less moving, less surprizing, and 
less wonderful. He has been so far from seeking those fine Occasions to move 
with which an Action furnish’d according to Art would have furnish’d him that 
he seems rather to have industriously avoided them. He makes Coriolanus, upon 
his Sentence of Banishment, take his leave of his Wife and his Mother out of sight 
of the Audience, and so has purposely, as it were, avoided a great occasion to move. 
{Had another critic made a misstatement as apparent as this, Dennis would have 
justly censured him.—Ep.] 

If we are willing to allow that Shakespear, by sticking to the bare Events of 
History, has mov’d more than any of his Successors, yet his just Admirers must 
confess that, if he had had the Poetical Art, he would have mov’d ten times more. 
For ’tis impossible that by a bare Historical Play he could move so much as he 
would have done by a Fable. 

We find that a Romance entertains the generality of Mankind with more Satis- 
faction than History if they read only to be entertain’d; but if they read History 
thro’ Pride or Ambition, they bring their Passions along with them, and that alters 
the case. Nothing is more plain than that even in an Historical Relation some Parts 
of it, and some Events, please more than others. And therefore a Man of Judgment, 
who sees why they do so, may in forming a Fable, and disposing an Action, please 
more than an Historian can do. . . . For ’tis observable that both in a Poetical 
Fiction and an Historical Relation those Events are the most entertaining, the most 


652 APPENDIX 


surprizing, and the most wonderful, in which Providence most plainly appears. And 
tis for this Reason that the Author of a just Fable must please more than the Writer 
of an Historical Relation. The Good must never fail to prosper, and the Bad must 
be always punish’d. Otherwise the Incidents, and particularly the Catastrophe 
which is the grand Incident, are liable to be imputed rather to Chance than to 
Almighty Conduct and to Sovereign Justice. The want of this impartial Dis- 
tribution of Justice makes the Coriolanus of Shakespear to be without Moral. 
’Tis true indeed Coriolanus is kill’d by those Foreign Enemies with whom he had 
openly sided against his Country, which seems to be an Event worthy of Provi- 
dence, and would look as if it were contriv’d by infinite Wisdom, and executed by 
supreme Justice, to make Coriolanus a dreadful Example to all who lead on Foreign 
Enemies to the Invasion of their native Country; if there were not something in 
the Fate of the other Characters, which gives occasion to doubt of it, and which 
suggests to the Sceptical Reader that this might happen by accident. For Aufidius 
the principal Murderer of Coriolanus, who in cold Blood gets him assassinated by 
Ruffians, instead of leaving him to the Law of the Country, and the Justice of 
the Volscian Senate, and who commits so black a Crime, not by an erroneous 
Zeal, or a mistaken publick Spirit, but thro’ Jealousy, Envy, and inveterate Malice; 
this Assassinator not only survives, and survives unpunish’d, but seems to be 
rewarded for so detestable an Action by engrossing all those Honours to himself 
which Coriolanus before had shar’d with him. But not only Aufidius, but the 
Roman Tribunes, Sicinius and Brutus, appear to me to cry aloud for Poetick Ven- 
geance. For they are guilty of two Faults, neither of which ought to go unpunish’d: 
The first in procuring the Banishment of Coriolanus. If they were really jealous 
that Coriolanus had a Design on their Liberties when he stood for the Consulship, 
it was but just that they should give him a Repulse; but to get the Champion and 
Defender of their Country banish’d upon a pretended Jealousy was a great deal 
too much, and could proceed from nothing but that Hatred and Malice which 
they had conceiv’d against him for opposing their Institution. Their second 
Fault lay in procuring this Sentence by indirect Methods, by exasperating and 
inflaming the People by Artifices and Insinuations, by taking a base Advantage of 
the Open-heartedness and Violence of Coriolanus, and by oppressing him with a 
Sophistical Argument, that he aim’d at Sovereignty, because he had not delivered 
into the Publick Treasury the Spoils which he had taken from the Antiates. As 
if a Design of Sovereignty could be reasonably concluded from any one Act; or 
any one could think of bringing to pass such a Design, by eternally favouring the 
Patricians, and disobliging the Populace. For we need make no doubt but that 
it was among the young Patricians that Coriolanus distributed the Spoils which 
were taken from the Antiates; whereas nothing but caressing the Populace could 
enslave the Roman People, as Cesar afterwards very well saw and experienc’d. 
So that this Injustice of the Tribunes was the original Cause of the Calamity which 
afterwards befel their Country, by the Invasion of the Volscians, under the Conduct 
of Coriolanus. And yet these Tribunes at the end of the Play, like Aufidius, 
remain unpunish’d. . . . The Good and the Bad then perishing promiscuously in the 
best of Shakespeare’s Tragedies, there can be either none or very weak Instruction 
in them: For such promiscuous Events call the Government of Providence into 
Question, and by Scepticks and Libertines are resolv’d into Chance. I humbly 
conceive therefore that this want of Dramatical Justice in the Tragedy of Corio- 
lanus gave occasion for a just Alteration, and that I was oblig’d to sacrifice to 
that Justice Aufidius and the Tribunes, as well as Coriolanus. 


CRITICISMS—HAZLITT 653 


WiruraM Hazuitt (Characters of Sh’s Plays, p. 69): Shakespear has in this play 
shewn himself well versed in history and state-affairs. Coriolanus is a store-house 
of political common-places. Any one who studies it may save himself the trouble 
of reading Burke’s Reflections, or Paine’s Rights of Man, or the Debates in both 
Houses of Parliament since the French Revolution or our own. The arguments 
for and against aristocracy or democracy, on the privileges of the few and the 
claims of the many, on liberty and slavery, power and the abuse of it, peace and 
war, are here very ably handled with the spirit of a poet and the acuteness of a 
philosopher. Shakespear himself seems to have had a leaning to the arbitrary 
side of the question, perhaps from some feeling of contempt for his own origin; 
and to have spared no occasion of bating the rabble. What he says of them is 
very true: what he says of their betters is also very true, though he dwells less 
upon it. The cause of the people is indeed but little calculated as a subject for 
poetry: it admits of rhetoric, which goes into argument and explanation, but 
it presents no immediate or distinct images to the mind, ‘no jutting frieze, buttress, 
or coigne of vantage’ for poetry ‘to make its pendant bed and procreant cradle 
in.’ The language of poetry naturally falls in with the language of power. The 
imagination is an exaggerating and exclusive faculty: it takes from one thing to 
add to another: it accumulates circumstances together to give the greatest possible 
effect to a favourite object. . . . Poetry is right-royal. It puts the individual for 
the species, the one above the infinite many, might before right. A lion hunting a 
flock of sheep or a herd of wild asses is a more poetical object than they; and 
we even take part with the lordly beast, because our vanity or some other feeling 
makes us disposed to place ourselves in the situation of the strongest party. So 
we feel some concern for the poor citizens of Rome when they meet together to 
compare their wants and grievances, till Coriolanus comes in and with blows and 
big words drives this set of ‘poor rats,’ this rascal scum, to their homes and beg- 
gary before him. There is nothing heroical in a multitude of miserable rogues 
not wishing to be starved, or complaining that they are like to be so: but when a 
single man comes forward to brave their cries and to make them submit to the 
last indignities, from mere pride and self-will, our admiration of his prowess is 
immediately converted into contempt for their pusillanimity. The insolence of 
power is stronger than the plea of necessity. The tame submission to usurped 
authority or even the natural resistance to it has nothing to excite or flatter the 
imagination: it is the assumption of a right to insult or oppress others that carries 
an imposing air of superiority with it. We had rather be the oppressor than the 
oppressed. The love of power in ourselves and the admiration of it in others 
are both natural to man: the one makes him a tryant, the other a slave. Wrong 
dressed out in pride, pomp, and circumstance has more attraction than abstract 
right. Coriolanus complains of the fickleness of the people: yet the instant he 
cannot gratify his pride and obstinacy at their expense, he turns his arms against 
his country. If his country was not worth defending, why did he build his pride 
on its defence? He is a conqueror and a hero; he conquers other countries, and 
makes this a plea for enslaving his own; and when he is prevented from doing so, 
he leagues with its enemies to destroy his country. He rates the people ‘as if 
he were a God to punish, and not a man of their infirmity.’ He scoffs at one of 
their tribunes for maintaining their rights and franchises: ‘Mark you his absolute 
shall?’ not marking his own absolute will to take every thing from them, his 
impatience of the slightest opposition to his own pretensions being in proportion to 
their arrogance and absurdity. If the great and powerful had the beneficence 


654 APPENDIX 


and wisdom of Gods, then all this would have been well: if with a greater knowl- 
edge of what is good for the people, they had as great a care for their interest as 
they have themselves, if they were seated above the world, sympathising with 
the welfare, but not feeling the passions of men, receiving neither good nor hurt 
from them, but bestowing their benefits as free gifts on them, they might then rule 
over them like another Providence. But this is not the case. Coriolanus is 
unwilling that the senate should shew their ‘cares’ for the people, lest their ‘cares’ 
should be constructed into ‘fears,’ to the subversion of all due authority; and he is 
no sooner disappointed in his schemes to deprive the people not only of the cares 
of the state, but of all power to redress themselves, than Volumnia is made madly 
to exclaim, 
‘Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome, 
And occupations perish.’ 


This is but natural: it is but natural for a mother to have more regard for her 
son than for a whole city; but then the city should be left to take some care of 
itself. The care of the state cannot, we here see, be safely entrusted to maternal 
affection or to the domestic charities of high life. The great have private feelings 
of their own, to which the interests of humanity and justice must courtesy. Their 
interests are so far from being the same as those of the community that they are in 
direct and necessary opposition to them; their power is at the expense of our weak- 
ness; their riches, of our poverty; their pride, of our degradation; their splendour, 
of our wretchedness; their tyranny, of our servitude. If they had the superior 
knowledge ascribed to them (which they have not) it would only render them so 
much more formidable; and from Gods would convert them into Devils. The whole 
dramatic moral of Coriolanus is that those who have little shall have less, and that 
those who have much shall take all that others have left. The people are poor; 
therefore they ought to be starved. They are slaves; therefore they ought to be 
treated like beasts of burden. They are ignorant; therefore they ought not to be 
allowed to feel that they want food, or clothing, or rest, that they are enslaved, 
oppressed, and miserable. This is the logic of the imagination and the passions, 
which seek to aggrandise what excites admiration and to heap contempt on misery, 
to raise power into tyranny, and to make tyranny absolute; to thrust down that 
which is low still lower, and to make wretches desperate; to exalt magistrates 
into kings, kings into gods; to degrade subjects to the rank of slaves, and slaves 
to the condition of brutes. The history of mankind is a romance, a mask, a 
tragedy, constructed upon the principles of poetical justice; it is a noble or royal 
hunt, in which what is sport to the few is death to the many, and in which the 
spectators halloo and encourage the strong to set upon the weak, and cry havoc 
in the chase, though they do not share in the spoil. We may depend upon it that 
what men delight to read in books they will put in practice in reality. 

One of the most natural traits in this play is the difference of the interest taken 
in the success of Coriolanus by his wife and mother. The one is only anxious for 
his honour; the other is fearful for his life. 

Coriolanus himself is a complete character; his love of reputation, his con- 
tempt of popular opinion, his pride and modesty are consequences of each other. 
His pride consists in the inflexible sternness of his will; his love of glory is a deter- 
mined desire to bear down all opposition, and to extort the admiration both of 
friends and foes. His contempt for popular favour, his unwillingness to hear 
his own praises, spring from the same source. He cannot contradict the praises 


CRITICISMS—DRAKE 655 


that are bestowed upon him; therefore he is impatient at hearing them. He would 
enforce the good opinion of others by his actions, but does not want their acknowl- 


edgments in words. 
8 ‘Pray now, no more: my mother, 


Who has a charter to extol her blood, 
When she does praise me, grieves me.’ 


His magnanimity is of the same kind. He admires in an enemy that courage 
which he honours in himself; he places himself on the hearth of Aufidius with the 
same confidence that he would have met him in the field, and feels that by 
putting himself in his power he takes from him all temptation for using it against 
him. 


DRakE (Sh. and His Times, ii, p. 493): This play, which refers us to the third 
century of the Republic, is of a very peculiar character, involving in its course a 
large intermixture of humorous and political matters. It affords us a picture of 
what may be termed a Roman electioneering mob; and the insolence of newly 
acquired authority on the part of the tribunes, and the ungovernable licence and 
malignant ribaldry of the plebeians, are forcibly but naturally expressed. The 
popular anarchy, indeed, is rendered highly diverting through the intervention 
of Menenius Agrippa, whose sarcastic wit and shrewd good sense have lent to 
these turbulent proceedings a very extraordinary degree of interest and effect. 
His ‘pretty tale,’ as he calls it, of the belly and the members, which he recites to 
the people during their mutiny occasioned by the dearth of corn, is a delightful 
and improved expansion of the old apologue, originally attributed to Menenius 
by Dionysius of Halicarnassus, but taken immediately by Shakspeare from 
Plutarch’s Life of Coriolanus, and from Camden’s Remains. 

The serious and elevated persons of the drama are delineated in colours of 
equal, if not superior, strength. The unrivalled military prowess of Coriolanus, 
in whose nervous arm ‘ Death, that dark spirit,’ dwelt; the severe sublimity of his 
character, his stern and unbending hauteur, and his undisguised contempt of all 
that is vulgar, pusillanimous, and base, are brought before us with a raciness and 
power of impression, and, notwithstanding a very liberal use both of the senti- 
ments and language of his Plutarch, with a freedom of outline which, even in 
Shakspeare, may be allowed to excite our astonishment. 

The representation of the Character of Coriolanus by Mr. Kemble, which realises 
the very conception of the poet, and which in spirit, manner, and costume can 
scarcely be deemed susceptible of improvement, has rendered this drama very 
popular in our own day. 

Among the female characters a very important part is necessarily attached to 
the person of Volumnia, the fate of Rome itself depending upon her parental 
influence and authority. The poet has accordingly done full justice to the great 
qualities which the Cheronean sage has ascribed to this energetic woman; the daring 
loftiness of her spirit, her bold and masculine eloquence, and, above all, her patri- 
otic devotion, being marked by the most spirited and vigorous touches of his 
pencil. 

The numerous vicissitudes in the story; its rapidity of action; its contrast of 
character; the splendid vigour of its serious, and the satirical sharpness and relish 
of its more familiar scenes, together with the animation which prevails throughout 
all its parts, have conferred on this play, both in the closet and on the stage, a 
remarkable degree of attraction. 


656 APPENDIX 


Knicut (Studies in Sh., p. 406): The leading idea of Coriolanus—the pivot upon 
which all the action turns, the key to the bitterness of factious hatred which 
runs through the whole drama—is the contest for power between the patricians 
and plebeians. This is a broad principle, assuming various modifications in 
various states of society, but very slightly varied in its foundations and its results. 
He that truly works out the exhibition of this principle must paint men, let the 
scene be the Rome of the first Tribunes or the Venice of the last Doges. With the 
very slightest changes of accessories the principle stands for the contests between 
aristocracy and democracy, in any country or in any age, under a republic or a 
monarchy. The historical truth and the philosophical principle which Shakspere 
has embodied in Coriolanus are universal. But suppose he had possessed the 
means of treating the subject with what some would call historical accuracy; had 
learnt that Plutarch, in the story of Coriolanus, was probably dealing only with a 
legend; that, if the story is to be received as true, it belongs to a later period; that 
in this later period there were very nice shades of difference between the classes 
composing the population of Rome; that the balance of power was a much more 
complex thing than he found in the narrative of Plutarch; further, suppose that, 
proud of this learning, he had made the universal principle of the plebeian and 
patrician hostility subsidiary to an exact display of it, according to the conjectures 
which modern industry and acuteness have brought to bear on the subject. It is 
evident, we think, that he would have been betrayed into a false principle of art, 
and would necessarily have drawn Roman shadows instead of vital and enduring 
men. As it is, he has drawn men so vividly—under such permanent relations to ~ 
each other—with such universal manifestations of character, that some persons 
of strong political feelings have been ready to complain, according to their several 
creeds, either that his plebeians are too brutal or his patricians too haughty. A 
polite democracy, a humane oligarchy, would be better. 


Batuurst (p. 126): Coriolanus must have been after 1605, according to Malone, 
from the resemblance, in the speech of Menenius to the people, to certain passages 
in Camden’s Remains. 

He is evidently stiffened by writing froma history. His art, as he says in his son- 
nets, is ‘made tongue-tied byauthority.’ Thefirstpart of the mother’sspeech might 
almost have been another poet’s; though the other part of it, which is separated, 
could not. He thought that he was bound to the words which he found in the 
book, and had only to make verse of it. He is also stiffened by having to write 
on a high political subject. But all this operates quite differently from what it 
does in his plays on the history of England, partly from falling upon a different 
time of his life, partly because the manners are not English. Instead of thinning 
off his multitude of ideas, the constraint of the subject seems only to increase the 
demand for a crowd and complication of them. Ideas, quite as much ratio- 
cinative as imaginative, though there are passages that approach to rant. The 
subject took his mind in this direction rather than that of simple feeling. But 
the four lines on Valeria would be enough to show that he has still the same sweet- 
ness of character. The love of thought and knowledge, which he seems always to 
have possessed, must have immensely increased the stores of his mind, and the 
materials, either for good or bad illustration, as he lived longer, and in so very 
learned an age. Perhaps the example of Jonson led him to require of himself more 
of dry thought (yet Jonson does not think deeply, as he does). In this play there 
is a good deal of character and prodigious spirit in many places, but which seems 


CRITICISMS—COLERIDGE—WHITELAW 657 


obstructed and kept down by the loaded state of mind I have mentioned, and by 
the exceedingly over-forced system of metre. With all the interest of the story, 
it is, to me, an uninviting and unremembered play. I speak of the serious passages 
in verse except the last scene of the killing. The scenes of the mob are excessively 
natural and spirited, and are among those I have always found to give that im- 
pression of reality, when acted, which the works of no other writer can do. 

It is a much better play, no doubt, than Timon of Athens, which is something 
of the same class; or Troilus and Cressida, which is not. There is a great deal 
more in it. It is hard; every sentence, almost, asks some pains to take in its 
meaning wholly. 

The verse of this play is somewhat like that of Henry VIIT., but the matter in 
Henry VIII. is thin in comparison, and the meaning, consequently, clear; and it 
is far more prosaic and matter-of-fact. Here we have the fourth style completely. 

The speeches, too, break and fit together regularly, and double endings are 
frequent. 

The poetry and the thoughts in Coriolanus arise out of the business of the scene; 
there are not many excursive passages, and those are mostly of feeling, not rea- 
soning or imagery. 


H. CoLerwwce (ii, 179): First and best in the series of Roman plays appears 
Coriolanus. As far as incident is concerned, it is Plutarch’s Life of Coriolanus 
described in scenes. The character, too, is exactly Plutarch’s Coriolanus talking 
English blank verse. In fact, Plutarch was the Shakspeare of biography. What 
a volume of politics, what a searching examen of humanity might be made in 
form of a commentary on this play! In Coriolanus the Roman and the man are 
so finely blended that not a thread avows whether it be woof or warp. 


Waite Law (Introduction, p. xii.): This is the tragedy. Coriolanus is first starved 
and impoverished by an ideal from which he has no escape, an ideal which as in 
duty bound he satisfies, and more than satisfies: and then he is annihilated by it. 
And the cruellest of the tragedy is this, that he possesses in himself in high per- 
fection that very capacity—namely, of sympathy—which the ideal proscribes, 
the obedient renunciation of which is his ruin. Consider his beautiful love and 
reverence for ‘the most noble mother of the world’—Volumnia, the splendid 
Patrician woman without sympathy, who ‘framed’ him. Three times in the 
Play she, for a purpose, untightens the strain of his nature; and he, for his love 
for her, submits. Or his still more beautiful and tender love for his wife Virgilia, 
Patrician indeed, but so unlike the type—‘best of his flesh,’ and ‘Gracious silence,’ 
whose kiss is sweeter to him than revenge. Or, again, his friendship for Menenius, 
the old man who worships him, whose heart is cracked by his enforced unkindness. 
How alien all this is from the mere Patrician mould of selfish isolation into which 
his nature is, for the rest, compressed. But it may be urged that, had his nature 
been truly generous, he would have practically recoiled from such excesses of 
insolence and of revenge—however logically forced upon him by the triple com- 
bination of aggressive Plebeians, narrow Patrician ideal, and boiling pent-up energy 
of soul. Can we not, on the contrary, almost put ourselves at his standpoint and 
sympathize with him? Are not the Tribunes ignoble, malevolent, treacherous, 
mean? Are not the people cowardly, foolish, fickle, without an ideal, led through 
the nose by demagogues? He seems not to have believed in the starvation and 
misery of the commons when they clamoured for corn; and it is certain that the 


42 


658 APPENDIX 


idea of patriotism, in the largest sense, was impossible to him. The Patricians 
were, to him, his countrymen; and the Plebeians, since the institution of the 
Tribunate, his countrymen’s worst enemies. This misconception was at the root 
of the mischief; but his sin, his treason, was not that he was ready to fight against 
his country, but that he was ready to involve his friends in one common destruction 
with his foes. 

Compare Coriolanus, lastly, with Aufidius. The hearts of both men are set 
upon glory. Both men are cruelly revengeful. Aufidius too is noble sometimes, 
but only sometimes. He can be envious; and this (in spite of his accusation of 
himself, ‘I sin in envying his nobility,’ and the slander of the Tribunes, that he 
submits to be commanded by Cominius only that he may have the honours for 
himself and let the faults be charged to his superior), Coriolanus cannot be. And, 
what is most unlike the true Coriolanus, the Volscian can conceal a purpose, cal- 
culate an opportunity, spring treacherously upon an unsuspecting foe. He has, 
nevertheless, bursts of nobleness. His welcome of Coriolanus (the most eloquent 
passage in the Play) is the expression of a real, though transient, enthusiasm. 

What is the dramatic fitness, dramatic teaching, of the death of Coriolanus by 
the hand of Aufidius? Is it not that Coriolanus is in this most false to himself— 
that, to effect his revenge, he allies himself with, so debases himself to the level of, 
a meaner nature? How unlike him, how like Aufidius, the silence as to his pur- 
pose of revenge in which he parts from his friends when he leaves Rome; the silence 
of his journey to Antium; and, most of all, the cynical cold speech which breaks 
the silence as he passes through the streets of Antium to the house of Aufidius. 
In all this he is dishonest, unnatural; revenge has warped the straightness of his 
soul. Had he been true to his nature, he would have been still the foe of Aufidius, 
and, as a foe, he leads a life charmed against all possible assaults. It is as if his 
magnificent honesty had been the panoply of the man, and that here he discovers 
for the first time a vulnerable point. It seems that his nobleness, exaggerated by 
all the circumstances of his life—the milk he has sucked, the very air he has 
breathed—gives away at last and cracks under the over-strain of the conflict with 
the Tribunes; and though, when the strain has abated, the man becomes natural 
again, himself again, the fatal crack remains, and admits the knife of the assassin. 

We have seen how stormy excesses of passion, through the shock and breach of 
the sacred ties of country and of blood, avenge themselves—in Coriolanus, as in 
Lear and in Macbeth. We do not know what it was that, in this latest period of 
his works, so constantly attracted Shakspere to the theme of impiety, of un- 
natural hate and ingratitude and treason. Events may to some extent have shaped 
his thoughts. It has been suggested that Julius Cesar was written not without 
reference to the rebellion of the Earl of Essex. And we may suppose that in 
Coriolanus Shakspere intended a twofold warning, to the pride of James and to 
the gathering resistance of the Commons. The first of the Stuart kings had lost 
no time in propounding his theory of kingship. From the first meeting of his first 
parliament to its dissolution in this year 1610, there were continual bickerings 
between King and Commons. ‘His command upon our allegiance,’ they said, 
‘is like the roaring of a lion.’ The straining of the prerogative and the doctrine 
of the duty of passive obedience were met by statements of grievances, by the 
assertion of the privileges of parliament, and in February of this year by a Re- 
monstrance against illegal impositions. 

But the lesson of Coriolanus (standing as it does among the plays of this period) 
is less political than moral. Between the haughtiness of the aristocrat and the 


CRITICISMS—H UDSON—FURNIVALL 659 


clamour of the demagogue there is little to choose: both are excess. Man is 
violent, but the Erinys of violence is sure: in moderation, not excess, is strength. 

We do not find ideals, political or moral, upon the stage of Shakspere. All that 
moves there is real. But it is there as in the life which is there portrayed: those 
who have eyes to see can discern, through the distempered atmosphere of the actual, 
the presence of an all-controlling law. Violence may drown the voice of reason and 
of conscience; but reason and conscience assert themselves at last. Disorder 
yields to order: and the anarchic impulses of men obey the calm supremacy of right. 

For Shakspere, like Sophocles, is a harmonist of discords: himself harmonious, 
whole, he sees the whole, and not the part, and sees that all is good. 


Hupson (Sh’s Life, Ari, and Characters, ii, 461): The tragedy is not heard of at 
all through any notice or allusion made during the author’s life; in fact, we have 
no contemporary note of reference to it whatever, save in the elegy on Richard 
Burbadge, where we learn that the hero’s part was sustained by that celebrated 
actor. So that we are left without any external evidence as to the date of the 
writing. Nor does the piece itself contain a traceable vestige of allusion to any 
known contemporary events; such, for instance, as that to the new creation of 
baronets in Othello. Our only argument, therefore, as regards the time of com- 
position lies in marks of style, use of language, and complexion of imagery and 
thought; in all which respects it clearly falls among the very latest of the Poet’s 
writing. Certainly no play of the series surpasses it, and very few, if any, equal 
it, in boldness of metaphor, in autocratic prerogative of expression, or in passages 
marked by an overcrowding of matter or an overcompression of language. The 
strength of civil wisdom, also, the searching anatomy of public characters and 
motives, the wide and firm grasp of social and political questions, in short, the 
whole moral and intellectual climate of the piece, all concur with the former notes 
in marking it off to the Poet’s highest maturity of thought and power. There- 
withal I hold it to be among his greatest triumphs in organization: I cannot point 
out, I believe no one has pointed out, a single instance where the parts might have 
been better ordered for the proper effect of the whole; while the interest never once 
flags or falters, nor suffers any break or diversion, from the beginning to the end; 
rather say, it holds on with ever-increasing force throughout, and draws all the 
details into its current; so that the unity of impression is literally perfect. In this 
great point of dramatic architecture I think it bears the palm clean away from 
both the other Roman tragedies; and indeed I am not sure but it should be set 
down as the peer of Othello, Macbeth, and King Lear. 


FurnNIvatt (Introd. to Leopold’s Sh., p. \xxxiii.): Coriolanus. Another Roman 
play from Plutarch; but how different in tone and colour from the last! An interval 
of 520 years separates the deaths of the two heroes (Coriolanus’s was after 489 
B. C.; Antony’s, 30 A. D.). Antony lived in the decay of public spirit, the growth 
of luxury in Rome, and after his death Augustus became its first Emperor. Corio- 
lanus lived in Rome’s early austere days, just when she’d driven the lustful Tarquin 
from his throne, and establisht the Republic. And it was in the great battle 
against Tarquin endeavouring to recover the throne, that Coriolanus won his first 
garland of oak. But it is rather in the heroines than the heroes that the contrast 
of Antony and Cleopatra and Coriolanus is felt. Against the shifting colours of the 
kaleidoscope of Cleopatra’s whims and moods, against the hail and storm of her 
passions, the lurid glow of her lust, the fierce lightning of her wrath, rises the pure 


660 APPENDIX 


white figure of Volumnia, clad in the dignity of Honour and Patriotism, the grand- 
est woman in Shakspere, the embodiment of all the virtues that made the noble 
Roman lady. It is the heaven of Italy beside the hell of Egypt. And from mothers 
like Volumnia came the men who conquered the known world, and have left their 
mark for ever on the nations of Europe. Read her lines in their beautiful rhythmic 
prose, ‘When yet | he was but | tender-bodied, | and the on | ly son | of my 
womb. | I | was pleased | to let him | seek danger | where | he waslike | to find 
fame. | Had I | adoz | en sons, | each in | my love | alike. | I had rather | had 
eleven | die nobly | for their country, | than one | volup | tuously | surfeit | out 
of | action.’ See her overcome her mother’s righteous indignation against her 
townsmen’s injustice to her gallant son; see her on her knees to that son, for her 
country’s sake, pleading to him for mercy to her native land, appealing to him in 
words that all Shakspere’s last plays echo and re-echo to us: ‘Think’st thou it 
honourable, for a noble man, still to remember wrongs?’ See her win her happy 
victory, and then return with welcome into Rome, its life; and then acknowledge 
that no grander, nobler woman, was ever created by Shakspere’s art. 

Her one fault, her son tells us of, her scorn of the common folk. And as his 
character was moulded on hers, this fault he shared, but he wilfully greatend it, 
while his pride and self-love stopt his reaching the height of his mother’s patriot- 
ism. ‘Flower of warriors’ as he is, ‘his nature (on one side) too noble for this 
world,’ bravest of the brave, generous in his gifts, his pride—as well of person as 
of birth—flaws and ruins the jewel of his renown. Treated with ingratitude— 
base and outrageous though in his case it was—he cannot put his country above 
himself. As Hotspur would third England, so Coriolanus would destroy Rome. 
His grip is on her throat when his wife Virgilia, mov’d by the gods, stirs his 
mother to appeal to him. They are joind by Valeria— 


“The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle 
That’s curded by the frost from purest snow, 
And hangs on Dian’s temple,’— 


and they visit that Volscian camp. Coriolanus thought he was above nature, 
that he could hear them unmoved. But mother, wife, and boy prevail. Corio- 
lanus is himself again, and takes death, as he should, from the hand of his country’s 
foe, while his dear ones, unlike Portia, Cordelia, live on in Rome. The ingratitude 
of the Roman citizens, the cursings of them by Coriolanus, prepare us for the bitterer 
curses of the next play of this Group, [Timon of Athens]. 


SNIDER (ii, 225): Coriolanus is essentially a drama of Political Parties. Internal 
dissension, through partisan organizations, is shown in a variety of forms; also, 
other elements, as foreign war and the domestic relation, intermingle in the action 
and diversify its incidents and coloring. Moreover, the warring principles of the 
two parties are aristocracy and democracy—the conflict which has always in 
History been most prolific of political strife. The main characters are graded 
according to their partisan bias and intensity, for the essence of the conflict is 
party versus country. Finally, the heroic figure of the drama is a person who 
cannot subordinate his hatred against a party to his love for his country. Great 
as is Coriolanus, Rome must get rid of him, and all like him, before she can con- 
quer the world. 

It will be seen that the action exhibits two distinct movements—the one of 
which terminates in the banishment of the hero, the other in his death. Coriolanus 


CRITICISMS—SWINBURNE—BRADLEY 661 


is portrayed as the great defender of his country, but also as the greater enemy 
of the plebeians; partisan rancor leads to his expulsion—to his separation from 
Family and State. Herein both sides commit wrong. Such is the first movement. 
The second movement shows Coriolanus passing over to the enemies of his coun- 
try, in order to ruin it and thereby ruin the opposite party. Patriotism is subor- 
dinate to partisan hate; even attachment to his own class cannot outweigh his 
desire for revenge. His nation and his order, therefore, cannot mediate his 
hostility to a party, but his family can, though at the cost of the life of himself, 
one of its members. 

On the other hand, the two threads which run through the whole play are the 
political and domestic, in their manifold relation and interaction. The political 
thread is shown in both its internal and external manifestations, namely, in partisan 
dissension and in foreign war; while the domestic thread—the Family—has its 
various sides represented in the mother, wife, husband, son, father, neighbor, and 
friend. 


SWINBURNE (Study of Sh., p. 187): I cannot but think that enough at least of 
time has been spent if not wasted by able and even by eminent men on examination 
of Coriolanus with regard to its political aspect or bearing upon social questions. 
It is from first to last, for all its turmoil of battle and clamour of contentious | 
factions, rather a private and domestic than a public or historical tragedy. As in 
Julius Cesar the family had been so wholly subordinated to the state, and all 
personal interests so utterly dominated by the preponderance of national duties, 
that even the sweet and sublime figure of Portia passing in her ‘awful loveliness’ 
was but as a profile half caught in the background of an episode, so here on the 
contrary the whole force of the final impression is not that of a conflict between 
patrician and plebeian, but solely that of a match of passions played out for life 
and death between a mother and a son. The partisans of oligarchic or demo- 
cratic systems may wrangle at their will over the supposed evidences of Shake- 
speare’s prejudice against this creed and prepossession in favour of that. A third 
bystander may rejoice in the proof thus established of his impartial indifference 
towards either; it is all nothing to the real point in hand. The subject of the whole 
play is not the exile’s revolt, the rebel’s repentance, or the traitor’s reward, but 
above all it is the son’s tragedy. The inscription on the plinth of this tragic statue 
is simply to Volumnia Victrix. 

A loftier or a more perfect piece of man’s work was never done in all the world 
than this tragedy of Coriolanus; the one fit and crowning epithet for its companion 
or successor is that bestowed by Coleridge—‘the most wonderful.’ 


A. C. Brapiey (Shakespearean Tragedy, p. 83): All of the later tragedies may 
be called tragedies of passion, but not all of them display these extreme forms of 
evil. Neither of the last two does so. Antony and Coriolanus are, from one 
point of view, victims of passion; but the passion that ruins Antony also exalts 
him, he touches the infinite in it; and the pride and self-will of Coriolanus, though 
terrible in bulk, are scarcely so in quality; there is nothing base in them, and the 
huge creature whom they destroy is a noble, even a lovable being. Nor does 
either of these dramas, though the earlier depicts a corrupt civilisation, include 
even among the minor characters anyone who can be called villainous or horrible. 
Consider, finally, the impression left on us at the close of each. It is remarkable 
that this impression, though very strong, can scarcely be called purely tragic; or, 


662 APPENDIX 


if we call it so, at least the feeling of reconciliation which mingles with the obviously 
tragic emotions is here exceptionally well-marked. The death of Antony, it will 
be remembered, comes before the opening of the Fifth Act. The death of Cleo- 
patra, which closes the play, is greeted by the reader with sympathy and admira- 
tion, even with exultation at the thought that she has foiled Octavius; and these 
feelings are heightened by the deaths of Charmian and Iras, heroically faithful to 
their mistress, as Emilia was to hers. In Coriolanus the feeling of reconciliation 
is even stronger. The whole interest towards the close has been concentrated on 
the question whether the hero will persist in his revengeful design of storming 
and burning his native city, or whether better feelings will at last overpower his 
resentment and pride. He stands on the edge of a crime beside which, at least 
in outward dreadfulness, the slaughter of an individual looks insignificant. And 
when, at the sound of his mother’s voice and the sight of his wife and child, nature 
asserts itself and he gives way, although we know he will lose his life, we care little 
for that; he has saved his soul. Our relief, and our exultation in the power of 
goodness, are so great that the actual catastrophe which follows and mingles sad- 
ness with these feelings leaves them but little diminished, and as we close the 
book we feel, it seems to me, more as we do at the close of Cymbeline than as we do 
at the close of Othello. In saying this I do not in the least mean to criticise Corio- 
lanus. Itisa much nobler play as it stands than it would have been if Shakespeare 
had made the hero persist, and we had seen him amid the flaming ruins of Rome, 
awaking suddenly to the enormity of his deed and taking vengeance on himself; 
but that would surely have been an ending more strictly tragic than the close of 
Shakespeare’s play. Whether this close was simply due to his unwillingness to 
contradict his historical authority on a point of such magnitude we need not ask. 
In any case Coriolanus is, in more than an outward sense, the end of his tragic 
period. It marks the transition to his latest works, in which the powers of repent- 
ance and forgiveness charm to rest the tempest raised by error and guilt. 


A. C. BRADLEY (Cortolanus, p. 3): Coriolanus is beyond doubt among the latest 
of Shakespeare’s tragedies; there is some reason for thinking it the last. Like 
all those that succeeded Hamlet, it is a tragedy of vehement passion; and in none 
of them are more striking revolutions of fortune displayed. It is full of power, 
and almost every one feels it to be a noble work. We may say of it, as of its hero, 
that, if not one of Shakespeare’s greatest creations, it is certainly one of his biggest. 

Nevertheless, it is scarcely popular. It is seldom acted, and perhaps no reader 
ever called it his favourite play. Indeed, except for educational purposes, I 
suppose it is, after Timon, the least generally read of the tragedies. Even the 
critic who feels bound to rank it above Romeo and Juliet, and even above Julius 
Caesar, may add that he prefers those dramas all the same; and if he ignores his 
personal preferences, still we do not find him asking whether it is not the equal of 
the four great tragedies. He may feel this doubt as to Antony and Cleopatra, but 
not as to Coriolanus. 

The question why this should be so will at once tell us something about the 
drama. We cannot say that it shows any decline in Shakespeare’s powers, though 
in parts it may show slackness in their use. It has defects, some of which are due 
to the historical material; but all the tragedies have defects, and the material of 
Antony and Cleopatra was even more troublesome. There is no love-story; but 
then there is none in Macbeth, and next to none in King Lear. Thanks in part 
to the badness of the Folio text, the reader is impeded by obscurities of language 


_CRITICISMS—MAcCALLUM 663 


and irritated by the mangling of Shakespeare’s metre; yet these annoyances would 
not much diminish the effect of Othello. It may seem a more serious obstacle 
that the hero’s faults are repellent and chill our sympathy; but Macbeth, to say 
nothing of his murders, is a much less noble being than Coriolanus. All this 
doubtless goes for something; but there must be some further reason why this 
drama stands apart from the four great tragedies and Antony and Cleopatra. And 
one main reason seems to be this. Shakespeare could construe the store he found 
only by conceiving the hero’s character in a certain way; and he had to set the whole 
drama in tune with that conception. In this he was, no doubt, perfectly right; 
but he closed the door on certain effects, in the absence of which his whole power 
in tragedy could not be displayed. He had to be content with something less, or 
rather with something else; and so have we. 

Dr Johnson observes that ‘the tragedy of Coriolanus is one of the most amusing 
of our author’s performances.’ By ‘amusing’ he did not mean ‘mirth-provoking’; 
he meant that in Coriolanus a lively interest is excited and sustained by the variety 
of the events and characters; and this is true. But we may add that the play 
contains a good deal that is amusing in the current sense of the word. When the 
people appear as individuals they are frequently more or less comical. Shakespeare 
always enjoyed the inconsequence of the uneducated mind, and its tendency to 
express a sound meaning in an absurd form. Again, the talk of the servants 
with one another and with the muffled hero, and the conversation of the sentinels 
with Menenius, are amusing. ‘There is a touch of comedy in the contrast between 
Volumnia and Virgilia when we see them on occasions not too serious. And then, 
not only at the beginning, as in Plutarch, but throughout the story we meet with 
that pleasant and wise old gentleman Menenius, whose humour tells him how to 
keep the peace while he gains his point, and to say without offence what the hero 
cannot say without raising a storm. Perhaps no one else in the play is regarded 
from beginning to end with such unmingled approval, and this is not lessened 
when the failure of his embassy to Coriolanus makes him the subject as well as 
the author of mirth. If we regard the drama from this point of view we find that 
it differs from almost all the tragedies, though it has a certain likeness to Antony 
and Cleopatra. What is amusing in it is, for the most part, simply amusing, and 
has no tragic tinge. It is not like the gibes of Hamlet at Polonius, or the jokes of 
the clown who, we remember, is digging Ophelia’s grave, or that humour of Iago 
which for us is full of menace; and who could dream of comparing it with the 
jesting of Lear’s fool? Even that Shakespearean audacity, the interruption of 
Volumnia’s speech by the hero’s little son, makes one laugh almost without reserve. 
And all this helps to produce the characteristic tone of this tragedy. 


MacCatuivum (p. 467): Certainly Coriolanus is not meant to be a constitutional 
manifesto; probably it does not, even at unawares, idealise a contemporary dis- 
pute; it is hardly likely that Shakespeare so much as intrudes conscious allusions 
to the questions then at issue. And this on account not only of the particular 
opinions attributed to him, but, much more, of his usual practice in poetic creation. 
Do any of these alleged incentives in .the circumstances, public or private, of his 
life go far to explain his attraction to a story and selection of it, its power over him 
and his power over it? Doubtless in realising the subject that took his fancy, he 
would draw on the stores of his experience as well as his imagination. In dealing 
with the tragedy of a proud and unpopular hero of antiquity, very possibly he 
would be helped by what he knew of the tragedy of a proud and unpopular worthy 


664 APPENDIX 


of his own time. In dealing with the influence of a mother and the reverence of 
a son, very probably the memories of his own home would hover before his mind. 
In dealing with the plebeians and patricians of Rome, he would inevitably fill in 
the details from his knowledge of the burgesses and nobles of England, and he 
might get hints for his picture of the by-gone struggle, from the struggle that he 
himself could watch. But it is the story of Coriolanus that comes first and that 
absorbs all such material into itself, just as the seed in its growth assimilates 
nourishment from the earth and sunshine and rain. These things are not the seed. 
The experiences are utilised in the interest of the play; the play is not utilised in 
the interest of the experiences. 

It is particularly important to emphasise this in view of the circumstance that 
Coriolanus has often been regarded as a drama of principles rather than of char- 
acter, even by those who refrain from reading into it any particular reference. 
But Shakespeare’s supreme preoccupation is always with his fable, which explains, 
and is explained by, human nature in action. He does not set out to commend or 
censure or examine a precept or a theory or a doctrine. Of course the life of men 
is concerned with such matters, and he could not exclude them without being untrue 
to his aim. Thus, to take the most obvious example, it is impossible to treat of 
character with a total omission of ethical considerations, since character is con- 
nected with conduct, and conduct has its ethical aspect; and, indeed, success in 
getting to the truth of character depends very much on the keenness of the moral 
insight. It is very largely Shakespeare’s moral insight that gives him his unrivalled 
position among the interpreters of men; and we may, if we like, derive any number 
of improving lessons from his works. But he is an artist, not a moralist; and he 
wrote for the story, not for the moral. Just in the same way an architect seeks to 
design a beautiful or convenient building, not to illustrate mechanical laws. 
Nevertheless, in proportion as these are neglected, the building will not rise or 
will not last; and if they are obeyed, however unconsciously, the illustration of 
them will be provided. In Charlotte Bronte’s Shirley, when Caroline gives Robert 
Moore this very play to read, he asks, ‘Is it to operate like a sermon?’ And she 
answers: ‘It is to stir you; to give you new sensations. It is to make you feel 
life strongly’ (that is the main thing, and then comes the indirect consequence), 
‘not only your virtues, but your vicious perverse points.’ 

Now just as in all Shakespeare’s dramas, though or rather because they are 
personal, the ethical considerations cannot be excluded; so in a drama that moves 
through a constitutional crisis, though or rather because it, too, is personal, 
political considerations cannot be excluded. They are there, though it is on the 
second plane. And just as his general delineation of character would be unsatis- 
factory if his moral insight were at fault, so his delineation of the characters that 
play their part in this history would be unsatisfactory if his political insight were 
at fault. He is not necessarily bound to appreciate correctly the conditions that 
prevailed in reality or by report: that is required only for historical accuracy or 
fidelity to tradition. But he is bound to appreciate the conditions as he imagines 
them, and not to violate in his treatment of them the principles that underlie all 
political society. 


DeicutTon (Jntrod., p. xiv.): It has been supposed by some that in Coriolanus 
the leading thought of the poet is a purely political one, and that we have here 
an exposition of Shakespeare’s political faith. This appears to be a complete 
inversion of his method. It is true, no doubt, that in plays which turn upon polit- 


CRITICISMS—MURRY 665 


ical issues Shakespeare’s leanings may in some measure be seen, and that in 
Coriolanus those leanings are not towards democracy. But that he here or any- 
where preached a political doctrine I disbelieve as entirely as I disbelieve that 
he ever preached a moral doctrine. A moral is of course to be found in all stories 
of human action. But it is there because the poet taking certain characters and 
certain incidents, whether from history, fiction, or his own imagination, shows us 
dramatically how those characters would act amidst those incidents; not because 
he has chosen those characters and incidents to illustrate a particular theory 
whether of ethics or of politics. In the present instance history is at hand with an 
outline of striking incidents, and characters strong in their individuality—in 
other words, with a subject eminently capable of dramatic handling. Shakespeare’s 
tribunes are the tribunes of Plutarch, his hero Plutarch’s hero, but with their souls 
laid bare, the working of their minds manifested in words as in actions. The 
play has, in fact, nothing more of set political purpose than, say, The Tempest or 
Cymbeline. . . . A great though far from flawless soul is brought in contact with 
mighty events, and the necessary results of position, nature, and training develop 
themselves. 


J. Mmpteton Murry (London Mercury, Feb., 1922, p. 386): Coriolanus is, if not 
one of the greatest, one of the most masterly of Shakespeare’s plays. If it does not 
hold all the spiritual significance of any of the three great tragedies, if it has not 
the profound emotional appeal of Antony and Cleopatra or Julius Cesar, it in- 
dubitably belongs to the same period of serene mastery of mind and expression. 
French critics continually, and English critics occasionally—these last improperly 
obeisant before the prestige of French criticism—have said that Coriolanus is 
Shakespeare’s most perfect work of art. While we deplore their language, we 
understand their meaning. Coriolanus is a magnificent example of creative con- 
trol. Its design is, as Mr Walter Sickert has well said of Poussin’s painting, 
‘marshalled.’ Its economy, its swiftness, its solidity, its astonishing clarity and 
pregnancy of language are not only satisfying and exhilarating in themselves, 
but they have a peculiar and profound appropriateness to the martial argument. 
Just as the looser texture of Antony and Cleopatra seems to be the inevitable gar- 
ment of the decaying soldiership of Antony, so the exact and unrelenting pattern 
of Coriolanus seems essential to the unfaltering decision and the unswerving success 
of the earlier Roman general. The play marches onward like a legion in the days 
when Roman soldiers were Romans still. 

Perhaps it is this quality of Roman relentlessness and inevitability which has 
made it unsympathetic to the general English taste, for among us it is surely the 
least popular of Shakespeare’s great plays. In France, on the contrary, it is said 
to be the most popular; probably not for the same reason. Beyond the fact that 
Coriolanus is a familiar and traditional hero of the French theatre, the concen- 
trated and controlled dramatic action which distinguishes Shakespeare’s Coriolanus 
from his other great dramas appeals directly to the French palate. Since, however, 
this only means that Coriolanus is an unusually well-constructed play, it cannot 
account for the general reluctance of English people to admit it to their affections. 
The reason, one imagines, is that it is too Roman. An English audience, and 
English readers for that matter, like to surrender themselves to their heroes. 
They can idolise Brutus as an Eloquent Hampden, and sympathise with an Antony 
lost in the embraces of his serpent of old Nile. A martyr for political liberty, a 
martyr for love, these are intimate and comprehensible to us; but a martyr to the 


666 APPENDIX 


aristocratic idea isnot. He is an alien; there is too much of the British constitution 
in our blood for him to warm it. 

In other and more familiar terms Coriolanus is an unsympathetic hero, and all 
the characters of the play, save one, Virgilia, strike chill upon the general heart. 
Volumnia is altogether too much like that forbidding Spartan mother who 
haunted our schooldays with her grim farewell: ‘Return with your shield or upon 
it’; Menenius is too cynical, too worldy-wise to move us humanly in his discom- 
fiture; Brutus and Sicinius arouse neither sympathy nor disdain; and the emotion 
we feel at the knightly generosity of Aufidius is dashed too soon by his confession 
that, if he cannot overthrow Coriolanus by fair means, he will by foul. Coriolanus 
himself we cannot like, any more than a schoolboy can like Themistocles. One 
may despise one’s country, one may hate one’s country, but one may not lead an 
enemy against her. These are primitive ethics, no doubt, but they are profound, 
and though they may be alien to esthetic criticism, they have their roots deep in 
the human heart. The writer who ignores them deliberately imperils the universal- 
ity of his appeal. 


Hooxuam (p. 113): There are, roughly, three periods or stages in the develop- 
ment of Shakespearean drama. A period before the great inspiration, the period 
when it was in full force, and a period when it was on the wane or had even ceased. 
The first period contains, for instance, Love’s Labour’s Lost, The Two Gentlemen, 
The Comedy of Errors. These are youthful productions, not very great, but not 
distasteful; and, the critics seem agreed, not beyond the powers of other dramatists. 
Of the period of decline or even cessation I should select as the most important 
instance Coriolanus. Coriolanus is a play on the grand scale. It is one of the 
great plays, a great tragedy, or it is nothing. Now what do we look for in a great 
play by the greatest of poets? One would say, poetry: poetical imagination, 
poetical passion, poetical beauty. From beginning to end of Coriolanus there is 
none of these. From the poet of Hamlet we look for exalted sentiment. In 
Coriolanus we find its unpleasant opposite; there is more than defective taste, 
there is perverted moral sense. There is, morally, as wide a gulf between the char- 
acter of Coriolanus, as there is, intellectually, between the wit of Falstaff and the 
malapropisms of Dogberry and Verges. Hamlet is what we call a gentlemen, if 
ever there was one, Coriolanus is not. I take it that one indelible mark of the 
man we call a gentlemen is that he never too obviously asserts himself. Hamlet 
is every whit as brave as Coriolanus; but he is not continually telling us how brave 
he is. We infer it from his actions, not from his proclamations. Coriolanus is 
blatant in his self-glorification. If we could imagine Pistol not a coward, he would 
be just such another. 

Coriolanus has absolutely no good attribute except physical courage, which he 
shares with most men and many animals. It is only because the defect of it is 
such an object of contempt, that its possession is so much and so generally ap- 
plauded. In her own way that horrible woman, Volumnia, is just as repulsive— 
fit mother of such a son. Indeed if we would mitigate our judgment of Coriolanus 
it would be on the ground of his unfortunate maternal parentage; we might con- 
jecture whence he derived his unbridled rant. Lady Macbeth we always respect. 
We even, such is the magic of the great play, sympathise with her, ina way. For 
Volumnia we have neither sympathy nor respect. She sets every nerve on edge. 
She and her congenial friend, Valeria, gloating over a little wretch of a boy (son to 
Coriolanus), tearing a butterfly to pieces in a fit of passion, makes a picture that, 


CRITICISMS—TOLMAN 667 


in this strange, decadent mood, Shakespeare seems to ask us to admire; but these 
mock-heroic women are in shocking contrast with other Shakespearean heroines. 
Even Lady Macbeth is murderous with a difference; she is not bloodthirsty. No 
horror will deter her; but she does not love horrors. These women do. 

In order to extol Coriolanus Shakespeare defames the commons. To make the 
Romans cowards is a libel, and a ridiculous libel at that. They were not even 
fools, but, as a nation, courage they could not possibly have lacked. The whole 
picture is about as incongruous and untrue to life as perverted sympathy can make 
it; and it is as bad in art as in morals. 

For with this perversion of moral sense perversion of style goes here hand in 
hand. The style of Coriolanus is turgid throughout. The language is everywhere 
stronger than the feeling; and what worse condemnation of a literary production 
could there be? There is a striving after the effect of excitement without genuine 
excitement. This leads to the most absurd contortions of language, and to wilful 
and unnecessary obscurity. 

It is commonly said that there are some blunders that only a clever man can 
make. Coriolanus shows intellect, but intellect gone astray. 

One would be glad to think, if it were thinkable, that Coriolanus was a spurious 
work wrongly credited—or debited—to Shakespeare; but that is impossible. 
Although it is what it is, it bears unmistakably the stamp of Shakespeare. So 
again, one would like to fancy it was Shakespeare’s satire on the Jingos, male and 
female, of his day—for Jingos we always have with us; but neither is that pos- 
sible. It stands for us a monument of fallen greatness. How great is that fall 
will be appreciated by any student of drama who shall read, first, the utterances 
of Coriolanus; and then any single scene in which Hamlet or Macbeth speaks; 
or who will first take a course of Volumnia, and, after, turn for refreshment to 
Cleopatra. If he does not then realise the difference between Shakespeare inspired 
and uninspired, it will be a pity. 


TOLMAN (p. 102): The question naturally arises, how far is the drama indebted 
to Plutarch for its unity and power? But one has only to read the two accounts 
side by side to see in what an endless variety of ways Shakespeare has condensed, 
hastened, unified, intensified, and supplemented the somewhat wandering story 
of Plutarch. Shakespeare himself is the real source of the intimate, vigorous dra- 
matic life that permeates the play. He recasts his material more freely here than 
in Julius Cesar or Antony and Cleopatra. He improves upon his original in the 
greater vividness of the characters and in the closeness and skill of the inter- 
weaving. 

Excepting Coriolanus himself all the characters in Plutarch’s sketch are faint 
and vague. In Plutarch Menenius does not appear again after telling the fable of 
the belly and the members. The tribunes disappear after Marcius is banished. 
Aufidius is not mentioned until Marcius goes to his house, and is not present at 
the great scene between Coriolanus and his mother. Volumnia has nothing to 
do with the suit of Marcius for the consulship; and his solicitation for that office 
is not brought into any connection either with the war against the Volscians or 
with the banishment of the hero. 

That the speech in which Coriolanus announces himself to Aufidius follows 
Plutarch closely, and that ‘nowhere has Shakespeare borrowed so much through 
so great a number of lines as in Volumnia’s appeal to the piety of her son’ are 
facts which easily mislead one as to the extent of the poet’s indebtedness to his 


668 APPENDIX 


source. And the telling close of Volumnia’s plea, which finally overpowers the 
hero, is new to Shakespeare. 

I must admit that the play seems to me defective at one point. In Plutarch 
the opportune and skillful recounting of the fable of the belly and the members 
by Menenius causes the plebeians to become reconciled to the patricians on con- 
dition that the people be granted the tribunes with ample power. In the play, 
while Menenius is talking to one body of plebeians, another company obtains from 
the hostile patricians the concession that they may have tribunes to protect them. 
This granting of tribunes has no natural relation to the bread-riot which Shake- 
speare has depicted. The populace ‘ask for bread and get a magistrate.’ Shake- 
speare makes the colloquy between Menenius and his audience supremely vivid 
and interesting. Hardly any serio-comic passage in the plays reads better. But 
because it is not made causative in any way, super-excellent as it is in itself, it 
is good for nothing. Surely this is an artistic mistake, an unfortunate alteration 
of the story of Plutarch. 

Two closely related actions make up the drama. The main action, the strife 
between Brutus and Sicinius, the leaders of the plebeians, and Caius Marcius, is 
prepared for at once in the outspoken bitterness of the common people toward 
their especial enemy. The second action, the contest between Marcius and the 
Volscians under Aufidius, is so closely involved with the first that it does not impair 
the unity. The play is not divided because of this second line of interest; it is 
enriched and enlarged. The interweaving of the two strands is intimate, com- 
plete. The character, the deeds, and the fate of Caius Marcius constitute the 
absorbing interest in which both actions are united. 


B. Marruews (Sh. as a Playwright, p. 270): Coriolanus is a one-part play, as 
was Richard III., but the Roman piece is without the theatric variety and the 
psychologic interest of the English history. It is intolerably monotonous in its 
insistence upon a single character, dominated by a single unlovely characteristic— 
an overmastering pride, supported by an inhuman contempt for all who do not 
belong to his own caste. Pride goes before a fall, and Coriolanus sinks to the 
infamy of becoming a traitor who takes command of the enemies of Rome and leads 
them victorious to her walls. For this baseness he may have provocation enough, 
but he has no real justification, and he admits himself that his revenge on his native 
city is due to spite. 

Shakspere exaggerates beyond belief the personal exploits of hishero. Coriolanus 
is a stalwart fighter, but he reveals none of the qualities of a great general. He has 
immense pride in his own prowess, in the strength of his thews; but he is narrow- 
minded and lacking in any genuine magnanimity of soul. He is ill-balanced 
and over-bearing; and such a character is too devoid of variety to attract play- 
goers, even if it had been exhibited in an artfully contrived plot, which Coriolanus 
has not. Moreover, the only really dramatic situation in the story that Shakspere 
finds in Plutarch—the surrender of Coriolanus to the appeal of his mother to spare 
the Rome which has turned him out—even this is not made to yield its full effect. 
It is probably this situation which led Shakspere to select the subject; and yet this 
scene is not as well done as Shakspere had handled corresponding situations in 
other plays. The speech of Volumnia to Coriolanus is a specimen of swelling 
eloquence, a towering example of rhetorical amplification, a big speech in itself 
but it is wanting in heartfelt sincerity. A few simple moving words would wave 
served the purpose better than this sonorous oration. Although there is no weak- 


CRITICISMS—HORN—KREYSSIG 669 


ening here of the poet’s power or of his intelligence, there seems to be a slackening 
of enthusiasm and a consequent diminution of emotional appeal. 

To this we may also ascribe the hardness of the play as a whole, its metallic 
orilliancy, its repellent temper. The atmosphere is petty and the political conflict 
in Rome is but a paltry factional fight. In Julius Cesar the clash of the contending 
parties is a struggle for imperial dominion; and in Coriolanus it is only an intra- 
mural squabble. In Julius Cesar we have world-politics, and in Coriolanus only 
ward-politics. We do not sympathize with either party, and plainly enough Shak- 
spere does not mean us to do so. He does not take sides himself, and we do not. 
He is impartial, and we have an equal dislike for both of the contending groups. 
The plebeians are crass and cowardly, and the patricians are cowardly and inca- 
pable. The mob is as flighty and as feather-brained as the mob in Julius Cesar; 
and the fathers of the city act rather as stepfathers, selfish and self-seeking. On 
both sides there is a plentiful lack of common sense and of right feeling. 


F. Horn (iv, 35): Shakespeare has with so clear a mind apprehended the his- 
torical material, and has set it forth in such a masterly manner, that in looking 
back we feel that hardly a wish is left unfulfilled. Besides, no one can gainsay 
that in most of the scenes of the tragedy the language sounds forth like to a mighty 
clarion, until towards the end it wearily dies away into silence. Nevertheless 
there remains in the inmost soul of the reader a longing that is unsatisfied; it is 
that feeling which in its tenderest depth cannot be adequately expressed. We 
must by no means confound such a longing with the fond expression of a definite 
affectionate relation between A. and B.; such would by no means satisfy this 
particular longing, but would be absolutely at variance with it. That which is 
lacking for us is not the fault of the poet, but rather that of the material, for which, 
except for his magical power, we should be unable to feel any such interest as we 
experience, for example, for Romeo, for Brutus, for Lear. In Coriolanus almost 
every character taking part is in the wrong; the hero himself and his opposer, 
Aufidius, Menenius and the Tribunes, the Volscian as well as the Roman Senate, 
but the Idea of State and Country stands forth predominant. The tragedy’s 
great goal is attained; whoever desires anything more than this desires here 
something quite unsuitable and misplaced. We may /zke, and I admit this to be 
my feeling also, other works of our poet more than this one, but we should not forget 
what both for itself and in itself it is. 


Kreyssic (p. 464): With Coriolanus Shakespeare had now finished the dramatic 
representation of Roman life. We do not possess any definite data as to the exact 
date of composition of this piece. The only likelihood of Antony and Cleopatra 
having been finished earlier might be signified by the fact that at certaininstances in 
the almost overbold treatment of the language, as depicted here and there, and pos- 
sibly, too, by the crude conception of human affairs, the guess is that it must have 
occurred in the neighborhood of 1609 or possibly 1610—an epoch of important de- 
cision for tracing at just this time the causes, the origin, duration, and possibly the 
strength that prompted it, without being able to offer any positive solution as to 
exact date. The seeming aristocracy of this drama rendered it a favorite piece of our 
romanticists. English criticism, too, places it upon a high pedestal, though, justly, 
not as high as Julius Cesar. The bold and the many-sided articulated char- 
acteristics, the wealth of far-reaching thought, and the splendor of the language 
will, forever, make for it a lasting impression. But we must not permit ourselves 


670 APPENDIX 


to be led astray by the heroic distinction of the main character and because of the 
specifically antique coloring to see it in that light and to prove its pitch accord- 
ingly. Shakespeare creates in Coriolanus a great historic and moral problem as 
offered to him through this antique legend, weaving into it his profound knowledge 
of human character, his entire and impartial love of truth. As in Brutus is por- 
trayed the vain struggle of an aristocratic idealist against the political minority 
declaration of his degraded people; or in Antony and Cleopatra, the quarrel of a 
light-minded and sensual egotism, genial though at times, with that cold and conse- 
quent ambition for power for the possession of a world, void of the spirit—so here, 
too, is illumined the self-destruction of an aristocratic hero who, overestimating the 
sensibility of personal strength, alienates himself from the only safe doctrine of 
aristocratic dignity and power, by which is meant the surrender of the subjective 
sympathy below the standard morality, the subjugation of a personal ambition 
for patriotic interest. It is to prove that the natural tendency of the poet for 
the aristocratic force over and above the common, the mediocre has brought about 
aristocratic evils and aristocratic narrowmindedness, which is just as bad, as shown 
in Henry VIII., where his Protestant tendency takes sides against the innocent, 
ailing Catholic queen. But, if this highly human conception of the problem 
shielded the poet from psychologic falsehood, it was in no way not sufficient to 
afford the drama historic importance in the sense of the plays as derived from 
English history. Plutarch’s narrative, to be sure, did not only give all the details 
of the outer action, but likewise a number of the most important moments of its 
psychological development. But suddenly in it becomes visible a more mythical 
than historic tradition, full of contradictions, a reflective consciousness of the nar- 
rator, belonging to an entirely different world. Thus, it is no longer difficult to 
prove that Shakespeare departed, too, from this muddy source wherever possible 
and wherever is reflected the truly pure antique, but unknown to the monarchial- 
aristocratic life of the State of the 16th century. As stated heretofore, we pay 
little or no attention to the many anachronisms occurring en masse, but without 
having reference to the action of the play itself. We are interested neither in the 
antique nor in the modern characters of the drama; we are not interested that 
Cominius speaks of Roman theaters, that Titus Lartius refers to Cato, that 
Menenius compares Coriolanus’ voice to the sound of a knell, his ‘hm’ to a 
battery, himself with Alexander, the Macedonian. It is not at all necessary to 
go into such details as far as the poet’s imagination is concerned, and, because of 
it, deny the drama every importance of its artistic value. Shakespeare does not 
owe his antiquarian knowledge to any specific or systematic study, but merely 
draws it from the perusal of moral and poetic substance. Wherever he beheld an 
insinuation, a comparison suitable to his purpose, he little cared whether or not 
the speaker living in this or that century B. C., or possessed the requisite under- 
standing for this or that. Then, too, the conception of action referring to the 
most important situations of life vary rather vividly from the historic notions so 
that it would not seem just not to take note of such changes in defining our stand- 
point for the benefit of the historic, moral, and esthetic conception and value. 


SCHLEGEL (ii, 209): In the three Roman pieces—Coriolanus, Julius Cesar, and 
Antony and Cleopatra—the moderation with which Shakspeare excludes foreign 
appendages and arbitrary suppositions, and yet fully satisfied the wants of the 
stage, is particularly deserving of our admiration. These plays are the very 
thing itself; and under the apparent artlessness of adhering closely to history as 


CRITICISMS—GERVINUS 671 


he found it, an uncommon degree of art is concealed. Of every historical trans- 
action Shakspeare knows how to seize the true poetical point of view, and to 
give unity and rounding to a series of events detached from the immeasurable 
extent of history without in any degree changing them. The public life of ancient 
Rome is called up from its grave, and exhibited before our eyes with the utmost 
grandeur and freedom of the dramatic form, and the heroes of Plutarch are en- 
nobled by the most eloquent poetry. 

In Coriolanus we have more comic intermixtures than in the others, as the 
many-headed multitude plays here a considerable part; and when Shakspeare 
portrays the blind movements of the people in a mass, he almost always gives him- 
self up to his merry humor. To the plebeians, whose folly is certainly sufficiently 
conspicuous already, the original old satirist Menenius is added by way of abun- 
dance. This gives rise to droll scenes of a description altogether peculiar, and 
which are alone compatible with such a political drama; for instance, when Corio- 
lanus, to obtain the consulate, must solicit the lower order of citizens whom he 
holds in contempt for their cowardice in war, but cannot so far master his haughty 
disposition as to assume the customary humility, and yet extorts from them their 
votes. 


GERVINUS (p. 746): Fondness for the Roman state, whose mighty career 
Shakespeare contemplates in this play with the proud satisfaction of one belonging 
to it, seems to have induced the poet, after the completion of Antony and Cleopatra, 
to take up once more the better days of the first military greatness of this people, 
and to treat a more noble subject out of its history. As in Antony he had repre- 
sented the imperial time and its degeneracy, and in Cesar the struggle of the 
republic with monarchy, in Coriolanus he brings before us the struggle between the 
aristocratic and the democratic elements within the republic. The play is filled 
with the striving of the two powers, tribunes and consuls, plebeians and patricians, 
senate and people; the complaints and reproaches customary between ruler and 
subjects, between official and privileged persons and those who bear the burden 
and perform the labours, are evenly balanced against each other. The opposition 
between these two powers is everywhere exhibited as founded on their nature; 
the implacable enmity between them is shown as a necessary result of the impru- 
dence, unreasonableness, and harshness of their contrast. The inconstancy in the 
people is contrasted with the obstinacy, the one-sidedness, and the scorn in the 
representative of aristocracy; the dishonesty on the one side is opposed to the 
boundless ambition on the other, proud contempt to envious hatred, deep desire 
of revenge to the passing intoxication of retaliation, the lingering grudge to the 
superficial repentance. The incompatibility of the higher and stronger nature 
with the weaker and lower is described; for this is inevitable, unless on one side 
wise modesty condescends, and on the other grateful respect for merit elevates. 
The contrasts and contentions of these two political states and powers are so 
thoroughly treated of in our play, that this very struggle of the aristocratic and 
democratic principles has usually been considered as the spirit of it, as if the leading 
thought of the poet had been a purely political one. But it always seemed to us 
that these three Roman plays were so highly and generally estimated, just on ac- 
count of the elevation of history to pure drama, the union of the political idea 
with a moral one, and the mixture of historical with psychological excellence. We 
are inclined to believe that those political relations are inherent in the subject, 
and form with it that general foundation on which the actual centre of the piece 


672 APPENDIX 


must first be sought. The internal connection of the three plays and their themes 
with one another will quickly place this in a clear light. In Julius Cesar the 
political subject was the struggle of the republic with monarchy; within this gen- 
eral subject of the great historical action we were, however, attracted by the sharp 
discord between a political and a moral duty, which affects the hero of the play 
and which is the kernel of the real dramatic action. In Antony and Cleopatra 
the historical theme is the struggle of the active Roman spirit against the influx 
of oriental effeminacy, and here, we may say, the political and the moral centre 
coincided; Antony’s individual hesitation between his active vocation in the world 
and his pursuit of sensual enjoyment is the first great symptom of the like state 
of the times. In Coriolanus the political basis is the struggle between the aristo- 
cratic and democratic elements; in this struggle the hero finds himself placed in a 
situation where he has to choose between his patriotism and his private feelings 
of hatred. Brutus renounced his friendship with Cesar, the supposed enemy of 
his country, out of greater devotion to his country, being as noble in policy as he 
was mistaken in morals; Antony renounced friendships that were useful to his 
country, and formed others that were injurious, being both in policy and morals 
equally easy and negligent; Coriolanus renounced an enmity with the enemy of 
his people, to the ruin of his country, being politically and morally hardened in 
selfishness. The sort of characters which have to decide in these situations, and 
the prominent qualities in them, by means of which they decide in this way or 
in that, this is everywhere the actual centre towards which the poet worked, 
and his leading thought here, as we everywhere demonstrate, is of a moral psycho- 
logical nature. Brutus’ really difficult choice is decided by the fundamental 
firmness and uprightness of a truly manly mind; Antony’s choice, which ought to 
be no choice, is, in strong contrast to Brutus, decided by the unmanly weakness 
and meanness of an effeminate voluptuary; Coriolanus, again, in double contrast 
to both, is guided by the lofty pride and high ambition of a manly character, in 
which an excess of selfishness unnaturally tends to unbending obstinacy which 
blunts itself. In Brutus, the noblest citizen contended with the noblest man; 
in Antony, the sensualist celebrated his triumph over the citizen summoned to 
action; in Coriolanus, the sensitive man and the good citizen is subdued by a 
heroism exaggerated by pride. A heroism, we say, because indeed the physical 
qualities and characteristics of Coriolanus surpass, as in heroic times, ordinary 
human greatness; an exaggerated heroism, we added, because, compared with 
similar descriptions of similar relations in the heroic ages, this stands prominent 
in the might of passion. Homer’s enraged Meleager and Achilles, in like scorn 
and obstinacy, soften when they see fire carried into the friendly city or ships; 
Coriolanus is ready to throw the fire-brand with his own hand into his native city. 

Even if we give up our usual plan of seeking in every one of Shakespeare’s 
dramas a fundamental moral view, it is by no means unimportant, in forming a 
judgment on this play, whether we take the political or the psychological idea as 
the basis for our consideration. If we take the political struggle between the two 
orders to be the main point, we shall readily arrive at wrong conclusions. To 
instance only one. We see Coriolanus, as the chief representative of the aristoc- 
racy, in strong opposition to the people and the tribunes; hence we naturally take 
up the view expressed by Hazlitt, that Shakespeare had a leaning to the arbitrary 
side of the question, to the aristocratical principle, inasmuch as he does not dwell 
on the truths he tells of the nobles in the same proportion as he does on those he 
tells of the people. Hazlitt has added excellent grounds for proving even the 


CRITICISMS—ULRICI 673 


naturalness and need of this inclination in the poet. . . . Shakespeare has depicted 
the man of freedom, Brutus, nay, even the harder master-spirit of the revolution, 
Cassius, far nobler and with much more love than the man of the aristocracy, 
Coriolanus. It will be allowed that, from the example of Brutus, many more would 
be won over to the cause of the people than would be won over to aristocratic 
principles by Coriolanus. If we regard Coriolanus not merely in reference to the 
many, but if we weigh his character in itself and with itself, we must confess, after 
the closest consideration, that personified aristocracy is here represented in its 
noblest and in its worst side, with that impartiality which Shakespeare’s nature 
could scarcely avoid. It may be replied, the people are not so depicted. Yet 
even on the nobles as a body our poet has just as little thrown a favourable light 
at last; for it lies in the nature of things that a multitude can never be compared 
with one man who is to be the subject of poetical representation, and who, on that 
very account, must stand alone, one single man distinguished from the many. But 
it may be said, the representatives of the people, the tribunes also, are not thus 
impartially depicted. Yet where would have been the poetic harmony, if Shake- 
speare had made these prominent? where the truth, if he had given dignity and 
energy to a new power created in a tumult? where our sympathy in his hero, if 
he had placed a Marcus Brutus in opposition to him in the tribunate? In pro- 
portion as he had raised our interest in the tribunes, he would have withdrawn 
it from Coriolanus, who had already enough to do to bear his own burden of 
declension. 


Urrict (ii, 183): The first cycle of Roman plays brings before us the political 
life and history of the progress of the Roman people (the basis of modern politi- 
cal life) in all its essential moments; Coriolanus gives us the contests between the 
plebeians and patricians and the progressive development of the republic; Jadius 
Cesar, the last fruitless struggles of the dying republic with the rise of the new 
monarchical form of government; Antony and Cleopatra, the downfall of the 
oligarchy and the nature of the empire; Titus Andronicus, the inevitable decay 
of the ancient spirit and position of the Roman empire, in face of the Germanic 
nations, and the new principle of life which the latter introduced into the political 
history of Europe. Coriolanus contains the tragic conflict which qualifies the 
historical drama to become a pathetic tragedy. Here, as in Shakespeare throughout, 
the political is met by the ethical, moral element. It is for political reasons alone 
(because Rome has fallen into the power of the populace) that Coriolanus wages 
war against his native city; but the political element cannot be so entirely sepa- 
rated from the ethical and general element of human nature as he thinks. By 
threatening his own country, he also threatens his own house; by tearing himself 
away from the former, he at the same time breaks his family bond; by valuing 
the political form (from a purely political standpoint) more than the political sub- 
stance, 7. e., more than the spiritual and physical welfare of the citizens, he de- 
stroys the welfare of the latter as well as that of his own family; in short, by en- 
deavouring only to preserve his political rights, and to do his political duty, he 
violates the moral duty of patriotism, as well as the love and affection due towards 
mother, wife, and child. It is true that, in the end, the moral feeling does overcome 
his political rigorism; but the violation of the moral law weighs too heavily, and 
penetrates too deeply, for him to repair what he has injured; even though he had 
not fallen a victim to the revengeful spirit of the Volscians, his life would never- 
theless have been utterly ruined. 


43 


674 APPENDIX 


The opponents of Coriolanus, however, appear also involved in a similar con- 
flict, a similar contradiction. Even the people, now and again, forget their political 
part, their democratic aspirations, and the poet—with an unmistakable touch of 
irony—shows us that it is partly hunger, partly an irresistible human feeling of 
respect for a great character that carries off the victory over the democratic prin- 
ciple. Did not the well-known fable of old Menenius Agrippa—about the quarrel 
between the belly and the other members of the body—suffice to quell a revolt? 


Frangcors-Victor Huco (vol. ix, p. 37): In his Tragedy of Coriolanus Shakespeare 
has appropriated the fatal denouement as given by Plutarch. According to an 
entirely different version of the story as related by Livy, following Fabius Pictor, 
Marcius, retired in Antium, was spared by the Volscians, and, through their 
indulgence, lived in unhappy exile until extreme old age. I do not know whether 
the English poet had read this account by the Latin historian, with which, through 
Philemon Holland’s translation in 1600, he might have been made familiar. Even 
supposing he had known it, I have no doubt he would have systematically rejected 
the peaceful conclusion mentioned by Livy. If ever, indeed, Shakespearian provi- 
dence had to inflict exemplary chastisement, it is in this very case. If ever tragic 
expiation was deserved, it was by Coriolanus. 

At the moment when Marcius falls beneath the swords of the Volscians let us 
recollect all the outrages committed by the victim. His life was but one long 
conspiracy against human and divine laws. In contempt of the eternal right, on 
which is founded the equality of men; in scorn of the social constitution which 
proclaims it, he wished to enslave the city to an oligarchy of the family, and sub- 
ject the majority of his fellow creatures to a privileged caste. In order to estab- 
lish the authority of this caste he counselled the employment of every means— 
violence, deception, ambuscades, massacre! Let us recollect the horrible threat 
which but lately he addressed to the starving people: ‘Ah! would the nobility but 
lay aside their scruples, and allow me to draw the sword, I would make a hecatomb 
of corpses as high as my lance!’ Marcius abused the prerogatives which he held 
by right of birth; those splendid qualities which he received for good purposes 
he made use of for bad; he used virtue to enact injustice, prostituted magnanimity 
to pride, and made heroism the supporter of tyranny. When the people, warned 
by their Tribunes, had foiled the plot made against their liberties, when, by a 
necessary arrest, they banished this dangerous citizen, what did Marcius do? 
In consequence of this decree so justly pronounced against him by his country he 
called upon the enemies of his country. This time it is not only a single class, it 
is all classes of society which Marcius wishes to sacrifice to his wounded pride. 
Adversaries and allies, plebeians and patricians, commons and nobles, peasants 
and princes, all must succumb pellmell to this fierce rancor. Fooled by overween- 
ing, Coriolanus pretends that he no longer has a heart; he casts far from him as 
weaknesses all sympathy and all affection; he no longer recognises parenthood. 
It is in presence of this last outrage that humanity, so many times offended, at 
last makes its protest heard. The inner man casts aside the cloak of arrogance of 
the aristocrat and refuses to obey. Nature, calling to her aid all her sentiments 
in revolt, turns against this insensate pride and crushes it in calling forth a cry for 
pity from this unpitiable one. Then we assist at a sublime scene. This being 
who imagined himself superior to all other beings is obliged, for his chastisement, 
to submit to every human emotion. He thought, beneath his armour, that he 
was invulnerable to passion, and behold him bathed in tears, moved to his inmost 


CHARACTER OF CORIOLANUS—HUDSON 675 


depths by the threefold tenderness of son, of husband, and of father. Filial love, 
conjugal love, paternal love, all the elementary affections of the soul suddenly take 
possession of this renegade and drag him to punishment. Admirable lesson offered 
by the poet for meditation by the ages! It is by the family that the patrician is 
touched. 


Dysosxi (p. 25): Shakespeare’s approved method of conscious limitation of 
effort at critical points of his career turns out to be a two-edged weapon, when 
immediately used again in Coriolanus. The too laborious insistence on the tower- 
ing isolation of the hero makes this, Shakespeare’s last great tragedy, almost dry 
in its restriction to political ambition. Coriolanus is not unjustly the least popular 
of all the great plays; it took the solitariness of the dead Beethoven to do justice 
in music to its grandeur. The drama is poor in colour when set against the 
Oriental glow of Antony and Cleopatra. The rustic simplicity of republican Rome 
is no match for the Hellenish Court on the Nile, truly; but in Julius Cesar there 
was a picture of a still simple Rome, too, and it was richer in variety. 

At the same time Coriolanus, by its recognition of the deference due from man’s 
conscience to the worth and weight of fellow men’s opinions, marks a distinct 
reawakening of the social interest, which had been so strong at the beginning of 
Shakespeare’s tragic period. We have seen that interest absorbed in intense 
preoccupation with problems of personal conduct. Here it emerges to take 
ultimate form. The moral of the tragedy of Coriolanus, being the necessary hom- 
age of a superior man to the great fact of Society, is Shakespeare’s own supreme 
moral triumph over the pride of genius. This excellence of Coriolanus is ethical 
rather than artistic; it is also, in its very maturity and conclusiveness, an excellence 
emphatically peculiar to advancing age. Coriolanus terminates Shakespeare’s 
poetic manhood. 


CHARACTER OF CORIOLANUS 


Hopson (ed. i, Introd., p. 156): The hero offers a capital study for those who, 
in their estimates of men, have not learned to temper their thoughts to ‘a web 
of mingled yarn,’ such as human nature, even in its best specimens, ordinarily 
presents. The character is a very mixed one; and all its parts, good and bad, are 
fashioned on so large a scale as to yield matter enough for making out a strong case 
either way, according as the observer’s mind is set to a course of all blame or all 
praise; while at the same time the several lines are so energetic and bold as to 
render it not easy for one to steer clear of all extremes, and so to take the impression 
of a given side as to fit the subject all round. 

In strict keeping with Plutarch’s account of the man, Shakespeare represents 
pride as the back-bone of his composition. And his pride is rendered altogether 
inflammable and uncontrollable by passion, insomuch that, let but a spark of 
provocation be struck into the latter, and the former at once flames up beyond 
measure, and sweeps away all the regards of prudence, of decorum, and even of 
life. It is therefore perfectly characteristic of the man that an unexpected word 
of scornful reproach stings him to the quick: the instant it touches his ear, he ex- 
plodes like a rocket. It is on this principle that the wily Tribunes work, plying 
their craft and watching their time to provoke him into some fatal provocation of 
popular resentment. Hence the Poet, with great judgment, and without any hint 
from the history, makes Aufidius, when the time is ripe for firing off the conspiracy 


676 APPENDIX 


against his life, touch him into an ecstasy of passionate rage by spitting the 
term ‘boy’ at him. Now, his very pride, if duly guarded by the ensconcements 
of reason and self-respect, would have caused him, from the monstrous unfitness 
of such an epithet, to answer it with calm and silent scorn; but he seems to resent 
it in proportion as it strikes wide of him, and makes its very unfitness to him the 
cause of its power over him. 

The natural working of these qualities, together with the gigantic structure of 
the man in other parts, made his character an apt and inviting occasion to repre- 
sent the struggle between those two antagonistic elements in the state, which in 
their reconcilement and unity did much towards rearing up the solid greatness and 
grandeur of old Rome. There is in the people much that is really despicable. This 
the hero seizes on greedily, and makes the most of, as favouring that whereon his 
pride fastens, and at the same time winks away whatsoever there is in them of a 
redeeming quality: he scorns their meanness, and is glad to find it in them as 
giving him cause for scorning them; will see in them nothing but what is vile, and 
would fain make them as vile as he thinks them, that so his scorn may stand justified 
to his sense of right. Still he is placed where his pride can only come at its proper 
food by their suffrage; for its dearest gratification he must needs look to that which 
most galls and offends it. This puts him upon trying to extort their admiration 
and homage while making them hate his person: what he most prides himself 
upon is to have his greatness force honours from them in spite of his insolence to 
them; because such an inverse proportion between their returns and receipts 
serves to magnify and set off his superiority. This is well shown in what falls 
from one of those almost characterless persons of the drama, in whom the Poet 
sometimes puts much candour and shrewdness of observation, and then uses 
them as the mouth-pi¢ce of his own judgment: ‘If he did not care whether he 
had their love or no, he would wave indifferently ’twixt doing them neither good nor 
harm; but he seeks their hate with greater devotion than they can render it him, 
and leaves nothing undone that may fully discover him their opposite.’ Hence, 
when he goes out to beg their voices, he takes care to season his requests with scorn, 
and to let them see that his spirit still disclaims what his tongue speaks; then, if they 
excuse his spirit on the score of his formal compliance, this will be his triumph. 

The hero’s pride, however, is far from being of a mean and narrow cast; nobly 
elemented out of the various regards of rank, family, country, talents, and courage, 
it therefore partakes the general greatness of his character; is of a towering and 
majestic pitch; and as it grows not less by what he derives from and shares with 
others, than by what is peculiar to himself, so it is of that high and generous scope 
that commonly issues in great virtues as well as great faults. Hence it is nowise 
such as, of itself, to eat out the better juices of humanity; on the contrary, modesty, 
gratitude, openness of heart and hand, are its chosen playfellows; and it is of an 
element that would keep clean and fresh the breast where it dwells, and under 
whose stern yet free patronage, tenderness of heart, purity and rectitude of life, 
and many of the milder and gentler qualities, have their best cherishing; a sure 
source of replenishment to whatsoever virtues it guards, because its own best 
sources of thrift are in the noble growth it fosters. Which is rarely shown in that, 
with all his passionate craving after fame, he still counts it his highest honour to 
be the cause that others are honoured. For he is as jealous of the merit as of the 
position of his fellow-Patricians; would guard their virtue as carefully as their 
rank; is not less strenuous to have them deserve than to have them hold the place 
of supreme rule and reverence in the state. He is prouder, too, of his mother than 


CHARACTER OF CORIOLANUS—DOWDEN 677 


of himself; cares more to please her than himself; owns no titles to honour in him- 
self but what he can refer to that honoured source, nor covets any returns but such 
as will magnify the part she has in him; in brief, he looks up to her as a superior 
being whose benediction is the best grace of his life; and his profound awe of her 
person and of her rights in him is itself a principle of such intrinsic greatness and 
energy as would burst asunder the cold dry ligatures of an ignoble and ungenerous 
nature. When, upon her coming out to intercede with him, he says, ‘My mother 
bows; as if Olympus to a molehill should in supplication nod,’ we have the sub- 
limity of filial reverence, imaged in a form not more magnificent in itself than 
characteristic of the speaker. 


DowneEN (Sh., His Mind and Art, p. 328): Although the play of Coriolanus almost 
inevitably suggests a digression into the consideration of the politics of Shakspere, 
it must once again be asserted that the central and vivifying element in the play 
is not a political problem, but an individual character and life. The tragic struggle 
of the play is not that of patricians with plebeians, but of Coriolanus with his 
own self. It is not the Roman people who bring about his destruction; it is the 
patrician haughtiness and passionate self-will of Coriolanus himself. Were the 
contest of political parties the chief interest of Shakspere’s drama, the figures of 
the Tribunes must have been drawn upon a larger scale. They would have been 
endowed with something more than ‘foxship.’ As representatives of a great 
principle, or of a power constantly tending in one direction, they might have ap- 
peared worthy rivals of the leaders of the patrician party; and the fall of Coriolanus 
would be signalised by some conquest and advance of the tide of popular power. 
Shakspere’s drama is the drama of individuality, including under this name all 
those bonds of duty and of affection which attach man to his fellow-man, but not 
impersonal principles and ideas. The passion of patriotism, high-toned and en- 
thusiastic, stands with Shakspere instead of general political principles and ideas, 
and the life of the individual is widened and elevated by the national life, to which 
the individual surrenders himself with gladness and with pride. 

The pride of Coriolanus is, however, not that which comes from self-surrender to 
and union with some power, or person, or principle higher than oneself. It is two- 
fold, a passionate self-esteem which is essentially egoistic; and secondly, a passionate 
prejudice of class. His nature is the reverse of cold or selfish; his sympathies are 
deep, warm, and generous; but a line, hard and fast, has been drawn for him by the 
aristocratic tradition, and it is only within that line that he permits his sympathies 
to play. To the surprise of the Tribunes, he can accept well-pleased a subordinate 
command under Cominius. He yields with kindly condescension to accept the 
devotion and fidelity of Menenius, and cherishes towards the old man a filial 
regard—the feeling of a son, who has the consciousness that he is greater than his 
father. He must dismiss Menenius disappointed from the Volscian camp; but 
he contrives an innocent fraud by means of which the old senator will fancy that 
he has effected more for the peace of Rome than another could. For Virgilia, 
the gentle woman in whom his heart finds rest, Coriolanus has a manly tenderness, 
and constant freshness of adhesion: 

‘O, a kiss 
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge! 
Now by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss 
I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip 
Hath virgin’d it e’er since.’ 


678 APPENDIX 


In his boy he has a father’s joy, and yields to an ambitious hope, and a yearning 
forward to his son’s possible future of heroic action, in which there is something 
of touching, paternal weakness: 


‘The god of soldiers, 
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform 
Thy thoughts with nobleness; that thou may’st prove 
To shame unvulnerable, and stick 7’ the wars 
Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw, 
And saving those that eye thee!’ 


His wife’s friend Valeria is the ‘moon of Rome,’ 


‘Chaste as the icicle 
That’s curdied by the frost from purest snow 
And hangs on Dian’s temple.’ 


In his mother Volumnia, the awful Roman matron, he rejoices with a noble enthusi- 
asm and pride; and while she is present always feels himself, by comparison with 
this great mother, inferior and unimportant. 

But Cominius, Menenius, and Virgilia, Valeria and Volumnia, and his boy 
belong to the privileged class; they are patrician. Beyond this patrician class 
neither his sympathies nor his imagination find it possible to range. The plebeians 
are ‘a common cry of curs’ whose breath Coriolanus hates. He cannot, like 
Bolingbroke, flatter their weakness while he despises them inwardly. He is not 
even indifferent towards them; he rather rejoices in their malice and displeasure; 
if the nobility would let him use his sword he would make a quarry ‘with thousands 
of these quarter’d slaves,’ as high as he could pick his lance. Sicinius the Tribune 
is ‘the Triton of the minnows.’ When Coriolanus departs from Rome, as though 
all the virtue of the city were resident in himself, he reverses the apparent fact, 
and pronounces a sentence of banishment against those whom he leaves behind: 
‘I banish you.’ Brutus is warranted by the fact when he says 


“You speak o’ the people, as if you were a god, 
To punish; not a man, of their infirmity.’ 


And yet the weakness, the inconstancy, and the incapacity of apprehending facts 
which are the vices of the people, reflect and repeat themselves in the great patrician; 
his aristocratic vices counterbalance their plebeian. He is rigid and obstinate; 
but under the influence of an angry egoism he can renounce his principle, his 
party, and his native city. He will not bear away to his private use the paltry 
booty of the Volces; but to obtain the consulship he is urged by his proud mother 
and his patrician friends to stand bareheaded before the mob, to expose his wounds, 
to sue for their votes, to give his heart the lie, to bend the knee like a beggar 
asking an alms. The judgment and blood of Coriolanus are ill commingled; he 
desires the end, but can only half submit to the means which are necessary to attain 
that end; he has not sufficient self-control to enable him to dispose of those chances 
of which he is lord. And so he mars his fortune. The pride of Coriolanus, as 
Mr Hudson has observed, is ‘rendered altogether inflammable and uncontrollable 
by passion; insomuch that if a spark of provocation is struck into the latter, the 
former instantly flames up beyond measure, and sweeps away all the regards of 
prudence, of decorum, and even of common sense.’ Now such passion as this 
Shakspere knew to be weakness and not strength; and by this uncontrollable 


CHARACTER OF CORIOLANUS—GERVINUS 679 


violence of temper Coriolanus draws down upon himself his banishment from Rome, 
and his subsequent fate. 


GrRvinus (p. 762): The mother had instilled into Coriolanus his bravery and 
desire of glory; these had led to pride; his pride had grown to excess, to a more 
than human strength of will and action. But the extreme in his nature, we have 
said, passed everywhere over into its opposite, his honourable bravery into a 
jealousy that took away the honourable aim which his deeds should ever have had; 
his valuable political gifts were put to the most hurtful use; his fury and passion 
were changed into forced calmness, pride into modesty, truth and uprightness into 
dissimulation, unbending rigidity into softness of feeling and even fickleness. 
Coriolanus enters the house of Aufidius with reflections on the changes of the 
world; how friendship breaks out into enmity for a doit, and hatred into friend- 
ship for some trick not worth an egg; so is it with him, he says himself, with him 
who had always so deeply despised the populace for their fickleness! On two great 
occasions in his history we see him fall from want of self-government, from over- 
strained passion and irritability, once on the occasion of his banishment, and again 
at his death. On both occasions a single word, the opprobrious epithet of ‘traitor,’ 
brings on the fatal outbreak of his fury. This shows in a very remarkable manner 
the fine turning-point by which he missed the result of all his strivings. If this 
name were rightly bestowed on him, then no reproach could be thought of which 
would so immediately shatter the noble work of Volumnia, and overturn the 
object of all the proud endeavours of Coriolanus as this. If he were a traitor, then 
his glory was turned into shame, his bravery misapplied, his pride dishonoured, 
his civic virtue changed into selfishness, his truth and fidelity into their reverse, 
his most honourable efforts covered with the coarsest stains. And it cannot be 
denied that he became a traitor to Rome after he first heard this word of reproach, 
and he was one to the Antiates when he heard it the second time. This mother, 
the giver and the shaper of his life, had brought him into both situations; she, 
therefore, meets her punishment with him. The first time, in a movement of 
motherly weakness, she had tempted him, contrary to a right instinct, into a 
false path, and thereby drawn down upon him the unmerited reproach of being 
a traitor, which he then hastened to deserve; this fault she and he also repaired, 
when, in a noble spirit of patriotism, she allured him back from his mistaken search 
after vengeance into the path of humanity, which he trod with death before his 
eyes. The name of traitor suits him now, indeed, but rather to his glory than to 
his disgrace, and his death atones for his life. 

We perceive, from the treatment of this character, that the poet elaborated it 
not so much with love as with great interest; it is not exactly a pleasant, but a 
powerful impression which we carry away from the consideration of the play and 
of the character, which in fact fills up the whole of it. To explain this we must 
remember that, not only earlier, but at that time, Shakespeare’s warmest sym- 
pathies rested on that unobtrusive greatness and on that plain, unexaggerated 
nature which he had depicted in Prince Henry and in Posthumus. As he had 
before contrasted his Percy with this form of character, he now did the same with 
Coriolanus, but far more remotely. And we may imagine that just this sharp 
contrast and its representation must have had a great charm for the poet, who 
with the most unbiassed mind perceived and acknowledged the peculiar alloy in 
every character. But what a large and comprehensive mind is this, that with so 
much love now sketches the characters of a Brutus and a Posthumus, their severe 


680 APPENDIX 


virtue and calm composure; then represents the expressive pride of this hero, 
Coriolanus, in the most accurate and full development of a heart that discloses 
little; and then, again, contrasts with this overstrained nature the weak characters 
of Antony and Timon, which lie in quite a different sphere, and which again he 
described with such mastery and penetration as might seem to betray in the poet 
himself a preference for these forms of human nature. 


STAPFER (p. 428): Marcius, as he is called before his gallant behaviour at the tak- 
ing of the town of Corioli gained for him the surname of Coriolanus, makes his 
entrance upon the scene in the midst of the excited populace, with contemptuous 
and insulting words upon his lips. So far there is no difficulty in admitting his 
contempt for the mob, proceeding as it does from a lofty sense of honour and of 
right. It is no petty pride of caste that vents itself in his burning words, but the 
pride of a noble nature; the man who thus expresses himself is an aristocrat in the 
best sense of the word, and we feel that with him the first title to nobility is cour- 
age—not the mere bearing of a noble name or coat-of-arms—and that he would 
willingly agree with the father of Don Juan, that ‘birth goes for nothing if valour 
is absent.’ But at the same time, he would never go so far with the father of 
Don Juan as to prefer the honest, worthy son of a porter to a degenerate prince 
or patrician, for the notion of a porter being worth consideration would never even 
occur tohim. To his mind, all real merit belonged exclusively to the noble classes; 
and for the common people, one and all, he entertained on principle a supreme 
contempt. His only feeling towards them was that of a boundless and outrage- 
ously absurd and unjust disdain. For him they were in fact devoid of all rights, 
natural as well as political; that he should wish to abolish the recently granted 
office of tribunes was a small matter—he went far beyond this, and would not 
even recognize their right to live, or to eat ‘even as dogs must,’ or to be hungry. 
When the pride of birth reaches such an altitude as this, it simply places the 
speaker outside the circle of humanity, and inevitably lays him open to the retort 
of the tribune, Junius Brutus, 


“You speak o’ the people, as if you were a god, 
To punish; not a man, of their infirmity’ (III, i, 103, 104). 


These are the two sides, good and bad, of the aristocratic nature of Coriolanus. 
True valour could alone win his approbation, and a nobleman unworthy of his 
birth would never find favour in his sight; but he considered this and every other 
virtue to be the exclusive possession of the patricians, and the only sentiment 
excited in him by the poorer classes—called by a saintly King of France, the 
‘common people of our Lord’—was that of a pitiless and inhuman scorn. 

This duality of temperament was great, fostered by the education he had received 
from his mother, a Roman matron of a lofty but rigid nature, who kindled a warm 
and generous spirit in him, but also taught him to call the plebeians 


‘Woollen vassals, things created 
To buy and sell with groats; to show bare heads 
In congregations, to yawn, be still, and wonder, 
When one but of my ordinance stood up 
To speak of peace or war.’ 


But this haughtiness of temper arose not merely from aristocratic instincts, in 
what they have of either good or bad; other elements mingled in it, and no ade- 


CHARACTER OF CORIOLANUS—STAP FER 681 


quate definition of its nature and species can be arrived at if it is considered 
merely from a social standpoint, as an intense class-prejudice, nor would it be 
very easy to understand all his conduct. For the pride of Coriolanus was essentially 
a personal pride, and intensely egoistical. A word that drops from his mouth at 
the beginning of the play clearly shows that the interests of his party, and even 
of his country, only hold a secondary place in his heart, and that his own glory 
and aggrandizement was, and would remain to the end, his primary consideration. 
Speaking of the Volscians, the enemies of Rome, he says (I, i, 249-257): 


‘They have a leader, 
Tullus Aufidius, . . 
And were I anything but what I am, 
I would wish me only he. .. . 
Were half to half the world by the ears, and he 
Upon my party, I’d revolt, to make 
Only my wars with him.’ 


A striking contrast to these singularly un-Romanlike sentiments may be found in 
those of Corneille’s Horatius: 


“My country must command against what foe 

T am to fight; my duty is to obey: 

A soldier’s lightest glory doth consist 

In full obedience to his country’s word, 

And he who lets a single thought intrude 

Of private ends, deserves the name of traitor. 
And now Rome bids me draw my sword, I arm 
And tarry not to reason.’ 


Here we have the true ring of Roman patriotism. But mark how admirably the 
exclamation of Shakespeare’s Coriolanus strikes the key-note both of his character 
and of his history, and prepares us for the crime against his country to which his 
overweening pride will in the sequel lead him on. The man who is capable of 
betraying his cause simply for the pleasure of fighting with Aufidius may one 
day be driven, out of mere resentment, to seek the alliance of this very enemy in 
order to wreak his vengeance upon Rome if it happens to offend him. 

With Coriolanus the violence of his temper was even greater than his pride; 
had he simply been haughty, he would have met the insults of the Tribune with a 
calm and cold disdain; but the least word of even unmerited abuse threw him into 
a frenzy, and worked him up into a rage like that of a passionate woman or child. 
In the final scene of the tragedy the epithet of traitor, added to that of ‘boy of 
tears,’ causes another frantic outburst, and precipitates him on the daggers of the 
Volscians. This excessive sensitiveness to personal affronts, it may be noted in 
passing, is a purely modern quality, far removed from the more self-contained, 
grave, and manly Coriolanus of antiquity. 

But it is when the sentence of perpetual banishment is pronounced upon him 
by the people that he rises to the full height of his stature. This is the climax and 
culminating point of the drama, the moment that would be chosen by a great 
painter to represent in all his greatness this embodiment of passion and of 
pride: 


682 APPENDIX 


‘You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate 
As reek 0’ the rotten fens, whose loves I prize 
As the dead carcases of unburied men 
That do corrupt my air. I banish you.... 

Despising, 
For you, the city, thus I turn my back: 
There is a world elsewhere.’ 


The attitude of Coriolanus is simply sublime—standing forth alone, greater by 
himself than all Rome, hurling back on his judges their sentence of exile, and op- 
posing to the city that thrusts him out, his own colossal personality. 

From this moment a strange alteration takes place in Coriolanus, and he becomes 
calm; a change which is the effect of his very violence, and due to the extreme gravity 
of his position. Plutarch mentions it as only the cloak under which he hid his 
intense indignation and thirst for vengeance, but it went deeper than this. From 
the moment that he conceived the plan of his revenge, a decadence both mental 
and moral took place within him, the consciousness of which must have well-nigh 
begun his expiation. To approach the Volscians disguised in mean apparel, to 
inquire civilly from a passer-by where Aufidius dwelt, to say to the servants who 
gave him but a rough reception, ‘Let me but stand; I will not hurt your hearth,’ 
and to present himself as an ally and guest before the master of the house, his mortal 
enemy, must have been so many bitter trials to his haughty nature. 


S. Lee (Jefferson Press Sh.: Introd., p. xxv.): Shakespeare’s Coriolanus is 
cast ina Titanic mould. His deeds ‘should not be uttered feebly.’ All his char- 
acteristics are of superb dimensions. A born soldier, he is in mere brute strength 
a giant who can turn a man about with his finger and his thumb as one would 
set a top spinning. He has the courage of a lion and is as stubborn. His voice is 
always pitched in the same thunderous and masterful key. He knows nothing of 
‘the soft way,’ nothing of mildness. He is ‘ill-schooled in bolted language.’ It 
is impossible for him ‘to practice the insinuating nod.’ His manner in peace has 
the austerity befitting a time of war. The unflinching pride, which is his ruling 
passion, is a ‘soaring insolence,’ which defies all conditions of practical prudence. 
No turn in the wheel of fortune can modify that colossal sense of the sacredness 
of caste with which his mother’s milk has infected him. Men engaged in trade or 
manual labour are for him an inferior race, of a closer affinity to the beasts of the 
field than to his own hereditary rank. They are curs, rats, hares, geese. Their 
‘stinking breaths’ and ‘greasy caps’ render equal intercourse with them unthink- 
able. He cannot tolerate their unwashed hands and unbrushed teeth. He speaks 
of the people as if he were ‘a god to punish; not a man, of their infirmity’ (III, i, 
103, 104). The spirit of fraternity which graced the soldiership of Shakespeare’s 
favoured hero, Henry V., is to the haughty temper of Coriolanus an undignified 
weakness. Scathing scorn for the ‘beastly’ rabble—of the apron-men and the 
mechanics—is for him an attitude of virtue. 

Yet Coriolanus’ pride of caste and stubborn temper are allied to a robust and 
severe integrity. His magnificent egoism suggests intellectual rather than moral 
failing. His brain lacks pliancy, and cannot modulate its workings. No sense of 
humour modifies his thought Yet he has virtues of characteristic amplitude 
and solidity. No sensual blemish is visible in his sturdy nature. He is incapable 
of petty jealousy of his colleagues. He readily serves in a subordinate capacity 


CHARACTER OF CORIOLANUS—LEE 683 


on the battle-field. He repudiates with convincing emphasis any suspicion of 
covetousness. He cannot make his heart consent to take a bribe to pay his sword. 
Praise is distasteful to him even from his mother. His wounds smart to hear 
themselves remembered. He had rather venture all his limbs to honour than one 
of his ears to hear it. He loathes exaggeration of his achievements. He cannot 
idly sit to hear his nothings monstered. There is an inevitable aggressiveness 
about his protestations of modesty, but their sincerity is unquestionable. 

The intense manliness of his temperament provokes among his associates an 
admiration, even an affection, which, within the bounds of his own class, he austerely 
reciprocates. His fellow officers reverence him as ‘the flower of warriors.’ The 
veteran Menenius cherishes for him a parental affection, which excites in his 
heart a filial echo. Men of his own rank readily find dignified excuses for his 
exorbitant arrogance and his frank incapacity for compromise: 


‘His nature is too noble for the world: 

He would not flatter Neptune for his trident, 

Or Jove for’s power to thunder. His heart’s his mouth: 
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent, 
And, being angry, does forget that ever 

He heard the name of death’ (III, i, 313-318). 


But Coriolanus’ bearing to his friends and fellow officers scarcely supplies the 
humanising touch which is necessary to any genuine sympathy with his fortunes. 
The leavening current flows in its fulness from his relations with his family. His 
patrician pride is the fruit of heredity. It is his mother’s gift, and to her he is 
bound by ties of affection as great in intensity as the less amiable traits of his 
character. It is the conflict between his strong filial sentiment and his obstinate 
antipathy to the democracy which induces sympathy with his fate and lends his 
story its needful dramatic point. The pivot of Coriolanus’ tragedy is the psycho- 
logical struggle between the inflexible aristocratic sentiment which governs his 
public life, and his sense of domestic obligation which is jeopardised by his public 
action. Coriolanus’ loving regard for his mother, Volumnia, is linked with con- 
siderate gentleness of bearing towards his gracious, silent wife, Virgilia, and with 
manly solicitude for their young son. A chivalric sentiment marks, too, his atti- 
tude to his wife’s confidante, Valeria. ‘The distress which he causes his wife moves 
him to his sole outburst of lyric emotion: 


‘Best of my flesh, 
‘ Forgive my tyranny; but do not say, 
For that “Forgive our Romans.” O, a kiss 
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge! 
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss 
I carried from thee, dear, and my true lip 
Hath virgin’d it e’er since’ (V, iii, 46-52). 


A genuine paternal tenderness inspires his brief address to his son whose thoughts 
he prays the god of soldiers to inform with nobleness: 


‘that thou mayst prove 
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i’ the wars 
Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw 
And saving those that eye thee!’ (V, iii, 80-83). 


684 APPENDIX 


Coriolanus’ fall comes from his misapprehension of the relative force of his 
private affections and of his public or political prejudices. In the crisis of his 
fate, when the two influences are in direct conflict, his political pride wins the 
first victory. It masters every opposing sentiment. He severs the domestic 
as well as the patriotic tie. He will not be a gosling and obey instinct. He joins 
the ranks of his country’s foes, and threatens his countrymen, including his kindred, 
with fire and sword. But the domestic sentiment, which he has suppressed, is 
not extinguished. At a breath it revives to challenge to a fresh encounter his 
political convictions, and in the end it scores a sweeping triumph. But the toils 
of fate, which Coriolanus’ stubborn and self-reliant egoism have already woven 
about him, leave him at the close of the spiritual conflict no genuine loophole of 
escape. His reawakened filial piety, which reunites him to his family and to his 
countrymen, is not to be reconciled with the political obligations in which his 
haughty spirit has involved him with his country’s enemies. He is murdered as 
a traitor by the Volscians, whom he had joined in order to avenge on his native 
city the outrage which her democratic leaders had done his patrician pride. 


A. C. BRADLEY (Coriolanus, p. 10): Critics have called Coriolanus a Tory or an 
ultra-Tory. The tribune who calls him a ‘traitorous innovator’ is quite as near 
the mark. The people have been granted tribunes. The tribunate is a part of 
the constitution, and it is accepted, with whatever reluctance, by the other 
patricians. But Coriolanus would abolish it, and that not by law but by the 
sword. Nor would he be content with that. The right of the people to control 
the election of the consul is no new thing; it is an old traditional right; but it too 
might well be taken away. The only constitution tolerable in his eyes is one where 
the patricians are the state, and the people a mere instrument to feed it and fight 
for it. It is this conviction that makes it so dangerous to appoint him consul, 
and also makes it impossible for him to give way. Even if he could ask pardon 
for his abuse of the people, he could not honestly promise to acknowledge their 
political rights. 

Now the nobleness of his nature is at work here. He is not tyrannical; the 
charge brought against him of aiming at a tyranny is silly. He is an aristocrat. 
And Shakespeare has put decisively aside the statement of Plutarch that he was 
‘churlish, uncivil, and altogether unfit for any man’s conversation.’ Shakespeare’s 
hero, though he feels his superiority to his fellow-patricians, always treats them as 
equals. He is never rude or overbearing. He speaks to them with the simple 
directness or the bluff familiarity of a comrade. He does not resent their advice, 
criticism, or reproof. He shows no trace of envy or jealousy, or even of satisfaction 
at having surpassed them. The suggestion of the tribunes that he is willing to 
serve under Cominius because failure in war will be credited to Cominius, and 
success in war to himself, shows only the littleness of their own minds. The 
patricians are his fellows in a community of virtue—of a courage, fidelity, and 
honour, which cannot fail them because they are ‘true-bred,’ though the bright 
ideal of such virtue become perfect still urges them on. But the plebeians, in 
his eyes, are destitute of this virtue, and therefore have no place in this community. 
All they care for is food in peace, looting in war, flattery from their demagogues; 
and they will not even clean their teeth. To ask anything of them is to insult 
not merely himself but the virtues that he worships. To give them a real share in 
citizenship is treason to Rome; for Rome means these virtues. They are not 
Romans, they are the rats of Rome. 


CHARACTER OF CORIOLANUS—BRADLEY 685 


He is very unjust to them, and his ideal, though high, is also narrow. But he is 
magnificently true to it, and even when he most repels us we feel this and glory 
in him. He is never more true to it than when he tried to be false; and this is the 
scene where his superiority in nobleness is most apparent. He, who had said of 
his enemy, ‘I hate him worse than a promise-breaker,’ is urged to save himself 
and his friends by promises that he means to break. To his mother’s argument 
that he ought no more to mind deceiving the people than outwitting an enemy in 
war, he cannot give the obvious answer, for he does not really count the people 
his fellow-countrymen. But the proposal that he should descend to lying or 
flattering astounds him. He feels that if he does so he will never be himself again; 
that his mind will have taken on an inherent baseness and no mere simulated one. 
And he is sure, as we are, that he simply cannot do what is required of him. When 
at last he consents to try, it is solely because his mother bids him and he cannot 
resist her chiding. Often he reminds us of a huge boy; and here he acts like a boy 
whose sense of honour is finer than his mother’s, but who is too simple and too 
noble to frame the thought. 

Unfortunately he is altogether too simple and too ignorant of himself. Though 
he is the proudest man in Shakespeare he seems to be unaware of his pride, and 
is hurt when his mother mentions it. It does not prevent him from being genuinely 
modest, for he never dreams that he has attained the ideal he worships; yet the 
sense of his own greatness is twisted round every strand of this worship. In almost 
all his words and deeds we are conscious of the tangle. I takea single illustration. 
He cannot endure to be praised. Even his mother, who has a charter to extol her 
blood, grieves him when she praises him. As for others, 


‘J had rather have one scratch my head i’ the sun 
When the alarum were struck, then idly sit 
To hear my nothings monster’d.’ 


His answer to the roar of the army hailing him ‘Coriolanus’ is, ‘I will go wash.’ 
His wounds are ‘scratches with briars.’ In Plutarch he shows them to the people 
without demur; in Shakespeare he would rather lose the consulship. There is a 
greatness in all this that makes us exult. But who can assign the proportions of 
the elements that compose this impatience of praise; the feeling (which we are 
surprised to hear him express) that he, like hundreds more, has simply done what 
he could; the sense that it is nothing to what might be done; the want of human 
sympathy (for has not Shelley truly said that fame is love disguised); the pride 
which makes him feel that he needs no recognition, that, after all, he himself could 
do ten times as much, and that to praise his achievement implies a limit to his 
power? If any one could solve this problem, Coriolanus certainly could not. To 
adapt a phrase in the play, he has no more introspection in him than a tiger. So 
he thinks that his loathing of the people is all disgust at worthlessness, and his 
resentment in exile all a just indignation. So, too, he fancies that he can stand 


‘As if a man were author of himself 
And knew no other kin,’ 


while, in fact, public honour and home affections are the breath of his nostrils, and 
there is not a drop of stoic blood in his veins. 

What follows on his exile depends on this self-ignorance. When he bids farewell 
to his mother and wife and friends he is still excited and exalted by conflict. He 
comforts them; he will take no companion; he will be loved when he is lacked, 


686 APPENDIX 


or at least he will be feared; while he remains alive they shall always hear from 
him, and never aught but what is like him formerly. But the days go by, and no 
one, not even his mother, hears a word. When we see him next he is entering 
Antium to offer his services against his country. If they are accepted, he knows 
what he will do: he will burn Rome. 

As I have already remarked, Shakespeare does not exhibit to us the change of 
mind which issues in this frightful purpose; but from what we see and hear later 
we can tell how he imagined it; and the key lies in that idea of burning Rome. 
As time passes, and no suggestion of recall reaches Coriolanus, and he learns what 
it is to be a solitary homeless exile, his heart hardens, his pride swells to a moun- 
tainous bulk, and the wound in it becomes a fire. The fellow-patricians from 
whom he parted lovingly now appear to him ingrates and dastards, scarcely better 
than the loathsome mob. Somehow, he knows not how, even his mother and 
wife have deserted him. He has become nothing to Rome, and Rome shall hear 
nothing from him. Here in solitude he can find no relief in a storm of words; but 
gradually the blind intolerable chaos of resentment conceives and gives birth to 
a vision, not merely of battle and indiscriminate slaughter, but of the whole city 
one tower of flame. To see that with his bodily eyes would satisfy his soul; and 
the way to the sight is through the Volscians. If he is killed the moment they 
recognize him, he cares little; better a dead nothing than the living nothing Rome 
thinks him. But if he lives, she shall know what he is. He bears himself among 
the Volscians with something that resembles self-control; but what controls him 
is the vision that never leaves him and never changes, and his eye is red with its 
glare when he sits in his state before the doomed city. 

This is Shakespeare’s idea, not Plutarch’s. In Plutarch there is not a syllable 
about the burning of Rome. Coriolanus (to simplify a complicated story) intends 
to humiliate his country by forcing on it disgraceful terms of peace. And this, 
apart from its moral quality, is a reasonable design. The Romans, rather than 
yield to fear, decline to treat unless peace is first restored; and therefore it will be 
necessary to assault the city. In the play we find a single vague allusion to some 
unnamed conditions which, Coriolanus knows, cannot now be accepted; but every- 
where, among both Romans and Volscians, we hear of the burning of Rome, and 
in the city there is no hope of successful resistance. What Shakespeare wanted 
was a simpler and more appalling situation than he found in Plutarch, and a hero 
enslaved by his passion and driven blindly forward. How blindly we may judge 
if we ask the questions: what will happen to the hero if he disappoints the expecta- 
tion he has raised among the Volscians, when their leader is preparing to accuse 
him even if he fulfils it; and, if the hero executes his purpose, what will happen to 
his mother, wife, and child; and how can it be executed by a man whom we know 
in his home as the most human of men, a tender husband still the lover of his 
wife, and a son who regards his mother not merely with devoted affection, but with 
something like religious awe? Very likely the audience in the theatre was not 
expected to ask these questions, but it was expected to see in the hero a man 
totally ignorant of himself, and stumbling to the destruction either of his life or 
of his soul. 


DrIcHTon (Introd., p. xv.): Born of a haughty race, inheriting from his mother 
an inflexible spirit, Coriolanus is from his earliest youth sedulously tutored 
in the belief that military glory is the noblest aim of life, that arrogance to his 
inferiors is a birthright and almost a virtue. Splendid and early successes, fully 


CHARACTER OF CORIOLANUS—CROCE 687 


recognized alike by high and low, have hardened the inborn pride and selfishness 
of his nature, while no check to the supremacy of his class has come to teach him 
the necessity of prudence and moderation. Thus, when he first appears before us, 
the attitude of his mind is one of fierce astonishment that such scum as the people 
should dare to complain even when starvation is staring them in the face. Rather 
than give them relief he would meet their demand by wholesale butchery, and see 
the city unroofed ere any privilege of appeal through representatives of their own 
should be conceded by the patricians. That of creatures like these he should have 
to ask a favour is to him a deep humiliation; that they should insist on the exercise 
of any rights is something monstrous. In war they are scarcely better than beasts 
of burden; in times of peace, mere machines for the use and convenience of the 
nobles. So towering in his arrogance that he utterly fails to see the dangers he is 
bringing down upon his own caste; so overweening his selfishness, and so vindictive 
his hatred, that to avenge his own wrongs he will call in to the destruction of his 
country the very foes whose conquest had won him his chief title to fame. That 
the tribunes were but self-seeking demagogues is true enough. That the people 
showed themselves fickle is, of course, patent. But the triumph of the former was 
rendered possible by nothing else than his own infatuation; the defection of the 
latter was courted by his cynicism. A very small stretch of good-will towards 
them would have earned for him an idolatry as ungrudging as that with which he 
was regarded by the patricians. Yet, with all his faults, his virtues were con- 
spicuous. His services to his country had been many and great. In him heroism 
and daring were surpassed not even by the demi-gods of Greece. To his freedom 
from the vice which especially tainted the whole body of patricians, the vice of 
grasping avarice, even the people he so hated bear willing witness. His gen- 
erosity of nature shows itself in his refusal to enrich himself with the spoils of war 
that are sought to be thrust upon him; his tenderness of heart in the remembrance 
of the old man of Corioli in whose house he had found shelter, and in the considera- 
tion which would soften his rejection of Menenius’s prayer; his modesty, in the 
aversion which ever shrank from all public eulogy; his warmth of affection by his 
devotion to his mother and his wife. So endowed, he might not only have wielded 
unique power, but wielded it to the highest interests of his country if his nobility 
had not been neutralized by a pride Titanic in its measure, the source of his strength 
converted into the source of his weakness. That in the end he should so far get 
the better of it as to sacrifice himself for his country which he had served so well 
and served so ill, shows him to us in a Jight which somewhat obscures the dark 
spots that must ever rest upon his name and fame. 


Croce (p. 211): The personages of the Roman plays arise like three-dimensional 
statues, that is to say, they are treated with full reality, and thus form a perfect 
antithesis to the figures of the romantic plays. These are superficial portraits, 
vivid, but light and vanishing into air; they are rather types than individuals. . . . 

Hotspur’s parallel (perhaps slightly inferior artistically) is the Roman Coriolanus, 
as brave, as violent, and as disdainful as he, a despiser of the people and of the 
people’s praise; he too rushes over the precipice to death and is also a ‘formal’ 
hero, because his bravery is not founded upon love of country, or upon a faith or 
ideal of any kind, one might almost say that it was without object or that its 
object was itself. Nor, on the other hand, is Coriolanus a superman in the sense 
suggested by the works of some of the predecessors and contemporaries of Shake- 
speare. He is not less tenderly demonstrative towards his mother or his silent 


688 APPENDIX 


wife (‘my gracious silence’) than is Hotspur to Kate, or when, yielding to a woman’s 
prayers, he stays the course of his triumphant vengeance. . . . The marvelous 
Hotspur appears in the play in order that he may confirm the glory of youthful 
Prince Hal, that is to say, that he may provide a curious anecdote of what was or 
appeared to be the scapegrace youth of a future sage sovereign; that is, he is not 
fully represented. Coriolanus runs himself into a blind alley; and even if the poet 
portrays with historical penetration the patricians and plebeians of Rome, it 
would be vain to seek in the play for the centre of gravity of his feelings, of his 
predilections, or of his aspirations, because both Coriolanus, the tribunes, and his 
adversaries are looked upon solely as characters, not as parts and expressions of a 
sentiment that should justify one or other or both groups. 


CHARACTER OF VOLUMNIA 


Mrs JAMESON (ii, 175): In Volumnia Shakspeare has given us the portrait of 
a Roman matron, conceived in the true antique spirit, and finished in every part. 
Although Coriolanus is the hero of the play, yet much of the interest of the action 
and the final catastrophe turn upon the character of his mother, Volumnia, and 
the power she exercised over his mind, by which, according to the story, ‘she saved 
Rome and lost her son.’ Her lofty patriotism, her patrician haughtiness, her 
maternal pride, her eloquence, and her towering spirit are exhibited with the 
utmost power of effect; yet the truth of female nature is beautifully preserved, 
and the portrait, with all its vigour, is without harshness. 

I shall begin by illustrating the relative position and feelings of the mother 
and son, as these are of the greatest importance in the action of the drama and, 
consequently, most prominent in the characters. Though Volumnia is a Roman 
matron, and though her country owes its salvation to her, it is clear that her 
maternal pride and affection are stronger even than her patriotism. Thus, when 
her son is exiled, she bursts into an imprecation against Rome and its citizens: 


‘Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome, 
And occupations perish!” 


Here we have the impulses of individual and feminine nature overpowering all 
national and habitual influences. Volumnia would never have exclaimed like the 
Spartan mother, of her dead son, ‘Sparta has many others as brave as he’; but in 
a far different spirit she says to the Romans, 


‘Ere you go, hear this; 
As far as doth the Capitol exceed 
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son, 
Whom you have banished, does exceed you all.’ 


In the very first scene, and before the introduction of the principal personages, 
one citizen observes to another that the military exploits of Marcius were per- 
formed not so much for his country’s sake ‘as to please his mother.’ By this ad- 
mirable stroke of art, introduced with such simplicity of effect, our attention is 
aroused, and we are prepared in the very outset of the piece for the important 
part assigned to Volumnia, and for her share in producing the catastrophe. 

In the first act we have a very graceful scene, in which the two Roman ladies, 


CHARACTER OF VOLUMNIA—JA MESON 689 


the wife and mother of Coriolanus, are discovered at their needlework, conversing 
on his absence and danger, and are visited by Valeria. 

Over this little scene Shakspeare, without any display of learning, has breathed 
the very spirit of classical antiquity. The haughty temper of Volumnia, her 
admiration of the valour and high bearing of her son, and her proud but unselfish 
love for him, are finely contrasted with the modest sweetness, the conjugal tender- 
ness, and the fond solicitude of his wife, Virgilia. Thus when the victory of 
Coriolanus is proclaimed, Menenius asks, ‘Is he wounded?’ 


‘Virgilia. O no, no, no! 
Volumnia. Yes, he is wounded—I thank the gods for it!” 


And when he returns victorious from the wars his high-spirited mother receives 
him with blessings and applause—his gentle wife with ‘gracious silence’ and with 
tears. 

The resemblance of temper in the mother and the son, modified as it is by the 
difference of sex and by her greater age and experience, is exhibited with admir- 
able truth. Volumnia, with all her pride and spirit, has some prudence and self- 
command; in her language and deportment all is matured and matronly. The 
dignified tone of authority she assumes towards her son when checking his head- 
long impetuosity, her respect and admiration for his noble qualities, and her strong 
sympathy even with the feelings she combats, are all displayed in the scene in 
which she prevails on him to soothe the incensed plebeians. 

When the spirit of the mother and the son are brought into immediate collision, 
he yields before her; the warrior who stemmed alone the whole city of Corioli, 
who was ready to face ‘the steep Tarpeian death, or at wild horses’ heels,—vaga- 
bond exile—flaying,’ rather than abate one jot of his proud will—shrinks at her 
rebuke. The haughty, fiery, overbearing temperament of Coriolanus is drawn 
in such forcible and striking colours that nothing can more impress us with the 
real grandeur and power of Volumnia’s character than his boundless submission 
to her will—his more than filial tenderness and respect. 

When his mother appears before him as a suppliant, he exclaims, 


‘My mother bows; 
As if Olympus to a molehill should 
In supplication nod.’ 


Here the expression of reverence, and the magnificent image in which it is clothed, 
are equally characteristic both of the mother and the son. 

Her aristocratic haughtiness is a strong trait in Volumnia’s manner and char- 
acter, and her supreme contempt for the plebeians, whether they are to be defied 
or cajoled, is very like what I have heard expressed by some high-born and high- 
bred women of our own day. And in her speech to the gentle Virgilia, who is 
weeping at her husband’s banishment, 


‘Leave this faint puling! and lament as I do, 
In anger—Juno-like!’ 


But the triumph of Volumnia’s character, the full display of all her grandeur of 
soul, her patriotism, her strong affections, and her sublime eloquence, are reserved 
for her last scene, in which she pleads for the safety of Rome, and wins from her 
angry son that peace which all the swords of Italy and her confederate arms could 
not have purchased. The strict and even literal adherence to the truth of history 
is an additional beauty. 


44 


690 : APPENDIX 


It is an instance of Shakspeare’s fine judgment, that after this magnificent and 
touching piece of eloquence, which saved Rome, Volumnia should speak no more, 
for she could say nothing that would not deteriorate from the effect thus left on 
the imagination. She is at last dismissed from our admiring gaze amid the thunder 
of grateful acclamation— 


‘Behold our patroness,—the life of Rome.’ 


Hunson (Sh’s Life, Art, and Characters, ii., 483): Volumnia is a superb figure 
indeed, yet a genuine woman throughout, though with a high strain of what 
may be called manliness pervading her womanhood. She has all of her son’s 
essential strength and greatness of character, and is nearly as proud withal as 
he; but her pride has a much less individual and unsocial cast; he is the chief 
matter of her pride, while self is the chief matter of his; she is proud of him too, far 
more for her country’s sake than either for his or her own; her supreme ambition 
is that he should be the greatest among the Romans; and she would have his 
greatness stand in being more a Roman than any of the others. Hence her pride 
flames out in fierce resentment at the sentence of exile; her maternal heart boils 
over with passion, insomuch that to those who are nowise in sympathy with her 
anger she seems insane; and she bangs away at the Tribunes with the wildest 
notes of imprecation; then hotly remonstrates against the quiet weeping grief 
of her daughter-in-law. Against the people also she goes into a lingual tempest, 
and speaks as if she would gladly see Rome burnt, since Rome rejects her heart’s 
idol; but the sequel shows this to be all because she is so intensely Roman in 
spirit; when things come to the pinch, her actions speak quite another language; 
and she is as far from sympathizing with her son in his selfish vindictiveness as 
she had been from sympathizing with the people’s madness in banishing him. 
That a Roman should fight his way to the highest honours in Rome is just what 
she believes in, but that he should fight for any thing but Rome is beyond her 
conception. So, when she sees her son waging war against his country, where his 
home and all its treasures are, she considers him to have renounced the only cause 
for fighting at all. It seems to her that he is making war against the one sole 
object or end of war; and she will rather disclaim her part in him than take part 
with him; nay, will rather die with Rome than see him grow by the death of that 
for which alone, in her view, a Roman should wish to live. 

As the mother’s pride is tempered by a more disinterested and patriotic spirit 
than the son’s, so she holds a much more firm and steady course; her words, in 
moments of high resentment, fly about wildly indeed, but her heart sticks fast to 
its cherished aims. And her energy of thought and purpose, if not greater than 
her son’s, yet in the end triumphs over his, because it proceeds on grounds less 
selfish and personal. She knows and feels that the gods are with her in it. The 
Poet wisely, and out of his own invention, represents her as exhorting him to tem- 
porize with the people, and to use arts for conciliating them which have no allow- 
ance in his bosom’s truth. For even so, like a true woman, as she is, she ‘would 
dissemble with her nature, where her fortune and her friends at stake requir’d 
she should do so in honour.’ To her sense and judgment of things deeds are to 
be weighed more by their ends and effects in regard of others than by their intrinsic 
quality to the doer’s mind; that is, a man should act rather with a view to help 
and gladden and comfort those about him, to serve his country and his kind, than 
to feed his moral egotism, or any sullen pride or humour of self-applause. It is 
even a rule of honour with her that a man should, in his action, be more considerate 


CHARACTER OF VOLUMNIA—LATHAM 691 


of what will further the welfare and happiness of others than of what will please 
himself, or accord with any inward or ideal standard of his own. And ¢0 it is 
rightly in woman’s nature, as being less wilful and more sympathetic in her reason, 
to judge of actions mainly by the practical consequences which she hopes or fears 
therefrom; I mean the consequences not only or chiefly to herself, but to those 
whom she loves. Therefore it is that women have so often been peace-makers in 
men’s wars of opinions and passions and ideas; and I know not what would become 
of human society if their softer bosom did not come in to mitigate the sharpness 
of the brain. 

Volumnia, though something more admirable than lovely in her style, is a 
capital representative of the old Roman matronly character, in which strength 
and dignity seem to have had rather the better of sweetness and delicacy, but which 
enshrined the very soul of rectitude and honour. And what a story does the life 
of this mother and this son, with their reciprocal action and influence as set forth 
in the play, tell us of the old Roman domestic system, and of the religious awe of 
motherhood which formed so large and powerful an element in the social con- 
stitution of that wonderful people! What a comment, too, does all this, taken 
together with the history of that nation, read upon the Divine precept, ‘Honour 
thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord 
thy God giveth thee!’ For reverence of children to their parents is the principle 
that binds together successive generations in one continuous life. 


Miss Grace Latuam (New Sh. Soc. Trans., 1887-92, p. 71): Among the noblest 
of the long line of Shaksperian women Volumnia is distinguished from them by the 
fact that no poetic glamour has been cast over her, as over Juliet or Hermione; we 
see her as she really is with all her faults and weaknesses, and yet her grand figure 
towers above them, gaining the reverence and admiration of the most different 
classes of minds. 

The germ of her character must be sought in her pleadings for Rome towards 
the end of the life of Coriolanus. Shakspere was evidently struck by them, for 
he has transcribed them almost literally in Act V, sc. iii, merely bringing them into 
the measure of blank verse, giving them the ring of spoken, not written, words, 
and here and there adding or strengthening an expression. 

The chief points which we notice in them are a deep love of her country; an 
intense affection for the person addressed; a jealous care for his honour, and an 
evident knowledge that he too is most sensitive about it; great personal dignity, 
and an imperative claim for reverence based on her motherhood; all which is 
expressed with fire and eloquence, moderated and held in check by self-control 
and common sense. . . . But although the outlines of her character are to be 
found in Plutarch, the touches and details which give it life remind us of great 
English ladies, such as Shakspere must have met by the time he wrote this play. 
. . . To this day Volumnias are not by any means uncommon in England, espe- 
cially in periods of national struggle and danger, combining with great pride of 
place an intense devotion to their country, to which they will sacrifice not only 
their pride, but the family ties which are yet dearer to their women’s hearts. In 
this she is unlike her son, for while her love of country is the one thing that rivals 
her love for him, he is rather devoted to his order, and, when rewarded for his 
services with ingratitude, can sacrifice even that order to his revenge. 

Of her parentage, girlhood, and marriage nothing whatever is told us; we only 
know that she was a widow, and that Marcius was her eldest and only surviving 


692 APPENDIX 


son, for she calls him ‘my first son’ and, again, ‘my only son.’ As to her husband 
we merely hear that he was of a noble house, distinguished for the services it had 
done for Rome. Whether Volumnia wedded him for love, or in obedience to her 
parents, whether she mastered him, or he her, there is no word to tell us. The 
reason of this is not that Plutarch is silent on the subject, for, as we shall presently 
see, Shakspere gives us a clear insight into her relations with her daughter-in-law, 
of which there is no hint in the life, but because Volumnia is one of those women 
the strongest, deepest feelings of whose natures are knitted up with the instinct, 
the passion of motherhood. Thus it by no means follows that Volumnia was not 
a happy wife, but her supreme affection was for her son, and it became all the 
stronger as being a widow there were no conflicting claims upon her. 

Her life was devoted to make her boy worthy of the high-minded patriots from 
whom he sprang; both by precept and example she taught him that courage and 
endurance were a duty, and especially that valour which, when Rome was struggling 
for existence with the nations around, was naturally held to be ‘the chiefest virtue’ 
which ‘most dignifies the haver.’ Neither did her great love lead her to neglect to 
discipline the boy; even when he is a grown man she exacts a reverence, an abso- 
lute obedience from him, which he, whose nature revolted from all control, would 
only have paid her from having been accustomed to do so from his earliest childhood. 

We are led to suppose that had she willed she might have married again, for 
she says of herself as an additional claim to his obedience: ‘and she, poor hen, 
fond of no second brood’; but she preferred to remain merely the mother of Corio- 
lanus, and to make his glory her crown as well as his. Thus she grew to old age, 
and he to middle life, repaying her great devotion with an affection and reverence 
which became the common talk of Rome; the very poorest knew that the chief 
joy he took in his great exploits was the pleasure they brought his mother, and 
on his return home hers was the face he first looked for to welcome him. 

Where, then, was the fatal mistake which rendered his many good qualities of 
no avail? It is shown in the first scene in which she appears, where we see her 
sewing at home with her daughter-in-law, Ccriolanus himself being absent at the 
wars. In Virgilia Shakspere has provided Volumnia with a good dramatic contrast. 
She is one of those quiet, gentle, persistent women with whom we often meet, who 
seem all submission, but who in the long run mostly get their own way. Indeed, 
only such a nature could possibly have lived with two fiery, masterful beings like 
her husband and his mother, without being either entirely crushed, or the occasion 
of terrible strife. The rough Coriolanus loves her well; he calls her ‘My gracious 
silence’; her calmness was doubtless very restful to him; influence over him she 
had but little; he had been accustomed to look to his mother as the only judge of 
his actions, and she still remained so, but to Volumnia Virgilia was an irritating 
daughter-in-law; there were an infinity of small matters over which their wills 
clashed, and such a nature as Volumnia’s would have far preferred an open quarrel, 
which would have cleared the air like a thunderstorm, and in which she would 
have been likely to triumph, to the persistent, dutiful opposition which it was 
Virgilia’s policy and nature to make. Then again the hardy old lady, to whom 
war and bloodshed were the highest form of glory, could not understand, much 
less tolerate, Virgilia’s shrinking from the very thought of danger; we shall find 
examples of both causes of difference in the present scene. The two women were 
not in sympathy; but by this time all trials of strength were over between them. 
Volumnia was too large minded to make petty quarrels, and too just not to give 
her daughter-in-law the place due to her in public; notice how she puts her forward, 


CHARACTER OF VOLUMNIA—LATHAM 693 


and lets her walk first in the procession which goes to implore mercy for Rome. 
Virgilia, on the other hand, had a good temper and great forbearance, and, too 
wise to attempt a fruitless struggle for domination, was content to carry her point 
in things appertaining to herself. . . . For her most dear country Volumnia is 
even ready to give the life of her only son, whom she cannot speak of to Virgilia 
as ‘thine’ without adding ‘and my good Marcius.’ Notice too her passionate 
nature and poetical mind, which make all her arguments word-pictures; we can 
almost see the beautiful boy whom she sent forth to war and danger. We find the 
same authoritative manner, the same fervid nature and vivid eloquence inherited 
by Coriolanus: 
‘Hang ’em. They say! 

They'll sit by the fire, and presume to know 

What’s done i’ the Capitol; who’s like to rise, 

Who thrives and who declines; side factions and give out 

Conjectural marriages; making parties strong 

And feebling such as stand not in their liking 

Below their cobbled shoes.’ 


It is like a picture of Teniers; we see the poor folk crouching round the fire in their 
well-worn shoes. But with Marcius we feel that he is not using his qualities, but 
they are running away with him, while all Volumnia’s powers are disciplined and 
controlled. There is never a word too much, even when she feels most strongly; 
when she speaks it is to the purpose, and at the right time. . . . By nature very 
like her son, Volumnia’s position as woman, wife, and mother has forced self- 
control upon her; and this, combined with her fiery impulsiveness, is one of the 
secrets of her strength of character and of the influence she exercises over him. 
The one giving her power and energy, the other allowing her to see where it 
should be employed; and even in the present scene we have an example of this. 
Hastily leaving what she perceives is a dangerous subject, Valeria begs the two 
ladies to go with her to visit a mutual friend, but Virgilia refuses; in vain does 
Valeria tease and persuade; in vain does Volumnia cry imperiously, ‘She shall, she 
shall! Virgilia will courteously endure the presence of her mother-in-law’s friends, 
but to gad about Rome in her lord’s absence is quite against her ideas of what is 
becoming in a wife; she is gentle as ever, but quite immovable. ‘Indeed, I must 
not,’ she says; ‘I wish you much mirth.’ Volumnia does not break out in angry 
exaggerated speech at this opposition, as her son would have done; she thinks it 
absurd and is annoyed, but she wastes no useless words, and only saying, ‘Let her 
alone, lady; as she is now she will but disease our better mirth,’ she goes forth 
alone with Valeria. . . . Volumnia’s first scene chiefly deals with her upbringing 
of Coriolanus; we see her in her domestic and heroic aspect; the second contains 
the outpouring of her mother-love, and joy in her son’s success, which are strong 
and full of fire in proportion to her impetuous, vigorous character. Though 
determinately cheerful in the absence of her ‘boy,’ as, mother-like, she still calls 
the great warrior, the news of his approach sends her into a fever of delight and 
excitement, showing how keen had been her anxiety and suffering while he was 
away, and now with Valeria and Virgilia she rushes to the gates to greet him. . . . 
Volumnia has now, as it is given to few to do, ‘seen inherited’ the ‘very wishes 
and buildings’ of her fancy; but the one thing wanting is to be denied her, and she 
now enters on a period of clouds and sorrow. The election of Coriolanus has been 
lost by his own unbridled folly; a tumult has followed, and he has been dragged 


694 APPENDIX 


away to be protected from the fury of the mob. A band of sympathizing friends 
have followed him home, and he is now angrily proclaiming to them his determi- 
nation of never submitting to his adversaries; but he speaks with the exaggerated 
emphasis of one who feels his cause a bad one, for the disapproval of his mother 
has already shaken his resolution. 

And here we meet with another grave error in Volumnia’s education of her son. 
With all her love for ‘our Rome’ she has a hearty contempt for her inferiors; she 
was wont 

‘To call them wollen vassals, things created 
To buy and sell with groats.’ 


And her son has learnt the lesson but too well; that part of his speech in Act I, 
sc. i, which has been already quoted, is a mere reproduction of the ideas he now 
recalls. But her pride of place has no personal dislike of those below her associated 
with it; thus she cannot only lay it aside when necessary, but has a real affection 
for them as her countrymen. With Coriolanus, the tendency of whose mind it is 
to exaggerate every impression he receives, it has become an intense abhorrence 
of the plebeians, finding expression in the grossest insolence and intolerance, and 
making him quite unfit for the work life brought him to do. Volumnia has learnt, 
by the mere fact of belonging to the weaker sex, that what we would have in this 
world we must often gain by tact; while Marcius has fallen into the not uncommon 
habit of natures disliking the effort of self-control, that of salving his conscience 
after an outbreak of temper by calling indulgence in it, honesty, and the expression 
of every feeling, no matter how discourteous or impolitic, truth. To her the com- 
mon sense of putting your power well on before you have worn it out is so evident 
that she is filled with impatience, and she expresses it openly; but having done so 
she holds her peace; she is not one of those nagging women who return again and 
again to a subject when nothing is to be gained by insistence on it; and at this 
moment the friends who are praising her son for his folly are stronger than she is. 
When, however, Menenius and the senators enter to persuade him to return and 
mend the evil he has done, she at once supports them, and Menenius, knowing 
that their best hope of success is in her influence, in his turn supports her. 

This scene is most significant not only of the great power which Volumnia 
possesses over her stiff-necked son, but of the kind of arguments which touch him. 
It is the forerunner of that in which by her prayers she saves Rome, from which 
indeed it probably originates, as the two scenes have much in common, and this 
may have been introduced to make us realize the extent of her influence over him, 
so that his final yielding to her petitions may not seem unnatural. There is a 
regular plan in her attack; she says no word about his duty to his country, which 
is one of her main arguments in her last great appeal to him; he is not now in a 
humour for it to have weight with him; but first she reasons, cutting from under 
his feet every inch of ground on which he would be likely to make a stand, laying 
especial stress on the fact that what she desires cannot hurt his honour. It is a 
point on which he is most sensitive, and we learnt from her first scene that she 
had brought him up to be so; and to Marcius honour meant not only the fulfilment 
of duty, but that renown for which he lived, and anything that touched it was at 
once resented by him. . . . She speaks boldly; no woman who was afraid of 
Coriolanus could have lived with him; she reminds him that persistence in his 
present course risks not merely his own safety, but that of his party and his 
family. Then, as he shows by his silence that she is making an impression on 


CHARACTER OF VOLUMNIA—LATHAM 695 


him, dropping her tone of rebuke, she tells him how he must bear himself to the 
plebeians, unpleasant though she knows her words will be. The very form of her 
speech, ‘I pri’thee,’ from one so unused to beg, shows us she is asking a great and 
hard thing. Still no answer; she fears that obstinacy may be taking possession of 
him, and, partly, woman-like, that she may commit him in spite of himself, partly 
to silence the doubt so unwisely thrown on his obedience by Cominius, she says 
in her old tone of command: ‘He must, and will. Pri’thee now, say you will, and 
go about it.’ 

He responds to the voice he has never yet disobeyed, but with such a loathing 
for his new part as augurs ill for his success in playing it, and his mother now 
prays him with the utmost tenderness: ‘I pri’thee now, sweet son,’ enforcing her 
argument by calling to his mind her share in building up his greatness. But to 
take this tone was, she finds, a mistake; Coriolanus is in no mood for softness, 
and that she should use it to beg a favour from him, shows him she knows how 
hard a thing she is asking him to do; it only increases his distaste for the task, 
and he stormily refuses to perform it, on the excuse of self-respect. Then, feeling 
the greatness of the occasion, Volumnia takes the last arrow out of her quiver. 
She is rarely angry, even under provocation, and prefers as a rule to concede a 
point rather than fight for it; but she possesses that valuable weapon of some strong, 
self-controlled natures, a temper which is so held in check that she can suppress 
or let it go at will. Such natures have all the flash and fury of anger, but reason 
lies in ambush to direct their use, and the extreme rarity of the outburst con- 
vinces its object that his antagonism is in such tremendous earnest that the effect 
is irresistible. In the present instance Volumnia suddenly turns on her son, and 
roundly chides him for failing in his duty and dishonouring her by refusing her 
prayer, and bidding him do his will, and bring ruin and death on her and on the 
city, she concludes with the reproach: 


‘Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck’dst it from me, 
But owe thy pride thyself.’ 


Her displeasure conquers him at once, and in hurried apologetic sentences, most 
unlike the usual utterances of the haughty Coriolanus, he promises obedience. 
She is too wise to diminish the effect of her rebuke by forgiving him at once, and 
she passes out with a curt ‘Do your will!’ 

We next see Volumnia at the pathetic leave-taking of Coriolanus; the utter 
failure of all her high hopes has broken down even her courage; she clings to her 
son with bitter tears, while he, their parts reversed for the first time, supports 
and comforts her. He checks Virgilia’s lamentations with the sharpness born of 
pain, but to his mother he is all gentleness. Even when she curses those who have 
treated him with such ingratitude, and he might be expected to launch out into 
invective, he only soothes and stops her. The dignified patience and sweetness 
which he now shows leads us to think that with a different rearing his faults might 
not have so obscured his finer qualities. He goes on his way, and the women are 
returning home under the care of Menenius, when they meet the tribunes; at 
the sight of them Volumnia breaks out in curses and loud-voiced abuse. Only 
now do we see how much alike the characters of this mother and son really are. 
Naturally hot-tempered, and prone to speak out all that is in her mind, the agony 
at her heart breaks down the power of self-control which she could only have ac- 
quired by long self-discipline, while the very sense that all is over, and that tact 
and patience can no longer help her son, drive her into this tempest of anger. Com- 


696 APPENDIX 


pare the restrained fire of her chiding of Coriolanus with her present wild and 
whirling words, and we shall see the difference between the passion which is allowed 
by the will to show itself, and that which bursts forth overthrowing all restraints. 
Compare also the states of mind of which these scenes are the outcome. In the 
one her whole energy is directed to persuade her son to retrieve the false step he 
has made; she feels a little impatience, but her anger is merely the instrument with 
which she effects her purpose. Now the knowledge that she is impotent to help 
her boy out of the ruin he has brought on himself, produces a physical as well as 
mental oppression which she must relieve, and had she not met the tribunes she 
would have vented her rage and pain on some one else. The tension of her nerves 
is such that everything is an offence, and she even quarrels with Virgilia for her 
natural tears. Poor old Menenius stands by her as he did beside her son, trying 
in vain to moderate her wrath and to prevent her from bringing destruction, like 
him, upon her head... . 

Throughout the early part of Act V, sc. iii. Volumnia’s natural affection for 
her son is struggling for the mastery, while she represses it with an iron hand, 
determined to play her part in the wisest and most tactful way for gaining her 
object. Had she not withheld her usual loving greeting; had she not, as it were, 
kept him at a distance, he would have been far less likely to grant her request, 
but though she does it willingly for Rome, it costs her much. Another cause 
makes her manner more formal and artificial than in her previous scene of remon- 
strance with him, until she is carried away by the strength of her own appeal. 
She comes as the ambassadress of Rome, and she speaks with the dignity befitting 
herofiice wear. & 

A horrible fear takes possession of her; will he, who never refused her anything, 
deny her prayer? and she cries in sudden apprehension, ‘Speak to me, son.’ She 
waits in breathless suspense for a reply, and then continues in vehement appeal to 
his nobler nature: ‘Thou has affected the fine strains of honour.’ Still no answer, 
and in a passion of despair she cries: ‘Why dost not speak? Think’st thou it 
honourable for a noble man still to remember wrongs?’ She calls to Virgilia, to 
the child, to aid her, and then with a sudden flash of anger: 


‘There’s no man in the world 
More bound to’s mother; yet here he lets me prate 
Like one i’ the stocks.’ 


And in grand indignation: 


‘Say my request’s unjust, 
And spurn me back: but if it be not so, 
Thou art not honest; and the gods will plague thee, 
That thou restrain’st from me the duty which 
To a mother’s part belongs—He turns away.’ 


It is a cry of agony; her last chance is slipping from her; she turns to her followers: 


‘Down, ladies, let us shame him with our knees.’ 


Country and honours, argument and indignation have been of no avail; if he can 
resist her self-abasement all is over; for a moment she thinks he is yielding, and 
points to the unconscious supplicating boy, but the father’s face hardens, and 
with a burst of anger she too is turning away when he catches her by the hand, 
and she knows that the same plan of attack which drove him out to humble him- 


CHARACTER OF VOLUMNIA—LEE 697 


self before the tribunes, has given her her triumph. He holds her hand a moment 


before he speaks: ‘O my mother, mother! O! 


You have won a happy victory to Rome; 

But, for your son,—believe it, O, believe it, 
Most dangerously you have with him prevail’d, 
If not most mortal to him.’ 


And Volumnia answers not a word; too well she knew that when she begged mercy 
for her country she devoted her only son to death; neither when the populace 
receive her on her return with shouts of joy and gratitude can she respond; she 
feels she has lost her one son, and that the voices which shout her welcome are 
those which hounded him to his death. She has made the greatest of all sacrifices 
for her country; and just as she would not show her anxiety when her Marcius was 
at the wars, so now she hides her pain and goes home to weep. 


S. Lee (Jefferson Press Sh.: Introd., p. xxix.): Coriolanus’ mother, Volumnia, 
is as vivid and finished a picture as the hero himself. Her portrait, indeed, is 
a greater original effort, for it owes much less to Plutarch’s inspiration. Volumnia 
is a proud, high-souled, strong-willed, shrewd-witted matron, amply endowed with 
maternal feeling. From her Coriolanus derives alike his patrician prejudice and 
his military ambition. She has firm faith in hereditary rank and birth. Trade 
or manual labour is in her view degrading. When her son suffers sentence of 
banishment from plebeian lips her resentment finds characteristic expression in 
the imprecation, ‘Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome and occupa- 
tions perish.’ Military glory colours her conception of manly virtue, and she values 
it highest in her own kindred. She inured her son, her only child, in boyhood to 
hardy soldiership. With justice she tells him, ‘My praises made thee first a 
soldier; Thy valiantness is mine; thou suck’dst it from me.’ She rejoices in the 
wounds with which in manhood he returns from battle. ‘She (poor hen!) fond 
of no second brood cluck’d him to the wars, and safely home, loaden with honour.’ 
There is no hesitation about her admiration of his prowess. He is to other Roman 
citizens ‘like the Capitol to the meanest house’ in the city. Though Coriolanus 
is impatient of his mother’s spoken praises, he rejoices in her approval, and there 
is some foundation for the citizens’ taunt that he performs his military exploits 
‘to please his mother.’ Her courage, too, is no wit inferior to his. She mocks at 
death with as big a heart as he. 

But in one regard Volumnia is greater than her stubborn heir. The keenness 
and pliancy of her intellect have no counterpart in his nature. In spite of the 
warmth of her affection, she is fully alive to his defects of reason, on which she 
comments with a mother’s frankness and a worldly philosopher’s penetrating irony. 
These are some of the biting rebukes she addresses to him: 


“You might have been enough the man you are, 
With striving less to be so’ (III, ii, 24, 25). 


‘T have a heart as little apt as yours, 
But yet a brain, that leads my use of anger 
To better vantage’ (III, ii, 38-40). 


‘T would dissemble with my nature, where 
My fortunes and my friends at stake, required 
I should do so in honour’ (III, ii, 79-81). 


698 - | APPENDIX 


There is no narrowness, no pettiness in Volumnia’s moral or mental constitution. 
Misfortune increases her moral and mental stature. There is no faint puling about 
her griefs. In anger she is Juno-like. When adversity compels her to present 
herself to her son in a foreign camp as a suppliant in behalf of the Roman people, 
her words acquire a logical cogency and rhetorical splendour which entitles her 
eloquence, for all its debt to Plutarch, to rank with Mark Antony’s oration at 
Cesar’s funeral. Her tongue is innocent of the garrulity of age. She knows the 
season of silence no less than that of speech, and it is dramatically fitting that 
after the eloquent appeal to her son, whereby she saves Rome and with unconscious 
irony seals his ruin, no further word in the scenes that follow should escape her lips. 

Very artistically are the other female characters of the tragedy, Coriolanus’ 
wife, Virgilia, and Virgilia’s friend, Valeria, presented as Volumnia’s foils. Valeria 
is a high-spirited and honourable lady of fashion, with a predilection for frivolous 
pleasure and easy gossip. Virgilia is a gentle wife and mother, who fully deserves 
Coriolanus’ apostrophe of ‘gracious silence.’ She speaks little, and her husband’s 
military adventures only excite her fears for his personal safety. She greets with 
tears his return home in triumph, whereby she earns the scorn of her brave and 
resolute mother-in-law. The three characters amply testify to the dramatist’s 
knowledge of the varieties of the female temper. 


A. C. BRADLEY (Coriolanus, p. 17): Though this play is by no means a drama 
of destiny, we might almost say that Volumnia is responsible for the hero’s life 
and death. She trained him from the first to aim at honour in arms, to despise 


pain, and to ‘forget that ever 


He heard the name of death’; 


to strive constantly to surpass himself, and to regard the populace with inhuman 


disdain as ‘things created 


To buy and sell with groats.’ 


Thus she led him to glory and to banishment. And it was she who, in the hour 
of trial, brought him to sacrifice his pride and his life. 

Her sense of personal honour we saw was less keen than his, but she was much 
more patriotic. We feel this superiority even in the scene that reveals the defect; 
in her last scene we feel it alone. She has idolized her son; but, whatever motive 
she may appeal to in her effort to move him, it is not of him she thinks; her eyes 
look past him and are set on Rome. When, in yielding, he tells her that she has 
won a happy victory for her country, but a victory most dangerous, if not most 
mortal, to her son, she answers nothing. And her silence is sublime. 

These last words would be true of Plutarch’s Volumnia. But in Plutarch, though 
we hear of the son’s devotion, and how he did great deeds to delight his mother, 
neither his early passion for war nor his attitude to the people is attributed to 
her influence, and she has no place in the action until she goes to plead with him. 
Hence she appears only in majesty, while Shakespeare’s Volumnia has a more 
varied part to play. She cannot be majestic when we see her hurrying through 
the streets in wild exultation at the news of his triumph; and where, angrily con- 
quering her tears, she rails at the authors of his banishment she can hardly be 
called even dignified. What Shakespeare gains by her animation and vehemence 
in these scenes is not confined to them. He prepares for the final scene a sense of 
contrast which makes it doubly moving and impressive. 


CHARACTER OF VOLUMNIA—BROOKE 699 


In Volumnia’s great speech he is much indebted to Plutarch, and it is, on the 
whole, in the majestic parts that he keeps most close to his authority. The open 
appeal to affection is his own; and so are the touches of familiar language. It is 
his Volumnia who exclaims, ‘here he lets me prate like one i’ the stocks,’ and who 
compares herself, as she once was, to a hen that clucks her chicken home. But 
then the conclusion, too, is pure Shakespeare; and if it has not majesty it has 
something dramatically even more potent. Volumnia, abandoning or feigning to 
abandon hope, turns to her companions with the words: 


“Come, let us go: 
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother; 
His wife is in Corioli, and his child 
Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch; 
I am hush’d until our city be a-fire, 
And then I’ll speak a little.’ 


Her son’s resolution has long been tottering, but now it falls at once. Throughout, 
it is not the substance of her appeals that moves him, but the bare fact that she 
appeals. And the culmination is that she ceases to appeal, and defies him. This 
has been observed by more than one critic. I do not know if it has been noticed 
that on a lower level exactly the same thing happens where she tries to persuade 
him to go and deceive the people. The moment she stops, and says, in effect, 
‘Well, then, follow your own will,’ his will gives way. Deliberately to set it against 
hers is beyond his power. 


S. BROOKE (p. 246): Volumnia is the Roman patrician and the Roman mother. 
The reverence of Coriolanus for her is a record of the ancient Roman honour for 
the ties of home, especially for motherhood. She is not only a mother; she is as 
much a patrician as her son, but without his furious temper; on the contrary, with 
a good share of politic prudence. She has the faults of her class and her position, 
otherwise she is a noble woman. ‘These faults are, however, too much for her 
womanly tenderness and for her honour. Her honour slips away when she ad- 
vises Coriolanus to deceive the people in order to get the counsulship. He is true, 
and he resents giving the lie to his nature. She excuses the fraud by the practice 
of war. It is lawful to deceive an enemy, and to her the people are the foe. As to 
her tenderness, she has it for her son and friends, but it is tenderness modified by 
the hunger for fame, for glory in war. The thoughtless militarism which has in 
all ages infected her class has made her its victim. She loves to see her son’s wounds 
which tell of his might and bravery. She has no care for the wounds of his men, for 
the wretched people who are victimized to make the fame of her son. She boasts 
in a terrible phrase of the terror and woe he causes. The trumpets sound as he re- 
turns. ‘These,’ she cries, ‘are the ushers of Marcius: before him he carries noise, 
and behind him he leaves tears.’ 

When we come to the close relationship between her son and her we come to a 
serious study. They stand together in an inner circle, isolated, as it were, from the 
rest. When the political interest, even when the fate of Coriolanus, in the play 
are dimmed in memory, the mother and the son still dwell in our thoughts. Their 
relationship is the inmost heart of the drama, where the deepest affections play. 
The love that is between them glorifies them, and creates round the haughty woman 
and the terrible warrior the gracious atmosphere of home. We retire, from time to 
time, from the noise of Rome and Volscian wars into an island of domestic peace 


700 APPENDIX 


and steady affection of which Volumnia and Coriolanus are the source. Virgilia 
sits and sews, Volumnia talks to her of her husband and her own son; the boy 
plays in the garden; Valeria drops in to gossip; and here Coriolanus—his violence 
and pride lost in his reverence and love of his mother who admires and loves him, 
and herself in him—finds his better self. Not till he is divided from his mother is 
he lost. The mother lives in the son. She has made him from his birth; both of 
them dwell on that long education. The son is the mother ina man. His fighting 
is what she would have done had she been a man. Had she been the wife of Her- 
cules she would have taken half his labours on herself. Her pride in her class is 
his. And his scorn of the people is hers. 

Her love of fame has been his inspiration. Every charge he has made on the 
enemies of Rome, every wound he has received have been made and received with 
the voice of his mother in his ears; and she has, in thought and admiration, made 
the charges and received the wounds. ‘O! he is wounded; I thank the gods 
for’t,’ she cries, when he comes home from Corioli. For his glory she has lived. 
One honour yet remains—he must be consul. 

They stand apart and together. The honour we give to the son we give also to 
the mother, who is its source. The pity we finally give to the son in his ruin we 
give in fuller stream to the mother. 


MacCattvum (p. 549): Of the subordinate persons, by far the most imposing 
and influential is Volumnia, the great-hearted mother, the patrician lady, the Roman 
matron. The passion of maternity, whether interpreted as maternal love or as 
maternal pride, penetrates her nature to the core, not, however, to melt, but to 
harden it. In her son’s existence she at first seems literally wrapped up, and she 
implies that devotion to him rather than to her dead husband has kept her from 
forming new ties. . . . Marcius is thus the only son of his mother and she a widow; 
but these reminiscences show how strictly the tenderness, and still more the in- 
dulgence, usual in such circumstances, have been banished from that home. 
In Plutarch the boy seeks a military career from his irresistible natural bent. . . . 
In Shakespeare the direction and stimulus are much more directly attributed to 
his mother, and it is she who first despatches him to the field. This she herself 
expressly states in her admonition to Virgilia. . . . Indeed it is easy to see that 
for good and evil he is what she has made him. She is entitled to say: 


‘Thou art my warrior: 
I holp to frame thee.’ 


And though elsewhere she puts it, 


‘Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck’dst from me, 
But owe thy pride thyself’ (III, ii, 156, 157), 


the impartial onlooker cannot make the distinction. He is bone of her bone and 
blood of her blood; and all her master impulses reappear in him, though not so 
happily commingled or in such beneficent proportion. The joint operation is 
different and in some respects opposite, but there is hardly a feature in him that 
cannot be traced to its origin in Volumnia, whether by heredity or education. 
This is just what we might expect. Modern conjecture points to the mother rather 
than the father as the source of will-power and character in the offspring; and in 
the up-bringing of the boy Volumnia has had it all her own way. Plutarch, as 
we saw, in his simple fashion notices this as a disadvantage; and though we may 
be sure that Plutarch’s insinuation of laxity could never be breathed against 


SHAKESPEARE AND THE MASSES—GERVINUS 701 


Shakespeare’s Volumnia, still she could not give her son more width and flexibility 
than her own narrow and rigid ideals enjoined. Moreover, her limitations when 
transferred to the larger sphere of his public efforts would cramp and congest his 
powers and displace his interests. 

Nor was there any other agency to divide the young man’s allegiance to his 
mother or to counteract or temper her authority. Generally the most powerful 
rivals of home influence are the companionship of friends, and the love that founds 
a new home in marriage. But both of these are either wanting in Coriolanus’ 
life, or serve only to deepen the impressions made on him by Volumnia. 


SHAKESPEARE AND THE MASSES 


CoLEeRIDGE (Notes of Lectures on Sh.): You will observe the good nature with 
which Shakespeare seems always to make sport with the passions and follies of a 
mob, as with an irrational animal. He is never angry with it, but hugely content 
with holding up its absurdities to its face; and sometimes you may trace a tone 
of almost affectionate superiority, something like that in which a father speaks 
of the rogueries of a child. See the good-humored way in which he describes 
Stephano passing from the most licentious freedom to absolute despotism over 
Trinculo and Caliban. The truth is, Shakespeare’s characters are all genera 
intensely individualized; the results of meditation, of which observation supplied 
the drapery and the colors necessary to combine them with each other. He had 
virtually surveyed all the great component powers and impulses of human nature— 
had seen that their different combinations and subordinations were, in fact, the 
individualizers of men, and showed how their harmony was produced by reciprocal 
disproportions of excess or deficiency. The language in which these truths are 
expressed was not drawn from any set fashion, but from the profoundest depths of 
his moral being, and is, therefore, for all ages. 


GERVINUS (p. 750): If we observe closely, we cannot even find that the people 
are here represented as so very bad. We must distinguish between the way in 
which they really act and the way in which the mockers and despisers of the people 
represent them; we may then soon find that the populace in Julius Cesar appear 
much worse than in Coriolanus. Great attention is here paid to the character of 
the age. In Antony, where the people had ceased to be of any importance, they 
no longer appear; in Cesar, where their degeneracy ruined the republic, they are 
shown in all their weakness; in Coriolanus, where they can oppose but not stop the 
progress of Rome’s political career, they appear equally endowed with good and 
bad qualities. We must allow that the populace are not flattered. The multitude 
are not alone blamed by Coriolanus as inconstant and variable, but they make 
him conscious of their changeableness by their behaviour concerning his election. 
Not alone does Menenius say that their imprudence ‘transports them by calamity 
thither where more attends them,’ but we find them actually on this road, and 
their leaders surpass them in popular frenzy; what is inconvenient, is not believed, 
and is concealed from the people, and the messenger is flogged who brings the 
unwelcome truth. It is true they are not alone reproached by words with unjustly 
ascribing to the government what is perhaps the decree of Providence, that they 
curse the justice that overtakes the criminal, and persecute the great with hatred; 


702 APPENDIX 


we see them ourselves in action, now loving and now hating without a reason, and, 
as it always happens in stirring times, scattering abroad the exciting common- 
places which have much show and little truth. Coriolanus despises all the deeds 
and capacity of the people, which ‘where it should find lions, finds hares,’ but the 
poet has actually shown us their cowardice and their love of plunder. On the 
other hand, we must not be, like Coriolanus, unreasonable, and overlook the fact 
that Shakespeare has introduced some better and braver among the people, who, 
when the general calls for volunteers, all shout and follow him, to his great joy 
and admiration. We must not omit to observe that the whole mass of the people 
acknowledge the merit of Coriolanus, that the zeal to admire and applaud the con- 
queror is universal, that his party among the people seems very great, that even 
the inflamed and excited people acknowledge that he is not avaricious, that he is 
not more proud than brave; that, with regard to his haughtiness, they take into 
consideration the power of his nature, and acknowledge that his merit surpasses 
their power to recompense. Menenius imagined that if the nobles did not keep 
them in awe they would destroy themselves, yet they acknowledge readily the 
wisdom of his fable, before which their wisdom yields. The friends of Coriolanus 
expected that the people, when left to themselves on his banishment, would fall 
into confusion, but, to their surprise, peace and union prevail. If fickleness be 
the attribute of the populace in all ages, there is an advantage even in this fault, 
which is totally opposed to the stiff obstinacy of the aristocrat; the populace be- 
come, through this quality, a manageable mass, which a wise man, like Menenius, 
can easily guide; if it be easily inflamed, it is also easily calmed again, and this 
quality of ready forgiveness Menenius himself praises in the people. Their hostility 
against Coriolanus is excusable on account of his indifference and haughty con- 
tempt, and on account of the scorn and enmity with which the proud man inten- 
tionally challenges their hatred. 

Here, in fact, the good and bad qualities of the multitude are weighed truly, 
and even with moderation. If, however, we would find out the poet’s estimation of 
democratic and aristocratic principles, we must, as we intimated above, compare 
the highest representative of both principles, Coriolanus, with Brutus and Cassius; 
not the populace with Coriolanus, who is intended by the poet, expressly and in 
accordance with history, to tower, like a hero, above them. We might compare 
this character with Marlowe’s transcendent heroes, if Shakespeare’s exaggeration 
were intended for genuine nature, and our admiration claimed in good faith, 
as is the case in similar descriptions of the old school of poetry; whereas with him, 
on the contrary, this outdoing of nature breaks to pieces of itself as something 
unnatural, and leaves in the observer a very mixed feeling. 


STAPFER (p. 461): In Coriolanus the people have a larger share in the action 
than in either of the other Roman plays. 

The cardinal point to be noticed first of all is that Shakespeare makes no dis- 
tinction between the plebeians of the early Republic and the populace of imperial 
and degenerate Rome. For this Plutarch is certainly not responsible, for although 
he is not in his heart very favourably disposed towards the ‘common people,’ 
as North calls them, he does justice on various occasions to their military courage 
and even to their civic virtues, noticeably at the time of their withdrawal to the 
‘Holy Hill,’ when they offered ‘no creature any hurt or violence, nor made any 
show of actual rebellion.’ Here they remained for four months. Right and reason 
were on their side, and they dishonoured their cause by no act of violence or excess 


SHAKESPEARE AND THE MASSES—STAPFER 703 


of any kind. To these oppressed and proud plebeians, opposing a passive and 
what may be called a conservative resistance to the despotic measures of the 
patricians, with a moderation derived from a sense of their strength and the right- 
fulness of their cause, it is impossible to refuse our esteem, nay more, our admira- 
tion. Nothing could less resemble a vulgar street riot than this orderly retreat 
to Mons Sacer of four thousand resolute men, ready to suffer anything rather than 
submit to tyranny. By the firmness of their attitude they compelled the senate to 
give way, for the land was lying uncultivated, and the inaction of four thousand 
valiant defenders, as Plutarch acknowledges them to be, left Rome exposed to the 
attacks of her foes. The chatter of poor old Menenius, and his wonderful fable, 
had but slight effect upon the seceders, who were only induced to return to their 
homes after obtaining the privilege of appointing tribunes ‘to defend the poor 
people from violence and oppression.’ 

This aspect of the plebeians of the Roman Republic in its young days, this grave, 
political, warlike, and wholly estimable side of their nature, does not appear in 
Coriolanus. According to his invariable custom, Shakespeare took no heed of what 
he considered to be a mere historical peculiarity, a local and temporary exception; 
he depicts the plebeians, in the early times of liberty, in conformity with the 
general type he had conceived of the populace, a type belonging to no especial 
date of nationality, but eternally and everlastingly true, and as applicable to 
ancient Rome as to Paris or London in modern times—to the Republic and the 
Empire, as to periods of absolute or constitutional monarchy, or as to our own 
democratic days. The dominant features of Shakespeare’s plebeians, as of all his 
sons of the people, are stupidity, inconstancy, and cowardliness. They are always 
blundering, always incapable of any political idea, and impressionable as wax in 
the hands of their demagogues. To these vices must be added their feeble negative 
good qualities, which may be summed up shortly by saying that they are even sillier 
than they are wicked. 

lf Coriolanus were an historical or political drama, and if the struggle between 
the plebeians and the patricians were what Shakespeare intended to depict, as 
has so often been foolishly said, it must be allowed that he has scarcely carried 
out his purpose in a satisfactory manner; for no attempt is made to give to each of 
the rival pretensions of the two hostile factions whatever portion of truth it may 
contain, or even to state clearly what they are. This contest between two political 
ideas, brought into harmony by a chorus of old men endowed with rather greater 
wisdom than Menenius Agrippa, would have furnished a magnificent subject to 
the Sophoclean drama. Nor would a poet, who like Corneille was fond of political 
dissertations, have failed to put an eloquent vindication of the rights of the people 
into the tribune’s mouth. But Shakespeare leaves all this side of the matter 
entirely in the shade. The plebeians would appear to have no solid foundation 
for their grievances, nor are we even able to perceive what benefit they expect from 
the establishment of the tribuneship, nor why, when their petition is granted them, 
it should throw them into such a rapturous state, shouting with joy, and throwing 
their caps ‘as they would hang them on the horns o’ the moon.’ 

But the truth is, that the interest of Coriolanus is anything but of a political or 
historical order; it is on the character of the hero, on the development of his nature, 
that the poet has concentrated all the effort of his genius: he pictures him as a 
giant of passion and pride, towering over the heads of all who surround him, who, 
with the single exception of his mother, are utterly insignificant, weak, and con- 
temptible. Without going so far as to say, with Hallam and Gervinus, that there 


704 APPENDIX 


was no other possible treatment of the subject, it is enough to state that this 
is the manner in which Shakespeare has treated it, and which is fully in accordance 
with the admiration for great personalities and strongly-marked characters which 
his writings so often testify. He has sacrificed in one huge holocaust nearly all 
the other personages of the drama, that he might add to the colossal proportions 
of the patrician and warrior. To form any notion of the distance that separated 
Coriolanus from the plebeians, of the remote spot whence he surveyed them and 
was dismayed, as it were, at their smallness, we must turn to medieval times, and 
picture to ourselves a knight equipped for battle giving orders from horseback to 
his churls and serfs: his intense contempt is simply inconceivable at a time when 
all citizens were on a footing of military equality. But, in fact, we are not in Rome 
at all, we are in the full stream of chivalry, with the warlike nobles on the one 
side and on the other the peasants that dig the ground. 

These flights of fancy in the Shakespearian drama rather interfere with our 
comprehension of the logical sequence of the facts; it is difficult to understand, if 
we stop to consider, how much such utterly contemptible creatures as the plebeians 
and their tribunes are represented to be, should all at once become powerful enough 
to dictate laws to the nobles, and to banish their great enemy. But the vigour 
of the poetry carries the reader along with it, and leaves no time or space for the 
cold objections of historical accuracy. Coriolanus is, at one and the same time, the 
play in which Shakespeare has borrowed from the historian the greatest number 
of details which he reproduces with peculiar exactitude, and also that in which he 
has most widely departed from the spirit of historical truth. 

The part played by the plebeians in Coriolanus must, therefore, be regarded 
merely as a representation of the populace in general; and it is, moreover, the best 
portrait of the kind given by Shakespeare, the shadows are not painted in so deep a 
hue as elsewhere, and one or two redeeming features possible to the picture are 
pleasantly brought forward. 


BRANDES (ii, p. 233): Shakespeare’s aristocratic contempt for the mob had its 
root in a purely physical aversion for the atmospuere of the ‘people.’ We need but 
to glance through his works to find the proof of it. In the Second Part of Henry VI. 
(Act IV, sc. vii.) Dick entreats Cade ‘that the laws of England may come out of 
his mouth’; whereupon Smith remarks aside: ‘It will be stinking law; for his breath 
stinks with eating toasted cheese.’ And again in Casca’s description of Czsar’s 
demeanour when he refuses the crown at the Lupercalian festival: ‘He put it the 
third time by, and still he refused it; the rabblement hooted and clapped their 
chapped hands, and threw up their sweaty nightcaps, and uttered such a deal of 
stinking breath because Cesar refused the crown, that it had almost choked Cesar; 
for he swooned and feel down at it; and for mine own part, I durst not laugh for 
fear of opening my lips and receiving the bad air’ (Julius Cesar, Act I, sc. ii.). 

Also the words in which Cleopatra (in the last scene of the play) expresses her 
horror of being taken in Octavius Cesar’s triumph to Rome: 


‘Now, Iras, what thinkest thou? 
Thou, an Egyptian puppet, shalt be shown 
In Rome as well as I: mechanic slaves, 
With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers, shall 
Uplift us to the view; in their thick breaths, 
Rank of gross diet, shall we be enclosed 
And forced to drink their vapour.’ 


SHAKESPEARE AND THE MASSES—BRANDES 705 


All Shakespeare’s principal characters display this shrinking from the mob, 
although motives of interest may induce them to keep it concealed. When 
Richard II., having banished Bolingbroke, describes the latter’s farewell to the 
people, he says (Richard IT., Act I, sc. iv.): 


‘Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green, 
Observed his courtship to the common people; 
How he did seem to dive into their hearts 
With humble and familiar courtesy, 

Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles 
And patient underbearing of his fortune, 

As ’twere to banish their effects with him. 

Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench, 

A brace of draymen bid God-speed him well, 
And had the tribute of his supple knee, 


With ‘‘Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends.’’’ 


The number of these passages proves that it was, in plain words, their evil 
smell which repelled Shakespeare. He was the true artist in this respect too, and 
more sensitive to noxious fumes than any woman. At the present period of his 
life this particular distaste has grown to a violent aversion. The good qualities 
and virtues of the people do not exist for him; be believes their sufferings to be 
either imaginary or induced by their own faults. heir struggles are ridiculous to 
him, and their rights a fiction; their true characteristics are accessibility to flattery 
and ingratitude towards their benefactors; and their only real passion is an innate, 
deep, and concentrated hatred of their superiors; but all these qualities are merged 
in this chief crime: they stink. 

‘Cor. For the mutable rank-scented many, let them 
Regard me as I do not flatter, and 
Therein behold themselves’ (Act ITI, sc. i.). 


‘Brutus. I heard him swear, 
Were he to stand for consul, never would he 
Appear i’ the market-place, nor on him put 
The napless vesture of humility; 
Nor, showing as the manner is, his wounds 
To the people, beg their stinking breaths’ (Act II, sc. i.). 


When Coriolanus is banished by the people he turns upon them with the out- 
burst: 
“You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate 
As reek 0’ the rotten fens, whose loves I prize 
As the dead carcases of unburied men 
That do corrupt my air’ (Act III, sc. iii.). 


When old Menenius, Coriolanus’s enthusiastic admirer, hears that the banished 
man has gone over to the Volscians, he says to the People’s Tribunes: 
“You have made good work, 
You and your apron-men: you that stood so much 
Upon the voice of occupation and 
The breath of garlic-eaters!’ (Act IV, sc. vi.). 


45 


706 APPENDIX 


And a little farther on: 
‘Here come the clusters. 
And is Aufidius with him? You are they 
That made the air unwholesome when you cast 
Your stinking greasy caps up, hooting at 
Coriolanus’ exile.’ 


If we seek to know how Shakespeare came by this non-political but purely 
sensuous contempt for the people, we must search for the reason among the ex- 
periences of his own daily life. Where but in the course of his connection with 
the theatre would he come into contact with those whom he looked upon as human 
vermin? He suffered under the perpetual obligation of writing, staging, and acting 
his dramas with a view to pleasing the Great Public. His finest and best had 
always most difficulty in making its way, and hence the bitter words in Hamlet 
about the ‘excellent play’ which ‘was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; 
for the play, I remember, pleased not the million.’ .. . 

A theatrical audience of those days was, to Shakespeare’s eyes at any rate, an 
uncultivated horde, and it was this crowd which represented to him ‘the people.’ 
He may have looked upon them in his youth with a certain amount of goodwill 
and forbearance, but they had become entirely odious to him now. It was un- 
doubtedly the constant spectacle of the ‘understanders,’ and the atmosphere of 
their exhalations, which caused his scorn to flame so fiercely over democratic 
movements and their leaders, and all that ingratitude and lack of perception which, 
to him, represented ‘the people.’ 

With his necessarily slight historical knowledge and insight Shakespeare would 
look upon the old days of both Rome and England in precisely the same light in 
which he saw his own times. His first Roman drama testifies to his innately anti- 
democratic tendencies. He seized with avidity upon every instance in Plutarch 
of the stupidity and brutality of the masses. Recall, for example, the scene in 
which the mob murders Cinna, the poet, for no better reason than its fury against 
Cinna, the conspirator (Julius Cesar, Act ITI, sc. iii.). .. . 

This point of view meets us again and again in Coriolanus; and whereas, in his 
earlier plays, it was only occasionally and, as it were, accidentally expressed, it 
has now grown and strengthened into deliberate utterance. 


MacCativo (p. 470): It is no doubt true that this and many other Shakespearian 
plays abound in hostile or scornful vituperation of the people; and not only of their 
moral and mental demerits; their sweaty clothes, their rank breaths, their gross- 
ness and uncleanness are held up to derision and execration. But are we to at- 
tribute these sentiments to Shakespeare? Such utterances are ex hypothesi 
dramatic, and show us merely the attitude of the speakers, who are without excep- 
tion men of the opposite camp or unfriendly critics. Only once does Shakespeare 
give his personal or, rather, impersonal estimate. It is in the Induction to the 
second part of Henry IV., when Rumour, whose words, in this respect at least, 
cannot be influenced by individual bias, speaks of 

‘the blunt monster of uncounted heads, 
The still-discordant, wavering multitude’ (line 18). 
That is, the populace as a whole is stupid, disunited, fickle. And this is how, apart 
from the exaggerations of their opponents, Shakespeare invariably treats crowds 
of citizens, whether in the ancient or modern world. He therefore with perfect 


SHAKESPEARE AND THE MASSES—BRADLEY 707 


consistency regards them as quite unfit for rule, and when they have it or aspire 
to it, they cover themselves with ridicule or involve themselves in crime. But 
this is by no means to hate them. On the contrary, he is kindly enough to indi- 
vidual representatives, and he certainly believes in the sacred obligation of govern- 
ing them for their good. Where then are the governors to be found? Shakespeare 
answers: in the royal and aristocratic classes. It is the privilege and duty of 
those born in high position to conduct the whole community aright. Shakespeare 
can do justice to the Venetian oligarchy and the English monarchy. But while to 
him the rule of the populace is impossible, he also recognizes that nobles and 
kings may be unequal to their task. The majority of his kings indeed are more or 
less failures; his nobles—and in this play, the patricians—often cut a rather sorry 
figure. In short, popular government must be wrong, but royal or aristocratic 
government need not be right. 

And this was exactly what historical experience at the time seemed to prove. 
The Jacqueries, the Peasants’ Wars, the Wat Tyler or Jack Cade Insurrections, 
were not calculated to commend democratic experiments; and, on the other hand, 
the authority of king and nobles had often, though not always, secured the welfare 
of the state. 


A. C. BRADLEY (Coriolanus, p. 7): The representation of the people, whatever 
else it may be, is part of a dramatic design. This design is based on the main 
facts of the story, and these imply a certain character in the people and the hero. 
Since the issue is tragic, the conflict between them must be felt to be unavoidable 
and well-nigh hopeless. The necessity for dramatic sympathy with both sides 
demands that on both there should be some right and some wrong, both virtues 
and failings; and if the hero’s monstrous purpose of destroying his native city is 
not to extinguish our sympathy, the provocation he receives must be great. This 
being so, the picture of the people is, surely, no darker than it had to be; the desired 
result would have been more easily secured by making it darker still. And one 
must go further. As regards the political situation the total effect of the drama, 
it appears to me, is this. The conflict of hero and people is hopeless; but it is he 
alone who makes the conflict of patricians and plebeians, I do not say hopeless, 
but in any high degree dangerous. The people have bad faults, but no such faults 
as, in his absence, would prevent a constitutional development in their favour. 

I will try to describe their character, but I will illustrate this statement by 
comparing two accusations of their opponents with the facts shown; for these we 
must accept, but the accusations we must judge for ourselves. In the first scene 
the people are called cowards both by the hero and by their friendly critic Menenius. 
Now there is no sign that they possess the kind of courage expected of gentlemen, 
or feel the corresponding shame if their courage fails. But if they were cowards 
how could Rome be standing where we see it stand? They are the common soldiers 
of Rome. And when we see them in war what do we find? One division, under 
Cominius, meets the Volscians in the field; the other, under Coriolanus, assaults 
Corioli. Both are beaten back. This is what Cominius says to his men: 


‘Breathe you, my friends: well fought: we are come off 
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands, 
Nor cowardly in retire.’ 


Nothing hints that the other division has not fought well or was cowardly in retire; 
but it was encouraged beforehand with threats, and, on its failure, with a torrent 


708 APPENDIX 


of curses and abuse. Nevertheless it advances again and forces the enemy to 
the gates, which Coriolanus enters, calling on his men to follow him. 


‘First Sol. Fool-hardiness; not I. 
Second Sol. Nor I. 

First Sol. See, they have shut him in. 
All. To the pot, I warrant him.’ 


Disgusting, no doubt; but the answer to threats and curses. They would not 
have served Cominius so; and indeed, when Lartius comes up and merely sug- 
gests to them to ‘fetch off’ the reappearing hero, they respond at once and take 
the city. These men are not cowards; but their conduct depends on their leaders. 
The same thing is seen when Coriolanus himself appeals to the other division for 
volunteers to serve in the van. For once he appeals nobly, and the whole division 
volunteers. 

Another charge he brings against the people is that they can neither rule nor 
be ruled. On this his policy of ‘thorough’ is based. Now, judging from the 
drama, one would certainly say that they could not rule alone—that a pure 
democracy would lead to anaichy, and perhaps to foreign subjection. And one 
would say also that they probably could not be ruled by the patricians if all 
political rights were denied them. But to rule them, while granting them a place 
in the constitution, would seem quite feasible. They are, in fact, only too easy 
to guide. No doubt, collected into a mob, led by demagogues, and maddened by 
resentment and fear, they become wild and cruel. It is true, also, that, when their 
acts bear bitter fruit, they disclaim responsibility and turn on their leaders: ‘that 
we did, we did for the best; and though we willingly consented to his banishment, 
yet it was against our will.” But they not only follow their tribunes like sheep; 
they receive abuse and direction submissively from any one who shows goodwill. 
They are fundamentally good-natured, like the Englishmen they are, and have a 
humorous consciousness of their own weaknesses. They are, beyond doubt, 
mutable, and in that sense untrustworthy; but they are not by nature ungrateful, 
or slow to admire their bitterest enemy. False charges and mean imputations 
come from their leaders, not from them. If one of them blames Coriolanus for 
being proud, another says he cannot help his pride. They insist on the bare form 
of their right to name him consul, but all they want is the form, and not the whole 
even of that. When he asks one of them, ‘Well then, I pray, your price of the 
consulship?’ the answer, ‘The price is to ask it kindly,’ ought to have melted at 
once; yet when he asks it contemptuously it is still granted. Even later, when 
the arts of the tribunes have provoked him to such a storm of defiant and revolu- 
tionary speech that both the consulship and his life are in danger, one feels that 
another man might save both with no great trouble. Menenius tells him that the 
people 

‘have pardons, being ask’d, as free 
As words to little purpose.’ 


His mother and friends urge him to deceive the people with false promises. But 
neither false promises nor apologies are needed, only a little humanity and some 
acknowledgment that the people are part of the state. He is capable of neither, 
and so the conflict is hopeless. But it is not because the people, or even the tri- 
bunes, are what they are, but because he is what we call an impossible person. 


SHAKESPEARE AND THE MASSES—BEECHING 709 


The result is that all the force and nobility of Rome’s greatest man have to be 
thrown away and wasted. That is tragic; and it is doubly so because it is not only 
his faults that make him impossible. There is bound up with them a nobleness of 
nature in which he surpasses every one around him. 

We see this if we consider, what is not always clear to the reader, his political 
position. It is not shared by any of the other patricians who appear in the drama. 


H. C. Brrecuinc (Character of Sh., p. 22): Of Shakespeare’s politics, in the 
narrower sense of the term, there should be little need to speak. All Englishmen 
under Elizabeth had much the same politics. But it has become the fashion lately 
to judge Shakespeare by our modern democratic and philanthropical ideas and 
to find him sadly wanting. We are asked, Is it not true that he despised the 
general mass of the people? Was he not specifically middle-class, with the char- 
acteristic reverence of that class for an aristocracy? Does he anywhere show 
interest in the poor, until indeed he came to write King Lear, when such interest 
had begun to be popular? Let me answer these questions as shortly as I can. 
Creizenach points out that Shakespeare was the first dramatist to bring crowds 
on to the stage; and indubitably, when he does so, he shows them to be at the 
mercy of the demagogues who play upon their cupidity, as they always were, and 
still are. To Shakespeare, as to Chaucer, they are 


“The stormy people, unsad and ever untrue, 
Ay indiscreet, and changing as a vane.’ 


But he shows them to be as responsive to good influence as to bad when they 
find a leader whom they respect and in whom they have confidence. There is a 
good instance in the insurrection scene in Sir Thomas More, which Sir E. Maunde 
Thompson’s investigation of Shakespeare’s handwriting permits us now to attribute 
decidedly to Shakespeare. Further, it must be observed that Shakespeare recog- 
nizes the shrewdness and common sense, and also the magnanimity, of individuals 
among them. In the scene where the Roman people, one by one, promise Corio- 
lanus their votes for the consulship, the good feeling and also the good manners 
are on their side, not his. In regard to the second question, when it is implied 
that Shakespeare takes no interest in the simple lives and doings of honest, humble 
folk, does not this mean merely that honest humble folk are, as such, naturally 
wanting in dramatic interest? Moreover, on a stage like Shakespeare’s, where it 
is character that is of moment, rather than manners, distinctions of class count for 
little, and in Illyria and the forest of Arden they become very shadowy. But when 
humility and poverty are of dramatic importance, as in the case of Helen in All’s 
Well that Ends Well, we find that Shakespeare comes out as the champion of the 
humble and meek. It would hardly be possible to find a more emphatic repudia- 
tion of the aristocratic claim that noble blood is the sole title to social recognition 
than Shakespeare puts into the mouth of the Countess of Rousillon, the old lord 
Lafeu, and even the King of France himself: 
‘Strange is it that our bloods, 

Of colour, weight, and heat, pour’d all together, 

Would quite confound distinction, yet stand off 

In differences so mighty... . 

Honours thrive 
When rather from our acts we them derive 
Than our foregoers.’ 


710 APPENDIX 


As to Shakespeare’s alleged indifference to the poor before the date of King Lear 
(1606), I can see no reason for thinking that the references to their hard condition 
in that play are other than dramatic. They are perfectly natural, one might even 
say obvious, in the mouth of a king reduced to equality with a beggar. There is 
no evidence that they represent, as has been said, ‘a swift response’ on the drama- 
tist’s part to a new spirit of Philanthropy in his patrons. Indeed, if it were so, 
Shakespeare’s response was not only swift but short-lived, for we find no further 
references of the sort in later plays. No one can say that Shakespeare may not, 
while he was writing King Lear, have come across some hard case which specially 
appealed to him; but the problem of pauperism had been before people’s minds 
all through Elizabeth’s reign, and by her third Poor Law it was thought to be 
satisfactorily settled. 


J. MipptEToN Murry (London Mercury, Feb., 1922): It is surely not against the 
democratic idea that Coriolanus is tried and found wanting. In spite of Signor 
Croce’s assurance to the contrary, it is impossible to believe that the contempt for 
the city mob with which the play is penetrated was not shared by Shakespeare him- 
self. The greatest writers strive to be impersonal, and, on the whole, they achieve 
impersonality; but, though they carve out an image that is unlike themselves, 
they cannot work wholly against the grain of their own convictions. Prejudice 
will out. And the loathing of the city mob which is continually expressed in 
Shakespeare’s work and comes to a head in Coriolanus was indubitably his own. 
It is indeed less plausible to deny this than it would be to argue that at a time when 
his genius was seizing on themes of a greater tragic scope it was his sympathy with 
the anti-plebeian colour of the Coriolanus story that led Shakespeare to choose it 
for his play. 

This is not a question of Shakespeare’s political views. We do not know what 
they were, and we have no means of finding out. Signor Croce is thus far right. 
But when he goes on to assure us that it is a wild-goose-chase to look to discover 
where Shakespeare’s sympathies lay in the world in which he lived, we can but 
point to the knowledge we actually have of every great writer. We do know their 
sympathies. It may be an illegitimate knowledge, but the laws it violates are 
laws of Signor Croce’s own devising. It is his own logical fiat that holds the king- 
doms of the esthetic and the practical asunder. In fact, there is no dividing-line 
between them. A writer’s predispositions in practical life do constantly deter- 
mine his esthetic creation, and every great writer who has been conscious of his 
activity has either confessed it or gloried in it. 

We know that Shakespeare detested the city mob. If we care to know why we 
have only to exercise a little imagination and picture to ourselves the finest creative 
spirit in the world acting in his own plays before a pitfull of uncomprehending 
base mechanicals: 


‘Alas, ’tis true, I have gone here and there 
And made myself a motley to the view, 
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear.’ 


The man who used that terrible phrase, who ‘gored his own thoughts’ to wring 
shillings from the pockets of the greasy, grinning crowd in front of him, had no 
cause to love them; and Shakespeare did not. He was an aristocrat, not in the 
political sense, but as every man of fine mind who shrinks from contact with the 
coarse-minded is an aristocrat, as Anton Tchehov was an aristocrat when he wrote: 


SHAKESPEARE AND THE MASSES—CHAMBERS 711 


‘Alas, I shall never be a Tolstoyan! In women I love beauty above all things, 
and in the history of mankind, culture expressed in carpets, spring carriages, and 
keenness of wit.’ 

Shakespeare could not, therefore, measure Coriolanus against the democratic 
idea in which he could not believe; nor could he pit the patriotic idea against him, 
for Coriolanus was immune from a weakness for his country. It is domestic love 
that pierces his armour and inflicts the mortal wound. 


R. W. CuamBeErRs (p. 156): Certain ideas were linked in Shakespeare’s mind, 
and this coupling recurs with a curious similarity in spite of differing circum- 
stances: at one time it may be in an elaborate simile; at another, in a single line 
or even word. Thus the idea that adversity tests character as a tempest tests 
ships is expressed by Coriolanus in twenty words, by Nestor (naturally) in nearly 
as many lines. So, too, Macbeth echoes Richard III. 

Therefore, if the speech of Sir Thomas More be Shakespeare’s, we may reason- 
ably expect More’s figures regarding government to reappear (changed to suit the 
speaker’s circumstances) in those passages in Shakespeare’s undoubted works 
where this question of authority and mob-law is discussed. Such passages are 
the speech of Ulysses in Troilus and several scenes in Coriolanus. 

If authority be impaired, there can be no end short of men devouring one 
another like ravenous fishes or beasts of prey. So Coriolanus thinks: 


“What’s the matter, you dissentious rogues, 
That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion, 
Make yourselves scabs? . . . Your affections are 
A sick man’s appetite, who desires most that 
Which would increase his evil. . . . What’s the matter, 
That in these several places of the city 
You cry against the noble senate, who, 
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else 
Would feed on one another?’ 


If Marcius had been able to make his language a little more conciliatory, he would 
have spoken exactly like Sir Thomas More: 


‘Grant . . . that you sit as kings in your desires, 
Authority quite silenced by your brawl, 

And you in ruff of your opinions clothed, 

What had you got? I'll tell you: you had taught 
How insolence and strong hand should prevail, 
How order should be quelled; and by this pattern 
Not one of you should live an aged man. 

For other ruffians, as their fancies wrought 

With self same hand, self reasons, and self right, 
Would shark on you, and men like ravenous fishes 
Would feed on one another,’ [Sir Thomas More, Addition II, 195-210]. 


The language of Coriolanus leaps over stages of thought, as we expect that of any 
angry man to do, let alone an angry man in one of Shakespeare’s later plays. But 
the thought which is explicit in More’s speech is implicit in that of Coriolanus, and 
leads them both to their conclusion in this identical figure involving an identical 
half-line. 


712 APPENDIX 


Even in his ridicule of humble folk Shakespeare generally shows a loving touch. 
The keen sympathy of Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch has taught us to see this even in 
Stephano, ‘in extremity to be counted on for the fine confused last word of our 
mercantile marine, ‘“‘Every man shift for all the rest.”’ And all must agree with 
Walter Bagehot that Shakespeare was ‘sympathizingly cognizant with the talk of 
the illogical classes.’ If Hippolyta is bored by Bottom and his company, and can- 
not conceal her impatience, Shakespeare did not expect us to see them with her 
eyes. The story of Much Ado, as Shakespeare found it, was one in which all the 
actors belonged to géntle circles, and the solution came from the confession of one 
or other of the courtly culprits. Shakespeare added Dogberry, Verges, and the 
Watch. He delighted in them; and in the hands of the absurd Watch of Messina 
he placed the detection of the plot which had deceived all the nobles, and against 
which even Beatrice could suggest no better remedy than ‘Kill Claudio.’ Further, 
Shakespeare’s love of irony has led him to arrange the order of events, so as to 
bring Leonato face to face with Dogberry and the detected plot before the wed- 
ding. If Leonato, instead of dismissing Dogberry as ‘tedious,’ had possessed 
Shakespeare’s ‘kindly fellow-feeling for the narrow intelligence necessarily induced 
by narrow circumstances,’ he would have saved himself considerable trouble at 
the expense of wrecking the catastrophe of the play. 

Despite anything the gentles may say, we love Bottom and we love Dogberry; 
even Carlyle so far overcame his dislike of fools as to love Dogberry. Yet when, 
instead of ‘Dogberry’ or ‘Bottom,’ we read ‘1st Citizen,’ or ‘2nd Citizen,’ we are 
very prone to see them, if not with the eyes of Coriolanus, at any rate of a patrician 
partizan. And it must be granted that in 2 Henry VI. the picture is partizan; the 
crowd is foolish and murderous. Yet even here the touches which are most 
Shakespearian are precisely those which are least venomous. 

We may admit that Shakespeare hated and despised the tribunes in Coriolanus 
with a bitterness which he rarely felt towards any of his creatures. And we may 
admit (with reservations) that in Shakespeare ‘when a “‘citizen” is mentioned, he 
generally does or says something absurd.’ But Shakespeare did not dislike absurd 
people, and demonstrably he did not dislike the mob in Coriolanus. 

We must remember that the plebeians as a whole (apart from the tribunes) 
never have a chance of seeing Marcius’ bearing to his fellow patricians. All they 
can see of him is that he is a valiant soldier, and that he hates them fanatically. 
Now the citizens are starving, and in arms; it is little wonder that they are deter- 
mined to kill Marcius: ‘For the gods know, I speak this in hunger for bread, not in 
thirst for revenge’; ‘He’s a very dog to the commonalty.’ The citizens have no 
cause to suspect, as we who know him better have, that he is a dog whose bark is 
worse than his bite. 

The tumult is appeased, Marcius again wins honour in the war, and the citizens 
are magnanimous enough to support their old enemy against all competitors for 
the consulship. This comes, of course, from Plutarch; but Plutarch makes it 
clear that up to this point there had not been on either side the exasperation which 
Shakespeare depicts. Such scenes as the plebeians seeking to kill Marcius, or 
Marcius threatening massacre to thousands of the plebeians, are out of the ques- 
tion, at this stage, in Shakespeare’s source. All the greater, you may say, Shake- 
speare’s estimate of the changeableness of the citizens; but assuredly all the 
greater his estimate of their generosity and forgiveness. The citizens recall a bit- 
ter old gibe of Marcius’, but only as subject for good-natured chaff, half admit- 
ting it to be true. And the Third Citizen sums up, ‘I say, if he would incline to 


SHAKESPEARE AND THE MASSES—CHAMBERS 713 


the people, there was never a worthier man.’ And though their speech is grotesque 
the citizens also are worthy men. 

And all this frank generosity Marcius rewards by open scorn, and by a haughty 
refusal to show his wounds according to custom. ‘The citizens are surprised; never- 
theless they do not at first go back upon their decision to support him against his 


rivals: «Third Cit. But this is something odd. 
Sec. Cit. And ’twere to give again—but ’tis no matter.’ 


When the different groups of two or three, who have been talking to Marcius, 
meet together again in a body, they find that they have all been mocked alike, 
though even here the voice of charity is heard: 


‘First Cit. No, ’tis his kind of speech; he did not mock us.’ 


If we compare carefully the citizens’ report of Marcius’ demeanour with his 
actual words, there is no misrepresentation, except on the part of the charitable 
citizen. Then the tribunes intervene and denounce the ‘childish friendliness’ 
that would yield voices ‘to him that did not ask but mock,’ whilst refusing votes 
to those who ask in proper form. 

Of course, it is because he so badly needs their voices that Marcius has been 
insolent to the citizens. He is too proud to flatter. It is a proof of the meanness 
of spirit of the tribunes that, whilst they know Marcius well enough to play on 
his weaknesses, they never understand his nobility. Still, their argument looks 
logical enough, and we cannot wonder that, so admonished, the citizens decide to 
refuse Marcius: ‘He’s not confirm’d: we may deny him yet.’ 

Which of us, in their place, would have done otherwise? 

Now, not only is this not Plutarch’s story; it is the direct reverse of Plutarch’s 
story. In Plutarch the change is due solely to the political fears of the plebeians, 
and there is no hint, at this point, of scornful bearing on the part of Marcius: if 
his friends err, it is by making too great entreaty on his behalf. Nor is there any 
question here in Plutarch of interference on the part of the tribunes. Shakespeare 
has altered the facts, as he received them, to exonerate the people at the expense 
of their leaders, and, above all, of Marcius. 

Then, when he learns that the citizens will no longer support him, Shakespeare’s 
Marcius exclaims, ‘Have I had children’s voices’ (as though he himself were not 
the cause of the change), and proposes to deprive the people of their liberties 
‘and throw their power i’ the dust.’ The tribunes answer by accusing him of 
treason, and demanding his punishment. Here again Shakespeare has altered 
his authority. In Plutarch the people reject Marcius and elect his rivals consuls; 
and there for the moment matters rest; it is later, as a private senator, and with 
no claim of his own to the consulship, that Marcius proposes to take the office 
of tribune from the people. Shakespeare’s main object in making this change is, 
no doubt, to hasten the action; but it also has the effect of justifying the citizens. 
When Marcius, regarded by the nobility as consul elect, and so regarding himself, 
meets the opposition of the plebeians by proposing the destruction of all their 
liberties, what can the citizens do except back their leaders in demanding his 
banishment? For ‘he hath power to crush.’ 

Yet, even at this stage, Menenius (who should know, and who does not flatter 
the people except sometimes to their face) believes that, if Marcius will but utter 
a few gentle words, it will not only save him from banishment (‘save what is 


714 APPENDIX 


dangerous present’), but even now gain him the consulship (‘save the loss of what 
is past’). If he will but recant publicly what he has spoken, 


‘why, their hearts were yours, 
For they have pardons, being ask’d, as free 
As words to little purpose.’ 


But it cannot be; for between the headstrong temper of Marcius and the venom- 
ous malice of the tribunes, who deliberately play upon that temper, the citizens 
are as helpless as Othello in the toils of Iago. 


B. Marruews (Sh. as a Playwright, p. 272): It has been maintained that 
Shakspere was not a democrat himself, but an aristocrat rather, not to say a snob, 
in his attitude toward the plain people; and the evidence in support of this has been 
derived partly from Coriolanus, partly from Julius Cesar, and partly from the 
Jack Cade episodes in Henry VI. It has been urged that these passages, taken 
collectively, show that Shakspere had no liking for the populace. This assertion 
has a certain specious plausibility. If phrases are taken from the mouths of Shak- 
spere’s characters and transferred to Shakspere himself, then there is no difficulty in 
making up a mass of derogatory expressions, full of bitter contempt for the people. 

But, of course, this is just what we have no right todo. Shakspere may not bea 
democrat, but he is a dramatist, and he lets all his creatures express themselves in 
their own words and utter amply what they may have in their own hearts. If these 
characters are disdainful aristocrats, then he allows them to express their con- 
tempt for the vulgar herd; and there is no justification for the assumption that they 
are serving at that moment as the mouthpieces of Shakspere himself. The dramatic 
poet differs from the lyric poet mainly in his possession of the power of projecting 
himself into other personalities and of keeping his own opinion to himself as 
far as this is possible. What Shakspere says in his sonnets and in his narrative 
poems we may accept, if we choose, as what he thought and felt as Shakspere. 
But what Jack Cade or Coriolanus may say in the plays wherein they appear is what 
Jack Cade and Coriolanus must say if they are to obey the law of their own being. 

Other adverse critics there are who admit the injustice of crediting Shakspere 
with the sayings of his characters, and yet who urge that he clearly discloses his 
dislike for the plain people in the handling of the several mob-scenes in which the 
populace is presented as foolish, fickle, and easily captivated by empty claptrap. 
And there is no denying that thus presented the charge has a far firmer support, and 
that it is not to be met by the mere assertion of any dramatic necessity for so repre- 
senting the populace. When we study the mob-scenes we can hardly escape the 
conviction that Shakspere detested and despised the mob. But who of us does not 
—even today in these democratic times? It is the mob that Shakspere seems to 
despise, and not the whole people, of which the mob is only a single constituent 
element and the least worthy. The mob is the residuum of the populace, the 
baser part in its basest aspects. It is as dangerous today and as much to be 
dreaded as it was when Coriolanus and Julius Cesar were alive; and Shakspere’s 
abhorrence of it is now shared by all who recall the Lord George Gordon dis- 
turbances in London, the draft riots in New York, and the inexcusable excesses of 
the closing hours of the Commune in Paris. 

So far as we can judge from his plays Shakspere has the universal toleration 
which comes from universal understanding. He has no liking for silly mobs, as 
he has no liking for bloody tyrants or for foppish courtiers. Richard III, and 


SHAKESPEARE AND THE MASSES—SCHELLING 715 


Macbeth are monarchs whose dark natures he makes us see for ourselves, as he 
also exposes Le Beau and Osric in all their empty pretentiousness. He is not a 
snob, nor is he a sycophant. He was almost the only poet who did not come 
forward with a dirge or an elegy after the death of Elizabeth. Yet it is probably 
true that he was not a democrat, and that he believed in a firm rule for the state, 
which in his day meant a monarchy. And here he was in accord with the most 
enlightened opinion of his own time and of his own country. So far as we can judge 
he was no political theorist anticipating the experiments of the future. 


Urrict (ii, 183): Shakespeare has been censured for having—out of predilection 
for the aristocracy, perhaps even for some flattering consideration to his public, to 
his great and noble patrons and friends—placed the people so much in the shade 
compared with Coriolanus and the Roman patricians, that they almost invariably 
present but a ludicrous appearance. . . . I think, however, that Shakespeare 
is in no need of any justification for not having placed the plebs, as a political 
party, on a level with the patricians, and for having presented them to us in their 
natural human aspect, with their natural human weaknesses and virtues—which 
are ever predominant in the people as such; neither does the poet require to be 
justified for having laid more stress upon the former than upon the latter, and, in 
accordance with this, for having stamped their leaders—the tribunes—demagogues, 
and as endeavouring by intrigues to make the plebs a political party, to raise 
them to political greatness. For it is just this contrast between the political and 
the natural in man that forms the central point upon which the whole drama turns; 
Shakespeare required such a people because his object was to give a full and vivid 
representation of the nature and character of the aristocracy within this general 
contrast. Lastly, the same cause that proves the ruin of Coriolanus leads to the 
mother losing her son, the wife her husband, and the son his father. The same 
political virtue, which is the pride of the whole race of the Marcii, and even pene- 
trates and inspires their women, forces the mother and wife (because in them it is 
not clouded by passion, and asserts itself in a purer and more disinterested manner) 
to become untrue to themselves and to entreat for that which is opposed to the 
life of the son and husband. 


F. E. Scueriine (The Common Folk of Sh.): In the taverns, the brothels, and 
the jails Shakespeare found the foulmouthed, the ignorant, and the dishonest, 
and he represented them in all these particulars in a faithful, if at times, forbidding, 
reality to life. Moreover, his prejudice against evil is pronounced in the very 
repulsiveness of such scenes. He knows that there are impostors among beggars, 
that trial by combat is only a somewhat cruder method of getting at the truth than 
trial by jury, that there are corrupt and incompetent magistrates and fools abound- 
ing in all walks of life. Moreover, he depicts in his plays a feudal state of society, 
for such was English society in his day. But there is nothing in these honest dra- 
matic pictures of English life, from the king on his throne to Abhorson with his 
headsman’s axe, to declare Shakespeare prejudiced against any class of his fellow- 
countrymen. Wherefore, our obvious generalization as to Shakespeare’s attitude 
toward common folk, whether they be learned or unlearned, is this: he found among 
them the stupid, the ignorant, the pretentious, and the absurd; but he found likewise 
in each class the earnest, the honorable, and capable, and honored each after his kind 
assuch. For their follies he ridiculed them; for their virtues, which he recognized, 
he loved them, deflecting neither to ridicule nor respect because of station in life. 


716 APPENDIX 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS 
NAHUM TATE’S INGRATITUDE OF A COMMONWEALTH 


In 1682 Nahum Tate made an alteration of Shakespeare’s Coriolanus under the 
title The Ingratitude of a Commonwealth; or, The Fall of Caius Marcius Cortolanus. 
It quite deservedly proved unsuccessful. The following analysis is given by 

Genest (vol. i, p. 326): In the dedication Tate says, ‘Upon a close view of this 
story there appeared in some passages no small resemblance with the busy faction 
of our own time; and, I confess, I chose rather to set the parallel nearer to sight 
than to throw it off at farther distance.’ 

There are no performers’ names to the Dramatis Persone. 

Act 1st begins as in Shakspeare, and proceeds with slight variations, till a 
Messenger enters, and tells Caius Martius that he is appointed substitute to 
Cominius in the room of Lartius—after the scene between the Ladies—Caius 
Martius enters before the walls of Corioles, for so Tate calls Corioli. 

Act 2d. Tate omits the whole till Coriolanus enters—he addresses his Mother 
with ‘Oh Madam.’ 

Act 3d. Tate very properly closes this act with the parting between Coriolanus 
and his friends—Young Martius is introduced, and a page and half added—there 
is likewise a new scene between Volumnia and Valeria—that between Volumnia 
and the Tribunes (in the next act) is omitted. 

Act 4th begins with Coriolanus, not at Antium, but at Corioles—he makes a 
short speech, and the scene changes to the house of Aufidius—when the servants 
go out Aufidius re-enters with Nigridius, a villain discharged by Coriolanus, and 
received by Aufidius—Nigridius speaks in part what belongs to the Lieutenant— 
the discontent of Aufidius is made very injudiciously to break out too soon— 
when the Tribunes enter at Rome, the two scenes are consolidated and shortened— 
Coriolanus is discovered sitting in state—Menenius addresses some few lines to 
him, by Tate—Volumnia, Virgilia, &c., enter—Valeria does not enter, yet what is 
said of her in the original is retained. 

Act sth is chiefly Tate’s—Volumnia, Valeria, &c., enter at Rome—Volumnia, 
hearing that Nigridius has formed a plot against the life of Coriolanus, determines 
to set off for Corioles with Virgilia and young Martius—Aufidius and Nigridius 
enter-—then follows the scene with Coriolanus and the Volscians, partly from 
Shakspeare—Coriolanus fights with Aufidius and his party—they are both mortally 
wounded—Aufidius threatens to ravish Virgilia before her husband’s face—she is 
brought in wounded—Aufidius dies—and then Virgilia—Nigridius boasts that he 
has racked young Martius—Coriolanus asks— 


‘Well, Cerberus, how then didst thou dispose him? 
Didst eat him?’ 


Nigridius replies that he threw him still alive, but with all his limbs broken, into 
the arms of Volumnia—she enters mad with young Martius—she kills Nigridius 
and runs off—the boy dies—Coriolanus concludes the play with a dying speech. 
Tate’s alteration is, on the whole, a very bad one; he omits a good deal of the 
original to make room for the new sth act—his own additions are insipid, and he 
makes numberless unnecessary changes in the dialogue, but the first 4 acts of his 
play do not differ very materially from Shakspeare—he has been guilty of a mani- 
fest absurdity in turning Valeria into a talkative fantastical lady—the new scenes 
which he gives her are not bad in themselves, but they are unsuitable not only 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—GENEST Tpit 7) 


to the real character, but to the time in which she lived—the part of Valeria, as 
written by Tate, bears some resemblance to that of Sempronia in Cataline— 
Volumnia’s speeches, when she is mad, are contemptible to the last degree. 

In justice to Tate it should be observed that he has made one considerable 
improvement—Shakspeare has been guilty of a mistake in repeatedly saying 
that Caius Marcius was alone when he forced his way into Corioli—Tate uniformly 
represents him as not being quite alone on this occasion—Plutarch says he had a 
very few friends with him—Livy and Dionysius Halicarnassensis afford still less 
ground for the supposition that he was alone—Coriolanus was a man of extraor- 
dinary courage, but it is absurd to make him an absolute Almanzor—The Prologue 
says of Tate: 


“Yet he presumes he may be safe to-day, 
Since Shakspeare gave foundation to the play.’ 


It then tells us what Tate has done— 


‘He only ventures to make gold from ore, 
And turn to money, what lay dead before.’ 


DENNIS’S INVADER OF HIS COUNTRY 


Genest thus records the first performance of Dennis’s alteration of Shakespeare’s 
Tragedy, and adds thereto an analysis of the work: 

November 11, 1719. Never acted, the Invader of his Country, or the Fatal 
Resentment (altered by Dennis from Shakspeare). Coriolanus = Booth; Aufidius = 
Mills; Menenius=Cory; Cominius=Thurmond; Sicinius=W. Wilks; Brutus= 
Walker; Titus Largius = Williams; Citizens and Servants = Penkethman, Johnson, 
Miller, Norris, &c. Volumnia=Mrs Porter; Virgilia=Mrs Thurmond. If any- 
body but Dennis himself had spelt Titus Lartius with a g instead of a ¢ Dennis 
would have been the first to have called him a blockhead. Tho’ great part of this 
Tragedy is Shakspeare’s, and there can be no doubt that Booth played Coriolanus 
well, yet it was acted only 3 times—after which the Managers, to the great indig- 
nation of Dennis, gave out another play, assigning as a reason, that it was not 
worth their while to act any piece that would not bring them £100. 

Dennis, in a dedication of 10 pages to the Duke of Newcastle, at that time 
Lord Chamberlain, complains bitterly of two or three insolent actors (particularly 
Cibber) who had no capacity, no education, nor the least concern for their country 
—for Dennis, it must be observed, wrote this play in the cause of his country and 
his sovereign—it was to have come out on Nov. ioth, but the Managers put it 
off till the 11th, that it might not interfere with the benefit of a young author at 
Lincoln’s Inn Fields—this threw Dennis’ own benefit on a Friday; and Friday, he 
says, was not only the worst day in the week for an audience, but his was that 
particular Friday when a hundred persons, who designed to be there, were either 
gone to meet the King, or preparing in town to do their duty to him on his arrival 
from abroad—Dennis then modestly asserts that the Managers and their stage 
were more indebted to him than to any other writer in England—after all he does 
not prove that he was particularly ill used, but he proves that when a man is 
blinded with passion he will say any thing—no one had talked more about liberty 
than Dennis; yet he here wants the Duke to interfere with the management of 
the theatre in the same arbitrary manner in which his predecessors in office had 


718 APPENDIX 


done—and calls him the lawful monarch of the Stage—in an advertisement he 
again attacks Cibber and his Tragedies, and says no one can get a play acted at 
Drury Lane, unless he will flatter Wilks by telling him that he is an excellent 
Tragedian—which would be ridiculous and absurd. 

Act 1st. Dennis omits the scene between Coriolanus and the Citizens, and that 
between the Ladies—he begins with Cominius at the head of the Roman army and 
the whole act consists of the military scenes. 

Act 2d. He begins with a scene between Volumnia and Virgilia—omits the 
scene between Menenius and the Tribunes—that between Menenius and Volumnia, 
and the scene in the Capitol—he alters the meeting between Coriolanus and his 
wife and mother for the worse—he adds a good deal of low Comedy to the parts 
of the Citizens. 

Act 3d. He mutilates the first scene between Coriolanus and the Tribunes 
shamefully, and concludes the act with a parting scene between Coriolanus and 
Virgilia: 

‘Cor, ———————Adieu! 
In quest of great revenge thy Lover flies. 
Virg. Support me, Virgins, for Virgilia dies.’ 


He had before said that the God of War had saved him at the request of Love’s 
propitious Goddess—Cibber himself could not have done worse than this. 

Act 4th. He begins with Coriolanus at Antium and puts in more low Comedy— 
Aufidius and the Volscians are discovered at table and Coriolanus is introduced— 
the scene between the Servants is considerably altered from the original one—the 
scene at Rome concludes with the Citizens driving off the Tribunes with an intent 
to throw them from the Tarpeian Rock. 

Act 5th. ‘The scenes in which Menenius is concerned are omitted, and through- 
out the play his speeches of humour are left out—Aufidius and his Officers begin 
the act—Coriolanus enters, and then Volumnia and the other Ladies—Aufidius 
goes out—Volumnia produces a dagger and threatens to make use of it, but she 
does not absolutely attempt to stab herselfi—when the Women retire, Coriolanus 
fights with Aufidius and kills him—he is killed by the Volscians—the women re- 
enter before he dies—Cominius comes on and concludes the piece—Dennis has 
retained about half of the original play, which he has altered much for the worse— 
as he was a man of abilities and a professed Critic, it might reasonably have been 
expected of him that he would have had too much good sense to have mangled 
Shakspeare in the way that Tate, Cibber, and others had done. 


TALFOURD (p. 36): Mr Dennis proceeds very generously to apologize for 
Shakspeare’s faults by observing that he had neither friends to consult nor time to 
make corrections. He also attributes his lines ‘utterly void of celestial fire,’ 
and passages ‘harsh and unmusical,’ to the want of leisure to wait for felicitous 
hours and moments of choicest inspiration. To remedy these defects—to mend 
the harmony and to put life into the dulness of Shakspeare—Mr Dennis has 
assayed, and brought his own genius to the alteration of Coriolanus for the stage 
under the lofty title of the Invader of his Country, or the Fatal Resentment. In 
the catastrophe Coriolanus kills Aufidius, and is himself afterwards slain, to satisfy 
the requisitions of poetical justice, which, to Mr Dennis’s great distress, Shakspeare 
so often violates. It is quite amusing to observe with how perverted an ingenuity 
all the gaps in Shakspeare’s verses are filled up, the irregularities smoothed away, 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—TALFOURD 719 


and the colloquial expressions changed for stately phrases. Thus, for example, the 
noble wish of Coriolanus on entering the forum— 


‘The honoured gods 
Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice 
Supplied with worthy men! plant love among us! 
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace, 
And not our streets with war’— 


is thus elegantly translated into classical language: 


‘The great and tutelary gods of Rome 

Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice 
Supplied with worthy men: plant love among you: 
Adorn our temples with the pomp of peace, 

And, from our streets drive horrid war away.’ 


The conclusion of the hero’s last speech on leaving Rome— 


‘Thus I turn my back: there is a world elsewhere’— 


is elevated into the following heroic lines: 


“For me, thus, thus, I turn my back upon you, 
And make a better world where’er I go.’ 


His fond expression of constancy to his wife— 


‘That kiss 
I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip 
Hath virgined it e’er since’— 
is thus refined: 
‘That kiss 
i carried from my love, and my true lip 
Hath ever since preserved it like a virgin.’ 


The icicle which was wont to ‘hang on Dian’s temple,’ here more gracefully 
‘hangs upon the temple of Diana.’ The burst of mingled pride and triumph of 
Coriolanus when taunted with the word ‘boy,’ is here exalted to tragic dignity. 
Our readers have, doubtless, ignorantly admired the original. 


‘Boy! False hound! 
If you have writ your annals true, ’tis there, 
That like an eagle in a dove cote, I 
Fluttered your Volsces in Corioli. 
Alone I did it—Boy.’ 


The following is the improved version: 


‘This boy, that like an eagle in a dove court, 
Flutter’d a thousand Volsces in Corioli, 
And did it without second or acquittance, 
Thus sends their mighty chief to mourn in hell!’ 


Who does not now appreciate the sad lot of Shakespeare—so feelingly bewailed 
by Mr Dennis—that he had not a critic, of the age of King William, by his side, 
to refine his style and elevate his conceptions! 


720 APPENDIX 


Krtpourne (p. 124): Again we see what havoc the application of an artificial 
notion can work with a play of Shakespeare’s. Dennis has but stultified himself 
by attempting to improve Shakespeare, the absence of the superior enlightenment 
and knowledge of dramatic art he believed himself to possess being amply demon- 
strated by his performance in this instance, as it had been also in the case of his 
revision of The Merry Wives of Windsor. 

The poet James Thomson in 1747 finished a tragedy of Coriolanus, which is 
entirely independent of Shakespeare’s play, a different source having been followed. 
His play, which was not acted and printed until 1749, the year after his death, 
is written in a cold classical manner and, indeed, is one of those tragedies in 
which, to use Doctor Johnson’s phrase, ‘Declamation roared, whilst Passion 
slept.’ 

[Genest records but a single performance of Thomson’s Coriolanus. The pro- 
ceeds of this were intended for the relief of the Poet’s sisters. Quin emerged 
from comparative retirement at Bath to enact the title réle, and, it may here be 
incidentally said, the remarkable representation of Quin in the character of Corio- 
lanus, which has been several times reproduced, gives us the actor as he appeared 
in Thomson’s tragedy. There is no authentic record of Quin’s appearance in 
Shakespeare’s Coriolanus at any time in his career.—Ep.] 


THOMSON’S CORIOLANUS 


GeENEST (vol. iv, p. 278): Shakspeare, in the names of his characters and in 
almost every other particular, copies Plutarch; Thomson follows Dionysius 
Halicarnassensis and Livy, both of whom call the Mother of Coriolanus, Veturia, 
and the Wife, Volumnia. 

To write a play on the same subject with one of Shakspeare’s is the most 
arduous task a dramatic writer can attempt; it is easy to avoid Shakspeare’s 
faults, but difficult indeed to equal his beauties—Thomson’s is certainly not a bad 
play, but when compared with Shakspeare’s, it is regular, cold, and declamatory— 
Shakspeare has hit off the character of Coriolanus admirably; Thomson has con- 
siderably softened it—he grossly misrepresents it when he says of him that he 
was adorned with every virtue of civil life—Plutarch expressly tells us that they 
who admired him for his temperance, justice, and courage, disliked him in his 
civil transactions as overbearing, unpleasant, and aristocratical—Dionysius 
Halicarnassensis says much the same thing—the scene lies during the whole of 
Thomson’s play in the Volscian camp; of course his plan differs materially from 
Shakspeare’s, except in the 5th act—Galesus is a sort of Pythagorean Philosopher, 
a character introduced improperly, both as to time and place—as to time, for tho’ 
Pythagoras had been in Italy, yet there is no reason to suppose that his doctrines 
had made any progress among the Volsci—as to place, for what is more absurd 
than to preach against war in a Camp?—to Galesus, however, Thomson has given 
many excellent sentiments and expressed them in appropriate language—he has 
borrowed largely from Dionysius Halicarnassensis—which is very fair—this was 
a posthumous play—Quin in the Prologue speaking of his deceased friend says: 


‘Forgive the gushing tear, 
Alas! I feel I am no actor here.’ 


From the Epilogue it appears that Mrs Woffington had painted her beautiful 
face with wrinkles to suit the character—what modern actress would do this? 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—BAKER—VICTOR—GENEST 721 


D. E. BAKER (Biog. Dram.): Our pleasing poet’s principal merit not lying in the 
dramatic way; and this, though the last, being far from the best of his works, even 
in that way; we cannot pay any very exalted compliments to the piece. 

The style of it is, like the rest of the author’s writings, ill calculated to excite 
the passions. 


Victor (vol. ii, 165): What could induce Mr Thomson (an author of undoubted 
Genius) to chuse Coriolanus for a Subject, when, by turning to his Shakespear, 
he could read a Play written on that Story by that inimitable Hand? and which is, 
at this Day, very justly preferred. Besides, Mr Thomson had many Examples 
before him: Dennis, whom, he knew, altered Coriolanus without Success; his Friend, 
Mr Hill, new wrote Henry V.; Mr Cibber tamper’d with King John; but the 
immortal Shakespear’s three Plays on those Subjects, written above one hundred 
and sixty Years ago, are, at this Day, the Stock Plays in our Theatre, and appa- 
rently superior in Merit. 


THOMAS SHERIDAN’S CORIOLANUS 


GENEST (vol. iv, p. 417) gives this analysis of Sheridan’s Coriolanus; or, The 
Roman Matron: Act 1st. The first act of Shakspeare is entirely omitted except 
the scene between Veturia and Volumnia (for Sheridan has preferred Thomson’s 
names to Shakspeare’s), with which this play begins—then follows the 2d act of 
Shakspeare not materially altered, except that in the Senate scene Coriolanus does 
not appear till he is called. 

Act 2d consists of Shakspeare’s 3d act—the first part of it, when the Tribunes 
enter, is curtailed in a manner that reflects the utmost disgrace on Sheridan’s 
judgment— 

‘Have you informed them since? 
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? 
Mark you his absolute shall’— 


and some other of Coriolanus’ most effective speeches are omitted. (Dennis had 
before done the same.) 

Act 3d is not contaminated with one line from Shakspeare—it consists of Thom- 
son’s 1st act, with some addition from the 2d. 

Act 4th begins with the scene between Tullus and Volusius from Thomson’s 
3d act; then follows a scene at Rome between Menenius and the Tribunes; this 
scene is made up from 3 scenes of Shakspeare, with some addition about throwing 
the Tribunes from the Tarpeian Rock—then follows another scene between Tullus 
and Volusius from Thomson. 

Act sth is entirely Thomson’s, except that when Tullus and Coriolanus quarrel, 
about 17 lines are introduced from Shakspeare; and after Coriolanus is dead 
Tullus speaks 2 lines from Shakspeare and 7 that Sheridan gives him—Galesus 
concludes the play as in Thomson—the Epilogue to Thomson’s play is added 
with the conclusion altered—On the whole this alteration is a very bad one— 
many fine parts of Shakspeare’s play are omitted to make room for some cold 
scenes from Thomson—Sheridan has added a second title—the Roman Matron— 
was not the original one sufficient? or was it proper that a play to be produced 
at Covent Garden should imitate those country playbills in which a stupid second 
title is frequently added to attract the vulgar? 


46 


722 APPENDIX 


In the preface the person who made the alteration says the success this play 
has met with in both kingdoms (for it was first performed on the Dublin stage) 
has more than answered his expectations—he adds that the military ovation had 
been much admired—Sheridan conveyed in his acting a masterly knowledge of the 
character of Coriolanus and the play drew some good houses. (Wilkinson.) 


Kizpourne (p. 125): J. P. Kemble, whose great part was Coriolanus, made an 
alteration, which was acted at Drury Lanein 1789. What might have been a legiti- 
mate and judicious abridgment and adaptation of Shakespeare’s play is spoiled 
by borrowing from Thomson in the Fourth and Fifth Acts. In the Fourth Act 
especially there is certainly no necessity for a resort to such a practice, as Shake- 
speare has provided an abundance of material. As it is, ftve whole scenes are 
rejected in favor of inferior matter from Thomson. In the Fifth Act the action 
and dialogue are more Thomson’s than Shakespeare’s. The latter’s conclusion 
being a little lame, Kemble saw fit to attempt to improve it by introducing the 
quarrel scene between Coriolanus and Aufidius from Thomson. Granting that he 
has accomplished his object, one cannot but wish that he had not known Thomson’s 
play, or, instead of resorting to it, had confined himself to Shakespeare. The 
same judiciousness he had exhibited in revising the first three acts would probably, 
if applied in treating the last two, have produced a definitive acting version of 
Shakespeare’s play. 


H. T. Hart (Sh’s Plays, p. 29): In 1806 Coriolanus was again revised by Kemble, 
and three more additions were published—one in 1811, one in 1812, and one in 1814. 
In 1820 the Tragedy underwent another alteration at the hands of R. W. Elliston. 


HARDY’S CORIOLAN 


MacCativm (p. 475): Coriolanus, even as treated by Shakespeare, is unsym- 
pathetic to many, and the legend is of so little historic significance that it is often 
omitted from modern handbooks of Roman history; so, for these reasons, despite 
its pre-eminent fitness for the stage, it was generally passed over. 

Not universally, however. It seems already to have engaged the attention of 
one important dramatist in France, the prolific and gifted Alexandre Hardy. 
Hardy began to publish his works only in 1623, and the volume containing his 
Coriolan appeared only in 1625; so there is hardly any possibility of Shakespeare’s 
having utilised this play. And, on the other hand, it was certainly written before 
1608, probably in the last years of the sixteenth century, but in any case by 1607, 
so.there is even less possibility of its being influenced by Shakespeare’s treatment. 
All the more interesting is it to observe the coincidences that exist between them, 
and that are due to their having selected a great many of the same motifs from 
Plutarch’s story. It shows that in that story Plutarch met the playwright half 
way, and justified the statement of Hardy in his argument that ‘few subjects are 
to be found in Roman history which are worthier of the stage.’ The number of 
subsequent French dramas with Coriolanus as hero proves that he was right, though 
in England, as so frequently, Shakespeare’s name put a veto on new experiments. 

Hardy’s tragedy in style and structure follows the Senecan manner of Jodelle 
and Garnier, but he compromised with medizval fashions in so far as to adopt 
the peculiar modification of the ‘simultaneous’ or ‘complex’ decoration which is 
usual in his other plays. In accordance with that, several scenes were presented 
at the same time on the stage, and actors made their first speeches from the area 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—MaAcCALLUM 723 


appropriated to that one of them which the particular phase of the action required. 
There was thus considerable latitude in regard to the unity of place, and even more 
in regard to the unity of time; but the freedom was not so great as in the Eliza- 
bethan theatre, for after all there was space only for a limited number of scenes, 
or ‘mansions’ as they would formerly have been called. Generally there were five, 
two at each side and one at the back. In the Coriolan there were six, and there is 
as well a seventh place indicated in the play without scenical decoration. Even 
so they are few compared with the two and twenty that Shakespeare employs; 
and though no doubt that number might be considerably reduced without injury 
to the effect, by running together localities that approximate in character and 
position, one street with another street, the forum with a public place and the 
like, still it would in any case exceed what Hardy allows himself. This may 
account for some of his omissions as compared with Shakespeare. 

His scenarium includes the house of Coriolanus and the forum at Rome, the 
house of Coriolanus and the house of Amfidius at Antium, the Volscian camp near 
Rome, the council-hall at Antium, and in addition to these an indeterminate spot 
where Coriolanus soliloquises after his expulsion. There is no room for Corioli, 
and this may be why Hardy begins somewhat later than Shakespeare with the 
collision between the hero and the people, and gets as far as the banishment by 
the end of the first act. In the second, Marcius leaves Rome, presents himself 
to Amfidius, and obtains the leadership of the Volscians. The third portrays the 
panic of the Romans and the reception of their embassage by Coriolanus. In the 
fourth, the Roman ladies make ready to accompany Volumnia on her mission, 
Amfidius schemes to use all Coriolanus’ faults for his destruction, Volumnia arrives 
in the camp and makes her petition, which her son at length grants, though he 
foresees the result. The fifth is occupied with his murder in the Senate House at 
Antium, and concludes with his mother’s reception of the news. 

Thus the sequence and selection of episodes are much the same in the two 
tragedies, except that Hardy, perhaps, as I have said, owing to the exigencies of 
his decorative system, does not begin till the exploit at Corioli is over, and adds, 
as he could do so by using once more Coriolanus’ house in Rome, the final scene 
with Volumnia. Otherwise the scaffolding of the plays is very similar, and it is 
because both follow closely the excellent guidance of Plutarch. But it is interesting 
also to note that some of their additions are similar, for when they were inde- 
pendently made, it shows how readily Plutarch’s narrative suggested such supple- 
ments. Thus, as in Shakespeare, but not as in Plutarch, Volumnia counsels her 
son to bow his pride before the people, and he, though in the end consenting, at 
first refuses. 

‘Volumnie. Voicy le jour fatal qui te donne (mon fils) 
Par une humilité tes hayneurs deconfits; 
Tu vaincras, endurant, la fiere ingratitude 
Et le rancceur malin de ceste multitude. 
Tu charmes son courroux d’une submission: 
Helas! ne vueille donc croire 4 ta passion. 
Cede pour un moment, et la voila contente, 
Et tu accoiseras une horrible tourmente, 
Que Rome divisée ébranle 4 ton sujet: 
La pieté ne peut avoir plus bel objet, 
Et faire mieux paroistre a |’endroit d’une mere, 
A l’endroit du pais, qu’escoutant ma priere. 


724 APPENDIX 


Coriolan. Madame, on me verroit mille morts endurer, 
Plust6t que suppliant sa grace procurer, 
Plustét qu’un peuple vil 4 bon tiltre se vante 
D’avoir en mon courage imprimé |’épouvante, 
Que ceux qui me devroient recognoistre seigneur, 
Se prévallent sur moy du plus petit honneur: 
Moy, fléchir le genoiiil devant une commune! 
Non, je ne le veux faire, et ne crains sa rancune.’ 


Thus Coriolanus, again as in Shakespeare, but not as in Plutarch, accepts his 
banishment as a calamity to those that inflict it. 


‘Je luy obeirai, ouy ouy, je mettrai soin 
De quitter ces ingrats plustét qu’ils n’ont besoin.’ 


Thus the machinations of Amfidius before the final cause of offense are amplified 
far beyond the limits of Plutarch, and these are in part excused by his previous 
rivalry with Coriolanus, which, as in Shakespeare, is made ever so much more 
personal and graphic. 


‘Un esperon d’honneur cent fois nous a conduits, 

Aveugles de fureur, 4 ces termes reduits 

De sentre-deffier [s’ entre-défier] au front de chaque armée, 
Vouloir mourir, ou seul vaincre de renommée.’ 


In short, though Hardy’s drama, as compared with Shakespeare’s, is a work of 
talent as compared with a work of genius, it shows that the Life had in it the mate- 
rial for a tragedy already rough-dressed, with indications, obvious to a practised 
playwright, of some of the processes that still were needed. 


S. Leg (Jefferson Press Sh.: Introd., p. xiii.): Hardy was a voluminous and popular 
playwright who had, like Shakespeare, begun his career as an actor. Although 
he interpreted Senecan principles of dramatic art with freedom, he respected the 
classical temper and most of the classical canons. In the case of Coriolan he 
observed the unity of action by opening the scene with the banishment of the hero 
and by strictly confining the succeeding episode to the events issuing in his death. 
The monologues of Coriolanus and Volumnia fill most of Hardy’s pages, and the 
chorus of Roman citizens hardly relieves the monotonous effect. Hardy never 
rises to the level of tragic passion, but his fluent pen always had at command an 
ample store of stilted dignity. The simplicity of the tragic motive with its filial 
sentiment well harmonised with French ideals of classical drama and with the 
French domestic temperament. For more than two centuries the seed which Hardy 
had sown fructified, and no less than three and twenty tragedies on the subject 
blossomed since Hardy’s day in the French theatres. The later French dramatists 
liberally revised the simple plot and greatly developed the female interest. Corio- 
lanus’ wife in some of the French tragedies acquires a prominence almost equal 
to that of her husband or her mother-in-law, and at times her influence is shared 
or disputed by the hero’s mistress or daughter or sister. But despite the occasional 
complications of later French ingenuity it is the singleness of interest attaching to 
Coriolanus’ relation with his mother which chiefly sustained the tragic fable in 
the stream of French drama. 


DRAMATIC VERSIONS—FRIEDLANDER—LEE 725 


It may be no more than a fortuitous coincidence that Shakespeare took up the 
dramatic parable just after its first enunciation in Paris; yet it is difficult to deny 
the possibility that some mysterious affinity or influence drew his attention, almost 
contemporaneously with the French playwright Hardy, to a dramatic theme whose 
main characteristic was a severe classical simplicity. At first sight the topic 
seemed to offer few opportunities or attractions to a dramatist whose immediately 
preceding and succeeding achievement evinced a predominant sympathy with 
stories instinct with emotional subtlety and romantic temper. Whether or no 
Shakespeare knew aught of Hardy’s experiment, his triumphant treatment in 
the plenitude of his strength of a statuesque classical episode (without sub- 
stantial variation of its tenour) is a striking testimony to the versatility of his 
genius. 


M. FRIEDLANDER (Jahrbuch, xxxvii, p. 97): On the subject of Coriolanus operas 
were composed by: Cavalli, Parma, 1660; Perti, Venice, 1683; Polarolo, Venice, 
1698; Cattani, Pisa, 1700; Caldara, Vienna, 1717; Ariosti, London, 1723; Daniel 
Gottlob Treu, Breslau, 1726; Jomelli, Rome, 1744; Pulli, Naples, 1745; Carl Hein- 
rich Graun, Berlin, 1750; Lavigna, Parma, 1806; Niccolini, Milan, 1809; Radicati, 
1810(?). It seems that none of these libretti are based upon Shakespeare’s work; 
more likely might they have proceeded from the Graunischen Werke, the text 
whereof was due to Frederick the Great. In 1802 Heinrich von Collin wrote a 
tragedy under the influence of Shakespeare, which two years later was put in print 
in Berlin. But Collin falsified and mangled his source of inspiration, since he did 
not know Shakespeare’s drama.’ For the first performance of this work, which 
took place at the Vienna Burgtheater, Abbe Stadler had arranged entre-act music 
from themes out of Mozart’s Idomeneo. In 1807 Beethoven, who had heard this 
music, determined to write an Overture to Collin’s Tragedy. In March of that 
year this had its first performance, and in January, 1808, appeared in print as 
Opus 62. Richard Wagner has made use of the all-inspiring theme, Beethoven 
and Shakespeare, as the motive of his Essay on Beethoven (Gesammelie Werke, 
ix, pp. 129 et seq.). Be it further recorded that an Overture and accompanying 
music for Shakespeare’s Coriolanus was produced by Frederick Ludwig Seidel in 
1811 at the Berliner Koniglichen National Theater, and that 60 to 70 years later 
Friederich Lux set to music a scene from the drama. 


S. LEE (Jefferson Press Sh.: Introd., p. xxxviii, foot-note): After both Shake- 
speare and Hardy had passed away the Spanish dramatist, Calderon, produced 
a dramatic fantasia on the theme of Coriolanus which is classed among his Armas 
de la Hermosura (‘Signs of Beauty’). It is a confused adaptation of Livy’s 
legendary annals of early Rome. Coriolanus is one of Romulus’ generals, and his 
wife, Veturia, is a ravished Sabine. Calderon’s play seems to stand alone in 
Spanish literature. [There is some confusion here. Las Armas de la Hermosura 
is the title of Calderon’s drama; and it may be translated the Arms of Beauty, 
not ‘Signs.’ Ticknor (History of Spanish Literature) refers to the play in one or 
two foot-notes, but does not give any date of composition. Calderon began writing 
for the stage in 1635 and, on his entrance to a religious order in 1650, ceased 
writing secular dramas; between these dates, probably about 1640, this dramatic 
fantasia was composed.—Eb.] 


‘For a full account of Collin’s Coriolan, see Jahrbuch, xli, pp. 22-44. 


726 APPENDIX 


STAGE HISTORY 


Corer, in his History of English Dramatic Poetry and the Stage (i, 430, foot- 
note), quotes a long manuscript Elegy on Richard Barbage written soon after his 
death in March, 1619-20, mentioning four of the characters acted by him, viz.: 
Hamlet, Hieronimo, Lear, and Othello. In his New Particulars Regarding Shake- 
speare, published five years later, Collier says (p. 27): ‘Some time after the pub- 
lication of my book the late Mr. Heber showed me a MS. of the same Elegy in 
his possession, . . . but it did not furnish any additional information regarding 
the many parts Barbage had sustained. I have since met with a third copy of 
the same Elegy, in which the list of characters is enlarged from four to no fewer 
than twenty, of which twelve are in plays by Shakespeare, viz.: Hamlet, Romeo, 
the Prince of Wales, Henry V, Richard III, Macbeth, Brutus, Coriolanus, Shylock, 
Lear, Pericles, and Othello. The other eight characters are in dramatic produc- 
tions by various authors.’ 

The lines directly referring to Coriolanus are: 


‘Brutus and Marcius henceforth must be dumb 
For ne’er thy like upon our stage shall come.’ 


This is, then, our earliest reference to a performance of Shakespeare’s Tragedy. 


[The following record of performances of Coriolanus is from Genest.] 


Date. Theatre. Cast. 
1720, Dec. 26. Lincoln’s Inn Fields. Coriolanus, perhaps Quin. 
0721, Oct: 31. s ef (Cast not given.) 
1754, Nov. 11. Drury Lane. Coriolanus=Mossop; Tullus Aufidius= 
(First time.) Howard; Volumnia=Mrs Pritchard; 


Virgilia=Mrs Davies. (Coriolanus 
was acted about nine times.) Mossop 
taised his reputation in this char- 
acter; it is probable that he would 
not have had the luck of having this 
play brought out with expense, but 
that Garrick, who was a quick gen- 
eral, was eager to get the start of the 
rival theatre, where it was in prep- 
aration with infinite pomp and splen- 
dour. The very idea of a triumphal 
procession at C. G. struck terror to 
the whole host of Drury, however big 
they looked and strutted on common 
occasions (Wilkinson). 
1754, Dec. 10. Covent Garden. Coriolanus =Sheridan; Tullus=Ryan; - 
(First time.) Veturia= Mrs Woffington; Volumnia 
=Mrs Bellamy. (Acted eight or 
nine times. This play is taken from 
Shakespeare and Thomson; the al- 
teration is, with much probability, 
attributed to Sheridan, but it is pub- 
lished without his name.) 


STAGE HISTORY 727 


Date. Theatre. 
1758, Nov. 2 and 3. Covent Garden. 


1750, Feb. 3. ce ao 
1765, Feb. 18. e G 


1789, Feb. 7. Drury Lane. 
1804, May 209. es 
1806, Nov. 3. Covent Garden. 
1806, Dec. 5. oe “ 
1807, Oct. 26. - < 


T4 (T4 


TED, Dec. 14,17, 
10, 21, 23. 
1812, May 5, 9; 
June 22. 
1812, Dec. 26. 
1813, June 2; Covent Garden. 
July 13. 
1813, Dec. 3. s es 
1814, Jan. 15, 22, 
25; Feb. 2, 
14, 16; 
May 18; 
Nov. 22; 
Decors. 
1815, May 1, 153 
Oct. 30. 
1816, Nov. 19, 28; 
Dec. 19. 
1817, April 26; es f 
May to. 
1817, May 23. 
1817, June 23. 


1819, Jan. ro. 


1819, Nov. 29, 30; Covent Garden. 
Dec. 1. 


Theatre Royal, Bath. 


Theatre Royal, Bath. 


Cast. 

Coriolanus = Smith; 
Hamilton. 

Volumnia=Mrs Vincent. 

Coriolanus =Smith; Tallus = Clarke; 

Veturia=Mrs Bellamy; Volumnia= 
Miss Macklin. 

Coriolanus =Kemble; Volumnia=Mrs 
Siddons. (This was the first perform- 
ance of Kemble’s alteration.) 

Coriolanus = Cooke; Tullus = Ray- 
mond; Voluwmnia=Mrs Powell. 
(Cooke never acted Coriolanus a 
second time in London.) 

Coriolanus=Kemble; Tullus=Pope; 
Menenius=Munden; Volumnia= 
Mrs Siddons; Virgilia=Miss Brun- 
ton. 

(Same cast as Nov. 3.) 

(No cast given, but doubtless same as 
above.) 

Coriolanus =Kemble; Volumnia=Mrs 
Siddons. 

Coriolanus = Kemble; Volumnia=Mrs 
Siddons. 

Coriolanus =Kemble; Volumnia=Mrs 
Weston. 

Coriolanus = Young. 


Veturia = Mrs 


Coriolanus =Conway; Volumnia=Mrs 
Powell. 
Coriolanus = Kemble. 


Coriolanus = Kemble. 
Coriolanus = Kemble. 


Coriolanus = Kemble; Volumnia=Mrs 
Faucit. 

Coriolanus = Kemble. 

Coriolanus=Kemble. (His last ap- 
pearance on the stage.) 

Coriolanus = Conway; Volumnia= Miss 
Penley. 

Coriolanus=Macready. (First time.) 


728 APPENDIX 


Date. Theatre. Cast. 

1820, Jan. 4. Drury Lane. Coriolanus =Kean; Tullus =S. Penley; 
Volumnia=Mrs Glover. (A revival 
of the Tragedy: ‘it is the manager’s 
intention to restore the text of 
Shakespeare, with omissions only’— 
such being his intention, he acted 
very inconsistently in inserting in 
the play-bill 6 names, which Kemble 
had given to the inferior characters, 
and of which Shakespeare never 
dreamt. Kean ought not to have 
attempted Coriolanus—his figure 
totally disqualified him for the part.) 


1820, Dec. 18,19. Covent Garden. Coriolanus =Vandenhoff; Volumnia= 
Mrs Bunn. 
1821, Jan. t. Drury Lane. Coriolanus = Wallack; Tullus = Cooper; 


Volumnia=Mrs Egerton; Virgilia= 
Miss Chester. 


1821, Jan. 13. Theatre Royal, Bath. Coriolanus=Conway; Volumnia=Mrs 
Weston. 

1824, June 14. Drury Lane. Coriolanus=Macready; Volumnia= 
Mrs Bunn. 

1848, Oct. 27. Sadler’s Wells. Coriolanus=Phelps; Volumnia=Miss 
Glyn. 

1851, Jan. 6. Drury Lane. Coriolanus = J. Anderson. 

1852, May. Britannia Theatre. Coriolanus = J. Anderson. 

1853, May. Standard Theatre. Coriolanus = J. Anderson. 


Genest’s record ceases with the year 1830; the latter dates and casts are supplied 
from the Life of Phelps, by J. M. Phelps, and W. Forbes-Robertson; and from the 
Stage History of the play in the Henry Irving Shakespeare. Macready retained 
Coriolanus in his repertoire from his first appearance in the part in 1819 until his 
retirement from the stage in 1851. IF. R. Benson produced the play at the Comedy 
Theatre in February, 1901. The latest production of Coriolanus was made by 
Henry Irving at the Lyceum in April, 1901. 

The first performance of Coriolanus in America took place at the Southwark 
Theatre in Philadelphia, on June 3, 1796, as recorded by Seilhamer. The part of 
Coriolanus was taken by Moreton, and that of Volumnia by Mrs Whitlock, a younger 
sister of Mrs Siddons. 

The following record of performances is from T. A. Brown’s History of the New 
York Stage, and from G. C. D. Odell’s Annals of the New York Stage: 


Date. Theatre. Cast. 
1799, June 3. Park Theatre. Coriolanus=Cooper; Volumnia=Mrs 
Barrett. 
1806, Nov. 16. 4 < Coriolanus=Cooper; Volumnia=Mrs 


Villiers; Virgilia=Mrs Darley. 
1808, Nov. 28. i § Coriolanus = Cooper. 


Date. 
1810, May 25. 


1811, April 19. 
1818, Sept. 9. 

1810, Feb. 23. 
1821, May 21. 


STAGE HISTORY 729 


Theatre. 


Park Theatre. 


Cast. 
Coriolanus=Cooper; Volumnia=Mrs 
Twaits. 
Coriolanus = Cooper. 
Coriolanus = J. W. Wallack. 
Coriolanus =J. W. Wallack. 
Coriolanus =H. Wallack. 


Coriolanus = Forrest. 

Coriolanus = Forrest; 
Cushman. 

Coriolanus = Vandenhoff. 


1832, May 9. : ee 
1838, Jan. 10. cs He Volumnia=C. 


1838, Sept. 11 National Theatre. 


1844, Sept. 7. Park Theatre. Coriolanus=J. Anderson; Volumnia= 
Miss Maywood. 

1849, Oct. 2. Bowery Theatre. Coriolanus = Hamblin; Volumnia=Mrs 
Shaw. 

1852, June 7. < ss Coriolanus =Hamblin; Aufidius =E. 


Eddy; Volumnia=Mrs Grattan. 


1856, Oct. 20. Old Broadway Coriolanus = Forrest. 
Theatre. 
New Bowery Theatre. Coriolanus=E. Eddy; Tullus=G. 
Boniface; Volumnia=Mrs Farren. 


Coriolanus = Forrest; Tullus =Shewell; 


1862, May 30. 


1863, Nov. 2,3,5, Niblo’s Garden. 


6, 9, 10, Cominius= McCullough; Volumnia 
OBS oop, Ponisi. 

1864, Sept. 5 (and se ie Coriolanus=Forrest; Tullus=McCul- 
eight fol- lough. 
lowing 
nights); 
Oct. 8. 


Coriolanus =McCullough; Volumnia= 
Katherine Rogers. 

Cortolanus =L. Barnay. 

Coriolanus=Salvini. (This was his 
first appearance in the character.) 


1878, Dec. 16. Grand Opera House. 

Bowery Theatre. 

Metropolitan Opera 
House. 


1883, Jan. 3. 
1886, Oct. 30. 


[John McCullough, owing to mental derangement, retired from the stage in 1885, 
and, apart from the above single performance by Salvini, he has had no successor 
in the part. 

Edwin Booth, in his Memoir of his father, says: ‘Once, after reading Coriolanus 
to me until far into the morning, he spoke of the marvelous acting of Edmund 
Kean—the only time he ever indulged me with even a glimpse of his reminiscences. 
The reading of Coriolanus was superb; but to my eager question, ‘Why don’t 
you act that part?’ he replied, ‘Nonsense! ’I'would seem absurd for one of my 
inches to utter such boastful speeches. I cannot look Coriolanus.’? And in a 
letter to Miss Emma Cary Edwin Booth says: ‘Forrest has lately acted Coriolanus 
both here and in Boston. It has never been very successful on the stage; I have 
never studied the character, nor should I feel at home in it; with my physique 
Coriolanus would appear more of a boaster than a man of deeds, I fear.’ (Edwina 
B. Grossmann: Edwin Booth, p. 167.)—Ep.] 


730 APPENDIX 


ACTORS’ INTERPRETATIONS 
Joun Partie KeMBLE 


W. Winter (Sh. on the Stage, iii, 204): John Philip Kemble made a stage 
version of the tragedy, basing it on the Sheridan-Thomson admixture; produced it 
at Drury Lane, February 7, 1789, and appeared for the first time as Coriolanus in 
association with Mrs Siddons as Volumnia. Kemble’s Coriolanus was considered 
his grandest impersonation. He retained the part in his repertory to the end of 
his career, acting it, with great power and effect, on the night of his final retire- 
ment from the stage, June 23, 1817... . 

Kemble’s scenic setting of Cortolanus was characterized by classical scholar- 
ship and tasteful opulence. The Rome exhibited was that of a much later 
date than the Rome of the time of Coriolanus, when the Augustan splendor 
of that city had not yet arrived. Among the objects shown was the Arch of 
Constantine, Trajan’s Column, and the Coliseum, things that Coriolanus never 
saw. 

Kemble’s impersonation of Coriolanus evidently was an histrionic marvel. 
Many judges of his time concurred in commending it, almost to extravagance, but 
usually in general terms. No recorder (as far as I can ascertain) has described 
it fully—with the particularity of specification which such a masterpiece deserved. 
The nature of Kemble’s excellence in this part is, however, to a slight extent 
indicated by some of the written encomium: it is more largely left to be inferred 
from what is said of his appearance, method, temperament, and quality, as sig- 
nified in description of his acting in other parts, or of himself, in private life. The 
most dominant of his characteristics was intrinsic dignity. His figure was tall 
and impressive, his demeanor majestic, his utterance (though his voice, while 
deep, was not strong) was clear, sonorous, and sympathetic. 

[The same may likewise, unfortunately, be said of all the accounts of Mrs 
Siddons’s Volumnia. Both Boaden and Campbell merely speak of the general 
excellence, and remarkable power of her interpretation —ED.] 


W. C. Macreapy 


MacreEapy (p. 147): The success of Richard would in ordinary course necessitate 
the trial of other leading characters. Coriolanus was the next selected by the 
managers. In this I stood at disadvantage, with the recollection of Kemble still 
fresh in the memory of the play-going public; but with a full consciousness of the 
difficulty of my task, I went to work. To add dignity and grace to my deport- 
ment I studied under D’Egville the various attitudes from the antique, and prac- 
ticed the more stately walk which was enforced by the peculiarity of their dress on 
the gens togata. I allowed myself no leisure, intent on mastering the patrician’s 
outward bearing, and under that giving full vent to the unbridled passion of the 
man. My reception (Nov. 29th, 1819) was that of an acknowledged favorite, and 
the applause throughout the play and at its close exceeded my most ambitious 
hopes. 

Among the flattering testimonies offered me on this second venture, none were 
held by me in equal esteem with the graceful sonnet published in the Literary 
Gazette by Barry Cornwall: 


ACTORS’ INTERPRETATIONS rat 


“MR MACREADY IN CORIOLANUS 

‘“This is the noblest Roman of them all”; 

And he shall wear his victor’s crown, and stand 

Distinct amidst the genius of the land, 

And lift his head aloft while others fall. 

He hath not bowed him to the vulgar call, 

Nor bid his countenance shine obsequious, bland, 

But let his dark eye keep its high command, 

And gather’d ‘from the few’ his coronal. 

Yet unassuming hath he won his way; 

And therefore fit to breathe the lines of him 

Who gayly, once, beside the Avon river, 

Shaped the great verse that lives, and shall live forever. 

But he now revels in eternal day, 

Peerless amongst the earth-born cherubim.’ 


From the Morning Herald: ‘Mr Macready by his performance of Coriolanus 
last night has again won the first honors of the stage. The previous development 
of this great performer’s genius in Richard stripped his last night’s enterprise of 
all its peril and much of its aspiring. . . . We have merely room to state that in 
the scenes where he consents, at the entreaty of his mother, to go back and con- 
ciliate the incensed people, and where he gives vent to his scorn and defiance of 
the tribunes, he gave proofs of variety, flexibility, and power rarely equalled and 
absolutely unexcelled. . . . The quarrel with Aufidius, particularly that passage 
in which Kemble was so fine—the retort of ‘‘Boy”—produced acclamation. . . . 
There is one grand point in which no other living actor but Mr Macready can 
approach Kemble—we mean the magic power of imposing an illusive image of 
physical grandeur upon the very sense of the beholder merely by some slight 
change of attitude or action. From the death of Coriolanus to the fall of the 
curtain the house resounded with applause, and in the pit the waving of hats was 
universal. Mr Egerton came on to announce the next performance, but was 
obliged to give way for a general cry of Macready. He did accordingly make 
his appearance, was received with the liveliest expressions of kindness by the 
audience, and announced the repetition of Coriolanus on Wednesday.’ 


Epwin FORREST 


ALGER (p. 761): The features and contour of the honest, imperious, fiery, 
scornful, and heroic Coriolanus, as impersonated by Forrest with immense solidity 
and distinctness, were simple but grand in their colossal and unwavering relief. 
Kemble had been celebrated in this réle. He played it as if he were a symmetrical 
statue cut out of cold steel and set in motion by some precise mechanical action. 
Forrest added to this a blood that seemed to flame through him and a voice whose 
ponderous syllables pulsated with fire. Stern virtue, ambition, deep tenderness, 
magnanimity, transcendent daring, and pride and scorn—the man as soldier and 
hero in uncorrupt sincerity and haughty defiance of everything wrong or mean— 
these were the favorite attributes which Forrest met in Coriolanus, and absorbed 
as by an electric affinity, and made the people recognize with applauding enthusi- 
asm. He might well utter as his own the words of his part to Volumnia, 

‘Would you have me 
False to my nature? Rather say, I play 
The man I am.’ 


732 APPENDIX 


What unconsciously delighted Forrest in Coriolanus, and what he represented 
with consummate felicity and force of nature, was that his aristocracy was of 
the true democratic type; that is, it rested on a consciousness of intrinsic per- 
sonal worth and superiority, not on conventional privilege and prescription. He 
loathed and launched his scorching invectives against the commonalty not because 
they were plebeians and he was a patrician, but because of the revolting opposition 
of their baseness to his loftiness, of their sycophancy to his pride, of their treacher- 
ous fickleness to his adamantine steadfastness. As an antique Roman he had the 
resentful haughtiness of his social caste, but morally as an individual his disdain 
and sarcasm were based on the contrast of intrinsically noble qualities in himself 
to the contemptible qualities he saw predominating in those beneath him. And 
although this is far removed from the beautiful bearing of a spiritually purified 
and perfected manhood, yet there is in it a certain relative historical justification, 
utility, and even glory, entirely congenial to the honest vernacular fervor of 
Forrests 

The signalizing memorable mark of the Coriolanus impersonated by Forrest 
was the gigantic grandeur of his scale of being and consciousness. He revealed 
this in his stand and port and moving and look and voice. The manner in which 
he did it was no result of critical analysis, but was intuitive with him, given to 
him by nature and inspiration. He exhibited a gravitating solidity of person, a 
length of lines, a slowness of curves, an immensity of orbit, a reverberating sonority 
of tone, which illustrated the man who, as Menenius said, ‘wanted nothing of a 
god but eternity, and a heaven to throne in.’ They went far to justify the amaz- 
ing descriptions given in the play itself of the impressions produced by him on 
those who approached him. 

When, after his peerless feats in battle, the army and its leaders would idolize 
him with praises, crown him with garlands, and load him with spoils, he felt his 
deeds to be their own sufficient pay, and waved all the rewards peremptorily aside 
with a mien as imposing as if some god 


‘Were slily crept into his human powers 
And gave him noble posture.’ 


Entering the capital in triumph, the vast and steady imperiality of his attitude, 
the tremendous weight of his slightest inclination, as though the whole earth 
were the pedestal-slab on which he stood, drew, and fascinated all gaze. 


‘Matrons flung gloves, 
Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchiefs, 
Upon him as he passed; the nobles bended 
As to Jove’s statue; and the commons made 
A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts.’ 


The rare and exalted use of such acting as this is that it invites the audience to 
lift their eyes above the vulgar pettinesses to which they are accustomed and extend 
their souls with a superior conception of the dignity of human nature and of the 
mysterious meanings latent in it. 

The Coriolanus of Forrest was a marble apotheosis of heroic strength, pride, 
and scorn. His moral glory was that he asserted himself on the solid grounds of 
conscious truth, justice, and merit, and not, as popular demagogues and the 
selfish members of the patrician class do, on hollow grounds of assumption, trick- 
ery, and spoliating fraud. There was great beauty, too, in his reverential love for 


ACTORS’ INTERPRETATIONS 733 


his mother, his tender love for his wife, his hearty love for his friend, and his mag- 
nanimous incapacity for any recognized littleness of soul or of deed. The weight 
and might of his spirit could give away victories and confer favors, but could not 
steal a laurel or endure flattery. His fatal defect was that he did not know the 
spirit of forgiveness, and was utterly incompetent to self-renunciation. He had 
the repulsive and fatal fault of a crude, harsh, revengeful temper, that clothed his 
gigantic indirect egotism in the glorifying disguise of justice and sacrificed even 
his country to his personal passion. Just and true at the roots, his virtues grew 
insane from pride. Wrath destroyed his equilibrium, and belched his grandeur 
and his life away in incontinent insolence of expression. Like all the favorite 
characters of Forrest, however, he was no starveling fed on verbality and cere- 
mony, no pygmy imitator or empty conformist, but one who lived in rich power 
from his own original centres and let his qualities honestly out with democratic 
sincerity of self-assertion. 


SAMUEL PHELPS 


Mortey (p. 214): Mr Phelps has opened the campaign with two plays of 
Shakespeare—As You Like It and Coriolanus. The former of these we have not 
yet seen, but of the Coriolanus we can speak from our own knowledge. Here as 
ever the first mention is due to the whole truth and harmony of the representation. 
The actors are all in accord together; and although the company includes few 
bright particular stars, yet each does justice to the dignity of his profession. Mr 
Barrett is a genial and genuine Menenius Agrippa; Mr Hermann Vezin, a new 
member of the company, who, we believe, had earned honours as first tragedian 
in a transpontine house, is a discreet and serious Aufidius, who mars nothing by 
errors of commission, and errs only on the hopeful side by under-acting of his part. 
The Roman mob, admirably grouped and disciplined, cannot possibly be repre- 
sented by a better First Citizen than Mr Lewis Ball. 

The little part of the household friend and gossip of the women in the hero’s 
household is spoken delightfully by Mrs Marston. Miss Kate Saxon, an intelli- 
gent actress, who supplies one of the losses of the company, delivers with all due 
simplicity the few sentences that fall to her lot as the wife of Coriolanus, and 
expresses quietly by her stage bearing the modest, faithful gentleness that follows, 
strong in love, the warrior’s career. As the proud mother of the prouder son, Miss 
Atkinson also labours her best, but she does not achieve her best. When she 
desires with face and gesture to express scorn, it not seldom happens that she fails 
to suggest more than intensity of spite. For this reason her Volumnia is wanting 
in some of the dignity with which the character has been invested by the poet. 
It is a hard trial, no doubt, to measure the expression of a Roman mother’s pride 
with the show of pride that a man can put into the part of Coriolanus. Pride, 
after all, is not a woman’s passion, for what passes by the name is often vanity. 

The pride of Coriolanus is heroic, and is a man’s pride, from which vanity is 
altogether absent. His own praises are irksome in his ears. That which he is, 
he is; and it is little in his simple estimation of himself, for he esteems himself by 
what he feels the power of becoming. Upon comparisons between himself and the 
base multitude he never wastes a thought. It matters not at what level other 
men are content to dwell; his mind abides on its own heights. Thus when Caius 
Marcius in the camp, beset with irksome praises that he is compelled to hear, is 
named Coriolanus, and there is added to this honour that exhortation, ‘Bear the 
addition nobly ever,’ Mr Phelps represents him stirred by the warning into a large 


734 APPENDIX 


sense of what is in his soul, and lifted upon tiptoe by his soaring thought. The 
same action gives grandeur to the words, 


‘I’d rather be their servant in my way 
Than sway with them in theirs,’ 


and is afterwards more than once used, not ostentatiously, and never without 
giving the emphasis intended. 

As in the action of the piece that pomp of processions with the constant noise 
of drum and trumpet which in the good old days of the drama formed a prominent 
part of the play is subdued, and made to follow instead of leading the march of 
the poem, so in the action of Coriolanus himself it is remembered that heroic pride 
is self-contained. The passion least to be concealed by it is impatience of subjec- 
tion to the shifting voices of the mob. ‘The pride of Coriolanus is a virtue over- 
grown, and is associated with the utmost purity and tenderness of home affections; 
next to hislove of home. The two qualities belong naturally to the same mind, and 
in the end of this play we are left unable to determine which feeling has prevailed. 
It is meant, doubtless, to be questionable whether love would have conquered 
had not the mother made her son—as Mr Phelps does not forget to mark very 
distinctly—flinch at such a pleading as, 


‘Say, my request’s unjust, 
And spurn me back: but, if it be not so, 
Thou art not honest.’ 


The expulsion of Coriolanus from Rome is presented in a capital stage picture 
by the grouping of the mob, and here the actor’s reading of his part is marked very 
distinctly. He had been wrung by the urgency of his friends and the commands 
of his mother to attempt to flatter into quiet the excited mob. The attempt to 
do this is presented with all signs of suppressed passion, and impatient, yet in 
itself almost heroic, endurance of what is really intense torture. When the tri- 
bune calls Coriolanus traitor, he recoils as from a blow, and lets his wrath have 
way. But when the mob raising their staves expel him from the city, he mounts 
proudly the steps from which as from his mental height he looks down on them, 
and he is lord of himself, lord as he feels of Rome. With a sublimity of disdain 
he retorts on them that ‘I banish you’ which Edmund Kean erred in delivering 
with an ungovernable passion. 

The scenic effect of the view of Antium by the light of the rising moon, when 
the banished Coriolanus haunts the door of Aufidius, his deadly enemy, is con- 
trived to give colour to the poetry. But there is no scene in the play more im- 
pressive to the eye than the succeeding picture of the muffled figure of Coriolanus 
seated by the glowing embers of the brazier that represents his enemy’s hearth. 
It is one of the omissions of Mr Vezin that he makes no sign whatever when the 
stranger-guest discloses his name, though he had vowed that 


‘Where I find him, were it 
At home, upon my brother’s guard, even there, 
Against the hospitable canon, would I 
Wash my fierce hand in his heart.’ 


If nothing more were to be done, hands tightly clenched at the hearing of the 
name, slowly relaxing till they are held out in friendship with the words, 


ACTORS’ INTERPRETATIONS 735 


“O Marcius, Marcius, 
Each word thou has spoke hath weeded from my heart 
A root of ancient envy,’ 


would be better than absolute inaction. 

We must not dwell much longer upon this performance. Let us add only that 
the meaning of the heroic close furnished by Shakespeare to the play is well 
brought out at Sadler’s Wells. The lofty pride that when defied by Rome had 
defied Rome herself, and was to set a foot upon the neck of the world’s ruler, had, 
after painful struggle, knelt at the voice of a mother, yielding nobly when to yield 
was dangerous, if not mortal. When Coriolanus has attained his greatest height, 
Aufidius, fallen to his lowest, has sunk into a dastardly chief of assassins. All 
hearts are thus secured for sympathy with the pride with which, as Mr Phelps 
shows us, the hero resents the taunt of an enemy basely triumphant. His whole 
frame enlarges, and his hands press on the expanding breast as he cries 


‘Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart, 
Too great for what contains it!’ 


And so at last the loftiness of his disdain carries all sympathies with it when he 
whets the swords of the conspirators by telling them 


‘How, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I 
Fluttered your Volsces in Corioli: 
Alone I did it—Boy!”’ 


R. F. BENSON 


R. Dicks (p. 98): Hitherto I had had no opportunity of seeing Coriolanus 
on the stage, but during this Spring there were to be two productions of the tragedy. 
The first of these was by R. F. Benson at the Comedy Theatre, during February, 
and in that I was exceedingly disappointed. J had not expected Benson to be an 
ideal Caius Marcius (with his personality that was hardly possible), but I was 
surprised to find his conception both of the character and of the play so completely 
unlike mine. The work is a difficult one to arrange for representation—it is very 
long and needs extensive compression, and, although much can be easily spared, 
a good deal that we would gladly keep has also to be sacrificed. Still, it has 
always appeared to me that of Coriolanus a version could be arranged exhilarating, 
full of movement, and appealing strongly to our sympathies. 

As represented at the Comedy the play was often dull, and never for a moment 
did Caius dominate the scene as he does when one studies the play, nor did the 
crowds excite the spectator as they do the reader. Benson was not big enough for 
Caius—not big enough either in personality, in power, or inches, and without a 
convincing Caius we cannot have a successful Coriolanus. Nevertheless, I shalh 
always look back upon two performances in this representation with the utmost 
satisfaction, and I place them amongst my happiest remembrances. The first of 
these was the Volumnia of Genevieve Ward, than which I can imagine nothing 
finer—she was the ideal embodiment of the Roman mother who loved her son 
beyond everything in the world, except only her country. Splendid was her 
portrayal of each phase of the character, its pride, its anger, its love, and its despair. 
The Sicinius Velutus of Oscar Asche was in its way almost equally good—strong, 
coarse-minded, selfish and cunning, he represented to perfection the contemptible 


736 APPENDIX 


creature the author intended. I can still see him, after the expulsion of Coriolanus, 
seated on a stone in the Roman street, contentedly peeling and eating an orange. 
Lyall Swete was a good Menenius, Brydone was Aufidius, and Lilian Braith- 
waite, Virgilia. The play was arranged in five acts and twelve scenes. 


Str Henry IRvING 


Symons (p. 57): Shakespeare at the Lyceum is always a magnificent spectacle, 
and Coriolanus, the last Shakespearean revival there, was a magnificent spectacle. 
It is a play made up principally of one character and a crowd, the crowd being a 
sort of moving background, treated in Shakespeare’s large and scornful way. 
A stage crowd at the Lyceum always gives one a sense of exciting movement, and 
this Roman rabble did all that was needed to show off the almost solitary splendour 
of Coriolanus. He is the proudest man in Shakespeare, and Sir Henry Irving is 
at his best when he embodies pride. His conception of the part was masterly; 
it had imagination, nobility, quietude. With opportunity for ranting in every 
second speech, he never ranted, but played what might well have been a roaring 
part with a kind of gentleness. With every opportunity for extravagant gesture, 
he stood, as the play seemed to foam about him, like a rock against which the 
foam beats. Made up as a kind of Roman Moltke, the lean, thoughtful soldier, 
he spoke throughout with a slow, contemptuous enunciation, as of one only just 
not too lofty to sneer. Restrained in scorn, he kept throughout an attitude of 
disdainful pride, the face, the eyes, set while only his mouth twitched, seeming to 
chew his words, with the disgust of one swallowing a painful morsel. Where other 
actors would have raved, he spoke with bitter humour, a humour that seemed to 
hurt the speaker, the concise, active humour of the soldier, putting his words 
rapidly into deeds. And his pride was an intellectual pride; the weakness of a 
character, but the angry dignity of a temperament. I have never seen Irving so 
restrained, so much an artist, so faithfully interpretative of a masterpiece. Some- 
thing of energy, no doubt, was lacking; but everything was there except the em- 
phasis which I most often wish away in acting. 


BRERETON (ii, 288): Irving’s thirteenth, and last, Shakespearean character at 
the Lyceum was Coriolanus. The revival took place on 15th April, r9or. It sig- 
nalised his return to the theatre after an absence of nearly nine months. As readers 
of this book are aware, he had contemplated the production as far back as the 
year 1882, when he had employed Mr (as he then was) Alma Tadema for the design- 
ing of the scenery and costumes. This artist was responsible for the designs in 
1gor, and the music for the revival was composed by Sir A. C. Mackenzie. Irving 
in short, had not lost the art of stage-production, but his own personality was as 
unsuited for the part of Coriolanus as was that of Miss Ellen Terry to Volumnia. 
There were one or two admirable passages in Irving’s impersonation. In the second 
act, for instance, the contempt which he infused into the line, ‘Weil, mildly be it— 
mildly,’ was remarkable in its concentration. In the last act, the scene where 
Coriolanus is in disguise outside Aufidius’s house, was a fine example of the pro- 
found melancholy which was so marked a feature, when it was necessary, of Irving’s 
acting. But he was not the Roman soldier of tradition any more than Miss Terry 
was the Roman matron. The handling of the stage-crowds was magnificent. 
Coriolanus is not the kind of play which could be expected to have a long run, and 
the thirty-six consecutive performances at the Lyceum, small by comparison with 
Irving’s other Shakespearean revivals, constitute a record for the tragedy. 


ACTORS’ INTERPRETATIONS 737 


R. Dicxrns (p. 98): On the 15th April Irving produced Coriolanus at the Lyceum, 
and I cannot but regret that he did so, for his Coriolanus was not in my judgment 
on the same plane of artistic grandeur as were his other Shakespearean creations. 
I do not think the part is one that could, under the happiest auspices, have ranked 
among his great successes; the character is not a complex psychological study, and, 
although Caius may well be supposed to have possessed a magnetic personality, 
among the vital requisites for portraying the part are a ringing voice and soldierly 
physique. Salvini is the most likely Coriolanus I can think of, but although it is 
difficult to name an ideal actor for the part, there are, I think, several infinitely 
lesser artists than Irving who would have acted the part better. It must, how- 
ever, be remembered that during 1901-2 the great actor was struggling against 
misfortune and illness, and was unfitted to grapple with such an exacting under- 
taking as the portrayal of a long and exhausting new part. It seems doubtful, 
too, whether he was wholly in sympathy with the character. For Caius to interest 
and move an audience the part must surely be approached from the point of view 
of the Patricians, and Irving appeared to view it from the standpoint of the 
Plebeians. He conveyed an idea of his fearlessness, of his pride, and of his superior 
intellect, but he did not present a man who would have been beloved even by his 
fellow nobles. It is needless to say there were numberless touches of rare thought 
throughout the representation, and although the great scene of supplication in 
the last act was strangely ineffective, that with his mother and friends before he 
goes to face the incensed people (Act III, Scene 2 in the printed version) was a 
gem of acting that only Henry Irving could have given us. I did not much like 
the arrangement of the play. Like Benson, Irving cut the whole of the fighting 
scenes before Corioli, and difficult as such scenes are in representation, they are 
in some form necessary to bring vividly before the spectator the vast superiority 
to his companions of Caius as a soldier, and the soundness of his reasons for despis- 
ing the common people. At the Lyceum, however, the omission was doubtless 
inevitable, for Irving’s strength could not have born the strain of such scenes. 
Ellen Terry looked lovely and moved with all her customary grace as Volumnia, 
but she was too young and not in the least like a Roman matron—she was little 
more than Ellen Terry in Roman attire. Barnes as Menenius was disappointing, 
but Tyars was good, and Mabel Hackney looked gentle and pretty. The scenery 
was designed by Alma Tadema, and its beauty may be imagined. 


Tommaso SALVINI 


W. WinTER (Sh. on the Stage, iti, 228): Salvini had never acted Coriolanus before 
he assumed the part in New York. He says, in his Autobiography, that his reason 
for not acting the part in Italy was that the tragedy ‘demands too costly a stage 
setting, and it was impossible to secure in the great number of assistants that 
artistic discipline without which the grandiose easily merges in the ridiculous,’ 
and he adds, with that tiresome patronage and complacent condescension which 
foreigners so frequently bestow on America and Americans, ‘I regret this’ (his 
inability, for the reasons assigned, to present the play in Italy) ‘very much, as my 
compatriots would have given me an unbiassed and intellectual judgment of the 
work.’ Othello and King Lear are plays much more difficult to cast properly than 
Coriolanus is, yet Salvini produced both of them in Italy. It is interesting, how- 
ever, that the illustrious Italian felt constrained to admit that the latter tragedy 
could be better cast, in the subsidiary parts, in this artistically benighted land 
than in the Theatre of Italy, which, being foreign, is, of course, so much superior 


47 


738 APPENDIX 


to ours! Perhaps he deemed it inconsequent how the play was acted here, assum- 
ing that nobody would know the difference. He further remarks that he had been 
attracted to the study of ‘the banished and vindictive hero Coriolanus’ because 
‘I felt that I could divine that character, which resembled my own in some ways— 
not, certainly, in his warlike exploits, but in his susceptibility, in his spurning of 
the arrogance and insolent pretensions of the ignorant masses, and, above all, 
in his filial submissiveness and affection.’ His personation, while not extraordinary 
in comparison with those with which the American Stage was familiar, was thor- 
oughly good. In appearance he was a huge, bearded warrior, more barbarian 
than Roman. He had authority, repose, and cumulative force; it is always a 
comfort to see an actor who can sustain and execute a splendid design, consistently, 
from beginning to end. That Salvini could do, and that, in this case, he did. In 
the first scene with the discontented, clamorous citizens he delivered the harangue 
(‘He that will give good words to thee will flatter,’ etc.) in a moderate tone and 
with almost jocular sarcasm; this, certainly, is not a correct manner, since the 
spirit of the speech is bitter and the utterance denunciatory. In requesting 
clemency and relief for the poor man of Corioli, who ‘used me kindly,’ he paused 
when asked for his name, seemed to weaken from the effect of his wounds, and, 
smiling, smote his forehead and shook his head, as he answered ‘By Jupiter! 
forgot!’ This detail, entirely correct, was extravagantly admired by some of the 
actor’s idolaters; the wonder is that it should have excited any comment. How 
any actor could fail to make a fine effect at that point is not easy to comprehend. 
‘The property of fire is to burn and of water to wet,’ says Touchstone. The 
salutation to Volumnia and Virgilia was spoken with affecting gentleness; the 
salutation to Valeria was omitted. The denunciation of the Roman mob, ‘You 
common cry of curs!’ etc., was uttered with a smile of contempt and with fine 
vigor. In the parting from his family—‘when I am forth, bid me farewell and 
smile,’ etc.—there was deep pathos, as also there was in the outburst of passion, 
‘O mother, mother! what have you done!’ in the scene of submission. The com- 
pany supporting Salvini spoke in English. Aufidius was performed by his son 
Alexander and Virgilia by Viola Allen, who gave a graceful and pleasing personation 
of that slight part. 


TIME ANALYSIS 


DanrEx (Sk. Soc. Trans., 1877-79, p. 183) gives the following analysis of the 
duration of the action: 


Time of this play, eleven days represented on the stage; with intervals. 


Dayar tact sculs Day 6. Act IV, sc. iii. 
Interval. <7, Act. EV..scssiv.andave 
See 2 ACL Leecti at. Interval. 
Interval. t 85 Act LVasce vic 
3. Act i, Scs. 1. to x: Interval. 
Interval. So Ose ANOLE VaSGanvils 
See Amer ACh Ul nscu ts Interval. 
Interval. some TOs. AN CUaVErsca estonia 
e's. Act Ll scr iaxendsot sc: Interval. 
i, in modern editions) Sco Ita ACC AVG SCacvis 
to Act IV, sc. ii. 
Interval. 


THE ENp. 


PLAN OF THE WORK, Etc. 


In this Edition the attempt is made to give, in the shape of TexTuaL Notes, 
on the same page with the Text, all the Various REaprncs of Coriolanus, from the 
Second Folio down to the latest critical Edition of the play; then, as CoMMENTARY, 
follow the Notes which the Editor has thought worthy of insertion, not only for 
the purpose of elucidating the text, but at times as illustrations of the History of 
Shakespearian criticism. In the APPENDIX will be found criticisms and discussions 
which, on the score of length, could not be conveniently included in the Commen- 


tary. 
List oF EpiTions COLLATED IN THE TEXTUAL NOTES 

EES ECONGEOMO fs siaisis cise cles on Sts eee IAC Ee (F.] 
HI CMINTGREOLLO eR Sond «ic certo ee [F;] 
MU ERTLOMIL IE LCOLLO? von oko cho acee ste eb totes s PISA SE [F,] 
CED stots SESS RO EE OA Fe {Q] 
INGEROWE. (Hirst Edition)... cee a6 6o 6 o-oesc seins [Rowe i.] 
INSBROWES (Second Edition). ©... 5s c:0oc0 s+ ¢ onfosrans [Rowe ii.] 
PMODE (PE ITSE HCItION) s5..ve5. «s,ccece bk arte ore Serer el ees [Pope i.] 
AmEOPE (Second Hdition) Kass.< os/tecs ieaae bons date [Pope ii.] 
eRe ORALD. (Pirst Wdition)!\.. soicscese sec a4 leven ee [Theob. i.] 
[HE OBATD (Second Edition)... ... . +. «ces cwiei se - [Theob. ii.] 
SP MPLLANMIER pe ce ojo Oona oe aise ale Oe ae caine tee {Han.] 
AMEN YAGUES TIRUT ON ge tictoee ne ctre diel avars en iar iaate nests [Warb.] 
MMO APES Treats teh epee ccs ave wicca epee ksi omelets wise S [Cap.] 
PREF ORNS ON of. ciate ara sehitererc aise tateyen epics aieabeibe ects [Johns.] 
OTIS ONT ANGLS TEE VEINS te-ci 6,5 in seis'oie Swiss eee [Var. 73] 
WOMNGON AUC OTEEVENS 6 ose ¢ «avis lcie of 6 nats rine eked + [Var. ’78] 
OHINSONCANG STEEVENS ¢ (0'i since users sie eibwecis mais sreeie ae [Var. 85] 
MP PLCR NIN EON ee ere cleric sctnste' sos oo cls ocsis Poe oes pie {Ran.] 
HE MEI ALONE Sent sar acca cust», ra.tn io al pia bua Siow Ome Ole Bs {Mal.] 
ROSH NO TEINS oer 375 Dice c ace-oie al evalciet een eis ete [Steev.] 
MoD LSM OTRMVI NS oie cca. ciel tinise are acs tee alanine ee ate ote [Var. ’o3] 
HE DSR OTE UENS tei re. peoneea cries sli scion sine ow tiene (Var. ’13] 
BOS WEL SmYLALONE Gis cite crcatl arta ce she ae he or at see [Var.] 
SMWEESINGE RS CEITSt ELCILION): yauin sc ecisisiseledeiete nes [Sing. i.] 
COME NT GTEC HiITSE CItION im trae cveersiexscinmele 2 soyaioonrs {Knt. i.] 
epee Ourim Rn: (HITSt ECItON) jus ccs tsscis(ecnsiee testers (Coll. i.] 
SRV EEOINGER (SECON, EAMILION) cece ocs.e's. grare os ete one [Sing. ii.] 
NOME) VCE A (RATS CAH AItLON) yg occ ete sasnsyey cn cdicerarn Bc Fisie saperns © [Dyce i.] 
ee COLImR (Second) EditiON))s 9... 0 caes ais 5 cece [Coll. ii.] 
Lema ALIN ONG erie ey tooues ¢ fontrsan Gents Casa rene lochs do adocte, ys [Sta.] 
Rem Crea VV ITE (RATSE PeAIEIOM) occ isn.6, 010 pusuut.oi' div ayn'e.« n> (Wh. i.] 
CAMBRIDGE (First Edition, W. G. CLarKk and W. A. 

WUARICEREO SOS Ao aleask ig See AC aeRO ERO OS [Cam. i.] 
a Omani VELL (HOMO ditION) a. sates cece als « {Hal.] 
MPPPLS EIGHT LEY trerciniets Miron eis alee more cieivig Gove o.era scious 'ealietsiee [Ktly] 


BS 


739 


1632 
1664 
1685 
1691 
1709 
1714 
1723 
1728 
1733 
1740 
1744 
1747 
1761 
1765 
1773 
1778 
1785 
1787 
1790 
1793 
1803 
1813 
1821 
1826 
1841 
1842 
1856 
1857 
1858 
1860 
1861 


1865 
1865 
1865 


740 APPENDIX 


@) Kure (Second Exdition))-ese ae eer ttre ckernstele {Knt ii.] eer SOS 
AED YCer (Seconds dition) amnesia reer rarer: [Dycent:|/ 9 5-4 1800 
PISS INePELUDSONGeaarest cael Giana uta te hie ete i teconnee rs [eladsi7] eae eereS G7 
Aw cra (hhirditidition) eamee esr inet ecient [Dycenti.| res 75 
Jie Ps Corprer (Chird) Edition) increta rer tetas [Collfair.] eae S76 
W. A. Wricut (The Clarendon Press Series)......... [Cla.] ye SS 
H. N. Hunson (Harvard Shakespeare)........+..+++55 (Huds: 1) 22eeeets7o 
Re G. Ware) (Second Edition) -a-aecee cients [Wh. ii.] ot ELSSS 
CAMBRIDGE (Second Edition, W. A. WRIGHT)......... [Cam ii.]}) 4a ersor 
IW wALENETESON J.nccacceas Selva anne tien enya recone [Neils.] shame L000 
J. Bewx. (Shakespeare's Plays) ccc 6c sie aa nes aatenle [Belles 1773 
GiopE, (CUARK and) WRIGHT) =... orm eae (Glo: Eee eeeaeee 1864 
IN se DVB TGTUUS > soe cuaeatcud zeae ator Oterchc saci ao hate Moe IONE eR [Del.] Elberfeld 1869 
REV. JOHN) HUNTER) (LongmansiSeries) oe ee een eee eee tee 1870 
RU WHELELAW (Rugby ER ditt01) = 0). cee scents eicraae seen te erent ee eer 1872 
ADeE SCHMIDT (S725 GUSH a MLELDTaMeN) avelelelerea tien eter esr renee 1878 
Wels Wricars(ClarendoniS2)) wenanane sar nee een rere 1879 
ny" ial BG Xes a eens meen eee aoe On OOO obo DUNG Ano OS die ae owes 1881 
Hea C. BESCHING |(Hemry 172112) Sis inves dee ce eee eee ea eee .. 1889 
(CP WORDSWORTH: (HUS1071CAlLPIGYS) panne cee eee nen ee nae 1893 
‘TL PAGE! (Mofatt'siShakes peare) 20s 11110) sarldeoeer serie see eee 1894 
fe C. BEECHING: (Lalcon LAtt0n).. ses waa eee ee eee ee 1894 
Rev), GHOLMELBY. (Aiynold’s School Shs) x2 wee eee eee eet 1897 
Car LERKORD (CL ersleyeEdiLc0) tees aes aie aera ee eee 1904 
NSS Wis 2 VERILY: (SHACENE S! SU: ia ate oe ar ayer ove Mie oe meee tore acne ate eee 1905 
STANLEY WOOD actress cxat ayo Srp eile Goss Galore sere et atoka oie aetaseneteemere 1906 
CPPoRTHR and Hale CLARKESGHi Si HOON) Sennen eee eee 1908 
RH CARRS (Oxford Plain Texts ts) merece ser teeea einen ieee IQII 
S:°P> SHERMAN (Tudor Si:)).come aceon Ce IgI2 
Gii'S.. GORDON ey. oh sa vs «Pars arose whee Seas lel cpalelelere Bia lee te ieee nicer mare IgI2 
We"). Crare(OsfordiSh.)<cax sodas oaieie eee aie eae etcaee ee ee IQI2 
IGS DEIGHTON © aa fists oa5 ots Sere arena eretotor toreaone aimed sca tetetelsteteel eters ears erates 1913 
H. D? WrIsER: (facmillan’s Pocket\ Classics) senwecs eve e seine ene: 1919 
Grate-Case: (Arden Shs). “288. 5 san smet a eee are tee ene ie nee eee 1922 
TucKER Brooke (Yale Sh.)..... & snbiaa, 5 OR RAT RG SORES as ei eee cee hen 1924 


These last twenty-five editions I have not collated beyond referring to them in 
disputed passages, and recording, here and there in the Commentary, the views of 
their editors. 

Within the last forty years—indeed, since the appearance, in 1864, of the Globe 
Edition—the text of Shakespeare is become so settled that to collate word for 
word the text of editions which have appeared within this term would be a fruit- 
less task. When, however, within recent years an editor revises his text in a 
second or third edition, the case is different; it then becomes interesting to mark the 
effect of maturer judgment. The present Text is that of the First Folio of 1623. 

In the Textuat Notes the symbol Ff indicates the agreement of the Second, 
Third, and Fourth Folios. 


LIST OF BOOKS 741 


T have not called attention to every little misprint in the Folio. The Textual Notes 
will show, if need be, that they are misprints by the agreement of all the Editors in 
their corrections. 

Nor is notice taken of the first editor who adopted the modern spelling, or who 
substituted commas for parentheses, or changed ? to !. 

The sign + indicates the agreement of Rowr, Popr, THEOBALD, HANMER, 
WARBURTON, JOHNSON, and the Variorum of 1773. This sign following Cam. in- 
dicates the agreement of GLoBE, CLARENDON, and WH. ii. 

When in the Textual Notes WARBURTON precedes HANMER, it indicates that 
Hanmer has followed a suggestion of WARBURTON. 

The words ‘Mnemonic Pope, Warb., Han.’ in the Textwral Notes signify that 
the passage indicated is marked by those editors as especially worthy of attention 
or memorising. 

The words e¢ cet. after any reading indicate that it is the reading of all other 
editions. 

The words et seg. indicate the agreement of all subsequent editions. 

The abbreviation (subs.) indicates that the reading is substantially given, and 
that immaterial variations in spelling, punctuation, or stage-directions are disre- 
garded. 

When Varr. precedes Steev. or Mal., it includes the Variorums of 1773, 1778, and 
1785; when it follows Steev. or Mal., it includes the Variorwms of 1803, 1813, and 
1821. 

An emendation or correction given in the Commentary is not repeated in the 
Textual Notes unless it has been adopted by an editor in his text; nor is conj. added 
in the Textwal Notes to the name of the proposer of the conjecture unless the con- 
jecture happens to be that of an editor, in which case its omission would lead to 
the inference that such was the reading of his text. 

Cott. MS. refers to CoLtreR’s copy of the Second Folio, bearing in its margin 
manuscript annotations. 

In citing plays or quoting from them, the Acts, Scenes, and Lines of the Globe 
Edition are followed, unless otherwise noted. Of course, all references to Coriolanus 
refer to the present text. 


LIST OF BOOKS 


To economise space in the foregoing pages, as a general rule merely the name 
of an author has been given, followed, in parentheses, by the number of volume 
and page. 

In the following List, arranged alphabetically, enough of the full titles is set 
forth to serve the purposes of either identification or reference. 

Be it understood that this List does not include those books which have been 
consulted or used in verifying references; were these included, the list would be 
many times longer. 


Aspott, E. A.: Shakespearian Grammar......... London, 1879 
AucER, W. R.: Life of Edwin Forrest.........4+ Philadelphia, 1877 
ANDERS, H. R. D.: Shakespeare's Books........ Berlin, 1904 
Anon.: New Readings in Shakespeare (Black- 

WOOUSU LAS An) Meet Ne cl vetht Mierareyn rievareres Edinburgh, 1853 


Arnoxp, M. L.: The Soliloquies of Shakespeare... New York, 1911 


742 APPENDIX 
ARrRowsMITH, W.R.: Editor of Notes & Queries and 
STREP Lo ac NE a ee Se ea nav tae 
Bapuam, C.: Criticism Applied to Shakespeare. . 
“s Text of Shakespeare (Cambridge 


ESSavs) onan tat re ee ree 

Bartey, S.: The Received Text of Shakespeare.... 
BaILy1e-GrouMan, W. A. & F.: The Master of 
Game, by Edward, Second Duke of York... . 
Baxer, G. P.: Development of Shakespeare as a 
DITO sce So ca et rots OTT ATOR Ree 
Barrett, L.: Edwin Forrest (American Actor 


WLCALLOIL WS. ere cis nee cat Se ens meee ene tee 
BayFieLp, M. A.: A Study of Shakespeare's Versi- 
JECTION | ARS hoe Se onc Le em 
Baytey, Harortp: The Shakespeare Symphony... 
Baynes, Tuomas S.: Shakespeare Studies and Other 


BrEEcHING, H. C.: The Character of Shakespeare 
(Seventh Annual Shakespeare Lecture of the 
(BTitishbA Cad emmy. )huare wae t aes) on cede mee 

BEIsLy, SIDNEY: Shakespeare's Garden,.......... 

Brrcu, W. J.: Inquiry Into the Religion and Phil- 
OSO Pl YSOjIUARES PCat ee tye eae es 

Boas, F. S.: Shakespeare and His Predecessors... 

BopeEnstept, F.: Shakespeare's Frauengestalien.. . 


s Shakes peare’s Frawencharaktere . 
Brapiey, A. C.: Shakespearean Tragedy........ 
a Coriolanus (British Academy: 
Second Annual Shakespeare 

Bectute) ea. cae ere 


Branves, G.: William Shakespeare............. 
BRANDI, ALOIS sy SUK Si) C7 Clete eerste areca tea 
BRERETON, Austin: Life of Henry Irving........ 
Brink, B. TEN: Five Lectures on Shakespeare 

(translated by Julia Franklin)............. 
Brockett, J. T.: A Glossary of North Country 


Brooke, C. F. Tucker: Shakespeare’s Plutarch... 
BROOKE, STOPFORD: On Ten Plays of Shakespeare. 
Brown, T. A.: History of the New York Stage... 
Browne, G. H.: Notes on Shakspere’s Versification. 
Buckni1, J. C.: Shakespeare’s Medical Knowl- 


Buttocu, J.: Studies on the Text of Shakespeare. . 
Bitow, E.: Der Arme Mann im Tockenburg...... 
Burttuaurt, H.: Dramaturgie des Schauspiels.... 
CAMPBELL, JOHN Lorp: Shakespeare's Legal Ac- 

QUATEINENIS sais oie etn as oe Eee 


London, 


oe 


Cambridge, 
London, 


“ 
New York, 
Boston, 
London, 


Cambridge, 
London, 


“6 


“cc 


New York, 
Dresden, 
London, 


New York, 


London, 
New York, 
“cc 
“ 
Boston, 
London, 
“ 


Leipzig, 
Oldenburg and Leipzig, 


New York, 


1858 


1846 


1856 
1862 


1909 
1907 


1881 


1857 


1920 
1906 


1896 


1917 
1864 


1848 
1896 
1874 
1874 
1905 


IQ12 
1900 
1894 
1908 


1895 


1829 
1909 
1905 
1903 
1884 


1860 
1878 
1852 
1903 


1859 


LIST OF BOOKS 


CampBELL, L.: Tragic Drama in Aschylus Soph- 
OVESMANGE SHUR CS PCO eee sees ne 
CAMPBELL, T.: Life of Mrs Siddons........... 
tS Life and Writings of Shakespeare. 
Np retiTem ean VOLES, fC 55 soe nesiciceas a faa o, ice: Pasttys 
Cartwricut, R.: Shakspere and Jonson......... 
- New Readings in Shakespeare... 
CHALMERS, G.: Supplemental A pology........... 
CuaMBERS, R. W.: Shakespeare's Hand in the Play 
of oir homas More (chav... .a.c.eo.s- 
CiarkE, C. C.: Shakespeare Characters......... 
Crarkr, C. & M. Cownen: Shakespeare’s Plays 
CoLermnce, H.: Essays and Marginalia......... 
CorermceE, S. T.: Notes and Lectures.......... 
CoiiieR, J. P.: Notes and Emendations to the Text 
of Shakespeare's Plays........ 
Trilogy: Conversations between 
Three Friends (it was privately 
printed) Gace ease cen eae 
Couns, J. C.: Studies in Shakespeare.......... 
Corson, H.: Introduction to Study of Shakespeare. 
CourTENAY, T. P.: Commentaries on the Historical 
PGV SiO} SHORES PCOre «5. 2 xsd eevee te at 
Cowurc, G. H.: Music on the Shakespearian Stage 
Croce, BENEDETTO: Ariosto, Shakespeare, and 
Corneille (translated by Douglas Ainslie)..... 
Crort, J.: Annotations on Johnson & Steevens’s 
SGOT Osc) Ste a RT REO 
WANTED, Ps AL: Shakespeare N oles 2% an ican 210% - 
Dettus, N.: Die Tieck’ sch Shaks perekritik beleuch- 


(73 


Dennis, J.: Letters, Familiar, Moral, and Critical. . 
Dispmn, Caries: History of the Stage......... 
Disp, J. C.: Annals of the Edinburgh Stage.... 
Dickins, R.: Forty Years of Shakespeare on the 
TYEE STON SIS AES ee RR EMAC POOREST 
Douce, F.: Illustrations of Shakespeare......... 
DOWDEN, EDWARD: S/. LINC 2... ane tae pe os 
a: Shakespeare: His Mind and 


Drake, N.: Shakespeare and His Times......... 
Dysosk1, Roman: Rise and Fall in Shakespeare’s 
DD OIA LUCMA TL xeric) Cobia a tae, Serie ea Ngo E 


UCTS eR EES  Balis a ea Sayan Sa yah 
cf Strictures on Collier’s Edition........ 
43 UIST UOTE, MBPT EIY OOEe: Of ae an ATC 


Eaton, T. R.: Shakespeare and the Bible........ 
Epwarps, T.: Canons of Criticism (seventh edi- 
(ALOIS © cop Wl ORGIES Coca c CRAG CRETE CRITI CR er 


London, 
“c“c 


Philadelphia, 


London, 
“c 


“ 


(v3 


Cambridge (England), 
London, 


“ce 


a 


New York, 


London, 
New York, 
Boston, 


London, 
Cambridge, 


London, 


York, 
London, 


Bonn, 
London, 


it 


Edinburgh, 


“ce 


London, 
London and New York, 


London, 


“ce 


743 


1904 
1834 
1846 
1779 
1864 
1866 


1799 


1923 
1863 
1864 
1851 
1874 


1853 


1874 
1904 
1889 


1840 
1913 


1920 


1810 
1870 


1846 
T7200 
1800 
1888 


1907 
1807 
n.d. 


1875 
1817 


1923 
1844 
1844 


1853 
n. d. 


1705 


744 APPENDIX 


Etson, Louis C.: Shakespeare in Music........ 
Eze, K.: Notes on Elizabethan Dramatists....... 
Farmer, R.: Essay on the Learning of Shakespeare 
Ficcis, DARRELL: Shakespeare: A Study........ 
FirzGERALD, Percy: The Kembles....7.......-- 
Freay, F. G.: Shakespeare Manual............. 
ss Life and Work of Shakespeare..... 
FontanE, T.: Aus England: Studien & Briefe 
uber Londoner Theater...-..0+- 2005 5+ 55055 
Friesen, H. von: Shakespeare Studien........... 
FurnivaL., F. J.: Introduction to Leopold Shak- 
SPCU Cistacneatepenactateoye ote eterna 
Some 300 Fresh Allusions to 


GEnEST, Jon: Some Account of the English Stage. 
Gervinus, G. G.: Commentaries (translated by 
IBUnnete) 5s scsuecacocimens sree onion Renee Pee 
Gitpon, C.: Remarks on the Plays of Shakespeare. . 
Gopwin, E. W.: Archictecture & Costume of 
Shakes peare’s Plays (The Architect), June,... 
GOETHE, VON, J. W.: Criticisms, Reflections, etc. 
(translated by W. B. Réunfeldt)............ 
GreENnwoop, G. G.: Is There a Shakespeare Prob- 


Grey, Z.: Critical, Historical, and Explanatory 
INOtES ON SHORES PCOr EG weenie te eer 
GrirFitH, Mrs: Morality of Shakespeare's Dramas 
GRINFIELD, THoMAS: Remarks on the Moral In- 
fluence of Shakespeare’s Plays............... 
GuizoT, M.: Guvres Completes de Shakspeare (7th 
CC) Ses aes ss, Soa Satie eee eee 
ERAS ion Wiest LESSONS O10 NOLES ener ener 
Harris, F.: The Man Shakespeare............4- 
i Women of Shakespeare............. 
Hartinc, J. E.: Ornithology of Shakespeare...... 
HARTMAN, SADAKICHI: Shakespeare in Art....... 
Hayuourst, CaTaLeENn H.: A History of the Text of 
CONOLGNUS rns aie RAS ee 
Hazuirt, W.: Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays... 
FIWATIR, SB RCUISGL Of SHS. Leshan ree eeentas 
HerRAvup, J. A.: Shakespeare’s Inner Life....... 
HER WEGH, G.: Coriolanus.... 0. o.1.0 02 sss ces 
HooKHam, G,: W2ll 0’ the Wisp... 0. .0-s.1050s 
Horn, F.: Shakespeare's Schauspiele erlaiitert.... 
Hupson, H. N.: Shakespeare: His Life, Art, and 
CHAIGCLENSIR, eave dun aetee See See ee 


London, 
Halle, 
London, 


New York and London, 


London, 
6c 


“ 


Stuttgart, 
Wien, 


London, 


“c 


Hildburghausen, 
Bath, 


London, 
“ 


Paris, 
London, 
New York, 


London, 
Boston, 


Chicago, 


London, 
“cc 


“ 


Berlin, 
Oxford, 
Leipsic, 


Boston, 


IQOI 
1886 
1767 
Igi2 
n.d 
1876 
1886 


1860 
1874 


1877 


1886 
1908 


1871 
1832 


1863 
1710 


1875 


Dag: 
1916 


1754 
1775 


1850 


1868 
1892 
1909 
Igi2 
1871 
IQOI 


1924 
1846 
1765 
1865 
1870 
1922 
1826 


1872 


LIST OF BOOKS 745 
Huco, Francois-Victor: Guvres Completes de W. 
SU ERE PEON ctr 4 a ston ae ma oan eee rT ee Paris, 1872 
Hitsmann, E.: Shakespeare: sein Geist und seine 
eric Rmen emis Me kage os ae Heat eS ee Leipzig, 1856 
Hume, Ropert E.: The Thirteen Principal U pani- 
shads (translated from Sanskrit)............ London, 1921 
Hont, Leicu: Critical Essays on the Performers of 
the London Theatres........... g 1807 
Hunter, Josepx: New Illustrations of Shakespeare s 1853 
Horois, J.: Cursory Remarks on the Arrangement of 
SHORCSPEGV E'S ELAS ancohy tate a Rhee “s 1792 
INGER Ye CM. Phe Sill Lionas ne ee eee s 1874 
IRELAND, JosePH N.: Records of the New York 
SYAELG Os conan ot AeA RRR SL Sot eR oie ar New York, 1866 
JACOBS, piceeres The Fables of Bidpat.......... London, 1888 
The Fables of Hisop as printed 
Oy Caxton neem ee ee . 1889 
Jameson, Mrs: Characteristics of Women....... ‘ 1833 
KeIcHTLey, T.: Shakespeare Expositor........ é S 1867 
Ketiett, E. E.: Suggestions: Literary Essays. . Cambridge (England), 1923 
KiILBourne, F. W.: Alterations and Adaptations a 
SS ADRES POMPEO sles sno erhhe Oe EOC Boston, 1906 
Kinnear, B. G.: Cruce’s Shakespeariane........ London, 1883 
Knicut, C.: William Shakespeare: A Biography. 1843 
ss Studies of Shakespeare............. es 1868 
Kocu, Max: Sh’s dramatische Werke nach der 
Vebersetzung von Schlegel, Kaufmann and 
G2) SS MME NTO N Pot ca cnayt eared custard Sie eT Stuttgart, n.d. 
Kreyssic, F.: Shakespeare-Fragen.............. Leipzig, 1871 
es Vorlesungen tiber Shakspeare (2nd 
edition) xan. ee se eee Berlin, 1874 
KriepitzscH, THEopoR: William Shakespeare, 
sein Leben und seine Werke................. gets) 
Ler, Sipney: Jefferson Press Sh. (Introduction). . London, 1908 
Leo, F. A.: Four Chapters of North's Plutarch.... London and Strassburg, 1878 
A SHARES DEAT CANDLES ap rthonis Poe eek London, 1885 
Lewes, L.: Shakespeare’s Frauengestalten....... Stuttgart, 18093 
Lewis, WynpuAm: The Lion and the Fox........ London and New York, 1927 
Lioyp, W. W.: Essays on Shakespeare.......... London, 1858 
Luce, M.: Handbook to the Works of Sh......... oa 1907 
Lupwic, Orro: Studien und kritische Schriften... Leipzig, 1891 
Lunt, Greorce: Three Eras of New England..... Boston, 1857 
Masts, H. W.: W. Shakespeare, Poet, Dramatist, 
and Man. [Newedition]................0. New York, 1904 
MacCatium, M. W.: Shakespeare's Roman Plays 
MSD HCU MB OCR OL OUI are evaa sere a ele dso London, 1910 
Manpen, D. H.: Diary of Master William Silence . 1897 
Martin, Str THEODORE: Essays on the Drama 
(ENCESETIGS) peter kte peacoat a eee ieee eae i ft 1889 
MASEFIELD, JoHN: William Shakespeare........ New York, 1911 


746 APPENDIX 


Mason, J. M.: Comments on the [Var. 1778].... 
s Comments on the Plays of Beau- 

mont & Fletcher with Observa- 

tions on Shakespeare......... 

Masson, D.: Shakespeare Personally (ed. R. 
WEASSOW) Woy. gaesratirs Acie sh cerevel sree restates 
MATHEW, FRANK: Ma Image of Shakespeare..... 
Matruews, BRANDER: Shakespeare as a Play- 


Mezifres, A.: Shakespeare ses Ciuvres eb ses 

CEDIA Bete OED ER OY OUD OOS EO eT 
MicueEL, F.: Gunvres choisies de Shakspeare...... 
Minto, W.: Characteristics of English Poets...... 
Mirrorp, J.: Conjectural Emendations (Gentle- 

memssy Mapas), sh 2,c:cciec stems ciekencnetencl suai eaten 
Mommsen, Tycuo: Der Paine Sioe peare sete: 
Monrécut, E.: Guvsres completes de Shakespeare. . 
Mortey, H.: Journal of a London Playgoer...... 
Morse, Herpsert: Back to Shakespeare......... 
Moutton, R. G.: Shakespeare as a Dramatic 

DVRS side ix et anche A OO RTS OS 
Moves, J.: Medicine and Kindred Arts in the Plays 

Ofe SHARCSPCULE® oun esa a een as eR 
Murry, J. Mrppreton: A Neglected Heroine of 

Shakespeare (London Mercury), Feb.,....... 
Naytor, Epwarp W.: Shakespeare and Music... 


Nicuots, Joun: Literary History of the xviii‘ 
CORLUPN Ee ico e ee eI Gt anne Sera 
ODELL, GEoRGE C. D.: Shakespeare from Betterton 
HOWE bo S Grint 5 ob eo SC 

si Annals of the New York 

StORe. So peor ae 


OECHELHAUSER, W.: Einfiihrungen in Shakes pere’s 
Buhne Dr GMOs oan oe ee 
OrceER, Joun G.: Critical Notes on Shakespeare's 
ERB IROL TOM QUOT Naienh Sete GaN GAEL one 
Parmer, Henrietta: List of English Editions and 
Translations of Greek and Latin Classics before 
1641 (Bibliographical Society).............. 
Parr, WOLSTONHOLME: The Story of the Moor of 
Venice with two Essays on Shakespeare....... 
PERRING, Sir P.: Hard Knots in Shakespeare 
(EGS ul) SS) omnes otal ae We ios or eee oats 
Pureson, Emma: Animal Lore of Shakespeare’s 


Prerce, F. E., MacCracken, H. N., Durwam, W. 
H.: An Introduction to Shakespeare......... 
PROLISSS ROBERT: (Corrolan wncepeamnetae ee ee 


London, 1785 


“cc 


1798 


1914 
1922 


New York, 1913 
Paris, 1860 
“1869 
Boston, 1901 
London, 1844-1845 
Berlin, 1854 
Paris, 1870 
London, 1891 

“c IQIS 

New York, 1921 
Glasgow, 1896 


London, 1922 
3 1896 


cs 1817 
New York, 1920 
“cc 1927 


Minden, 1885 


London, 1890 


“ 


IQII 
“3995 
3 1886 
1883 


New York, 1912 
Leipzig, 1899 


London, 1807 


LIST OF BOOKS 


RareicH, W.: Shakespeare. (English Men of 
Retters) Reea peer em eee oerinen tee 
Rapp, Moritz: Studien tiber das Englisches Theater 
Ruopes, R. C.: The Stagery of Shakespeare..... 
as Shakespeare’s First Folio....... 
RIcHARDSON, W.: Essays on Shakespeare’s Dra- 
LETC HOT ACLEN Soa. en woes aE 
Ritson, J.: Remarks Critical and Illustrative... .. 


Gs Cursors CPUtCiSInS way eee 
RoBERTSON, J. M.: The Baconian Heresy....... 
Cs Shakespeare and Chapman... 


Rosrnson, W.C.: Shakspere: The Man and His Mind 
RorscHEer, H. T.: Shakespeare in seinem hichsten 
ORO ORLEY CCOUD EN oe coc recctwvens ge Oak Ress 
RUMELIN, G.: Shakspere-Siudien............4.. 
Rusuton, W. L.: Shakespeare’s Legal Maxims... 
“ Shakespeare Illustrated by Old 
ALON S a5), esd I ATO: 

Ruskin, JoHN: Complete Works (ed. Cook & 
Wedderburn). 2,120 eon cyetorioencnaer oalena nee 
ScHELLING, F. E.: Shakespeare and ‘Demi- 
DS CLEICE tea not oat chee ROR ee eae 
SCHERER, EpMonp: Essays on English Literature 
(translated by G. Saintsbury))........ sae. 
SCHLEGEL, A. W.: Dramatic Literature, Lectures 
(translated) DY-i)s black) cc ciis ene crete eae 
SECCOMBE & ALLEN: Age of Shakespeare......... 
SEILHAMER, G. O.: History of the American Theatre 
SHarp, F. C.: Shakespeare’s Portrayal of the Moral 


SHErtock, M.: Fragment of Shakespeare (trans- 
lated from French by Duncombe)........... 
Smpson, Percy: Shakespearian Punctuation..... 
Stvcer, S. W.: Text of Shakespeare Vindicated... 
SKEAT, W. W.: Notes on English Etymology..... 
os Shakespeare’s Plutarch.......... 
SxoTtowE, A.: Life of Shakespeare............. 
SmitH, Gotpwin: Shakespeare: The Man....... 
SnweER, D. J.: System of Shakespeare's Dramas... 
StapFeR, Paut: Shakespeare and Classical Antig- 
uity (translated by E. J. Carey)............. 
STEPHENSON, H. T.: The Study of Shakespeare... 
STOFFREGEN, W.: Tragische Naturen und Shake- 
IS PEGI C- OW OR LETC ara aioler piavoiel #1s\=)a)2hens\cl+ <i Wairove' 
SwInBuRNE, A. C.: A Study of Shakespeare..... 
Symons, ArtHuR: Plays, Acting, and Music..... 
TaLBot, BERTRAM: Sh’s View of Women’s Influ- 
ence on Men of Mark. (Noctes Shakespear- 
tane.) Winchester College Sh. Soc......... 
Taytor, C.: The Shakespeare Gallery........... 


London, 
Tiibingen, 
Birmingham, 
New York, 


London, 
iz3 


“cc 


New York, 
London, 
Buffalo, 


Berlin, 
Stuttgart, 
London, 


ce 


Philadelphia, 
New York, 


London, 


“cc 


Philadelphia, 
New York, 


London, 
Oxford, 
London, 
Oxford, 
London, 
Toronto, 
St. Louis, 


London, 


“ce 


Bremen, 
London, 
New York, 


London, 


“cc 


747 


1909 
1862 
1922 
1923 


1797 
1782 
1792 
IQ13 
IQL7 
1890 


1864 
1866 
1859 


1867 
1912 
1927 
181 


1815 
1903 
1888 


1902 


1786 
IQII 
1853 
IQOL 
1904. 
1824 
1899 
1877 


1880 
I9I§ 


1889 
1880 


1909 


1887 
1792 


748 . APPENDIX 


TeTzLaFr, ARTHUR: Die Kindergestalten bei den 
Englischen Dramatiker, &.........2+....0+. 
THEOBALD, L.: Shakespeare Restored............ 
Tmon, Dr.: Shakespeare's Drama in seiner 
natiirlichen Entwicklung dargestellt........... 
TormMAN, ALBERT H.: The Structure of Coriolanus. 
(Modern Lang. Notes, xxxvii.)............. 
Tooke, J. Horne: Diversions of Purley (edited 
Dy ARS Pay lor) ctr en tre tesa eer arn ee ee 
TowseE, J. R.: Sixty Years of the Theatre........ 
Trencu, R. C.: Plutarch: His Life, his Lives, & 
PASPNEOTOISS ov niwinc.0 cass. 6 oR Oe 
Uric, H.: Sk’s Dramatic Art (34 ed.) (trans- 
atediby lee De Schinitz) Sesame rg eee 
VEHSE, Epwarp: Shakespeare als Protestant, Po- 
littker, Psycholog und Dichter............... 
ViscHER, F. T.: Shakespeare-Vortrige.......... 
WALKER, W. S.: Shakespeare’s Versification..... 
Critical Examination of the Text 

OLDS UORCSP COLE EE re erie 

Warp, A. W.: English Dramatic Literature...... 
WELLESLEY, Henry: Stray Notes on the Text of 
sD SDIRES PEGI C rete tenets ok eke eRe ete 
WENDELL, BaRRretT: William Shakspere......... 
WHALL, W.B.: Shakespeare’s Sea Terms Explained 
Waite, Epwarp J.: Commentaries on the Law in 
SNARES DEALE Wee a ney. eee ne 
Waite, R. G.: Shakespeare’s Scholar........... 
WixkeEs, G.: Shakespeare from an American point 


OF ULC OG REL hs ees cdi ee OO ae ee EE 
Wincate, C. E. L.: Shakespeare’s Heroes on the 
SEE LO rind eta S SET: CEA TEL 
Winter, Wittiam: Shakespeare on the Stage (34 
SOrieS seen sto fis ake anes bon bone ee ee 


WorpswortnH, C.: Shakespeare’s Knowledge and 
USCTOPLNE BIDE acres cutie 1a ae eee 
Youn, J. C.: Memoir of Charles Mayne Young. . 


Halle, 
London, 


Leyden, 
Baltimore, 


London, 
New York, 


London, 


“cc 


Hamburg, 
Stuttgart, 
London, 


New York, 
London, 


St. Louis, 
New York, 


1898 
1726 


1889 
1922 


1857 
1916 


1873 
1876 
1851 
IQOI 
1854 


1860 
1875 


1865 
1894 
1910 


1913 
1854 


1882 
1896 
1916 


1854 
1871 


INDEX 


PRANC 1/2., 505 5 hin Ree ERO ca RRR 332 
“heart as little apt as yours...... 341 
MHUISECINOLOM Camera Faas s10 cee cca 318 
bated =subducdias sci cue eess 392 
Abram, corruption of ‘auburn’.... 247 
Absolute challesetcts yon cos oes coc 290 
Ache, noun and verb, pronunciation 
OE, an Stee Cb ee eee ae 207 
Act III., dramatic effectiveness of, 
Bak (Chambers'0n); os 5.60:. 5 280 
Action is eloquence.............. 355 
INCHIODS OF ACCENUSS:4) oe.) chee. axe -21: 379 
Adjective formed from noun and 
not from verb....... Oa 
sf proleptic use of........ 98 
MY transposition of........ 551 
Adverb of motion used without 
VEL siamese Saeeriel: 88 
“used as adjective........ 407 
Adverbial expression, transposition 
Obs ts tev. beeen 573 
a expressions, omission of 
preposition in........ 373 
NAMES OLLICELOLVopctavess Alagtuasos:e 8 Bie 
AGIRICK A SOPMAIICA ae vain Ge caf oaks « ne, 
Africa as a country famous for ser- 
(OSES Boca yas Si ae ocean 137 
Again=on the other hand.......... 272 
Weerot Conolanisia:sicia cine: 232 
Alexander, gold image of......... 557 
TAU 20> bors to eee ST EIOS 305 
PNLIOWANCE meres e inca. wseuksths ara 350 
Along used without a verb of mo- 
LOT eey tere Pea reas b de ondia¥es ays 79, 268 
Anabaptists, insurrections of...... 305 
Anachronism in reference to theatre 231 
Anachronisms, Shakespeare’s dis- 
PER ATG Ol sey ote tat eee olen <be aid II5 
Anacoluthonn men aneten cals. kise: 399 
Ancestors and descendants of Corio- 
lanus, confusion between....... 276 


And used emphatically........... 31 
Antiates a trisyllables.ee maa... 126 
Antium or Corioli as locality of 

A CUOVS SCs Vib pies eed x chosen 563 


Apoplexy an affection of the brain.. 452 


ADPAYANCO stirs. =). nee eae cates 430 
Appeared used in transitive sense.. 417 
Apt= pliant, accommodating....... 342 


Armas de la Hermosura of Calderon. 726 


Articulate=to capitulate.......... 162 
AS; ellipsisnattercnpete wae 222 
“used redundantly with expres- 
SION OM tINe sara ant cia. 385 
“with meaning of relative pro- 
NOUNS aes aso eae 503 
EN SL UO is ee SOROS RSE! 288 
IASDECERACCEN tiOlian. eed nee emote Cee: 
IASPIay2O0 OSPICy.. neice aiae 475 
ASS HNNCOMPOUNG se suas erie 181 
Assistance=assessors..........+:.. 458 
At a-word=27 short... .25.0610.. 99 
SSaINOLCV:3: ihe kncwnntites tance apse haa oe 165 
“ point=on the point of.......... 317 
ALONE =CCONCLIE A ee 461 


Attach =arrestunnas sone enon 313 
Audible used with active sense= 


OUT E RUCIL Beene aka oe 448 
Aufidius, see Tullus Aufidius. 
Aufidius’s place in Tragedy, S. 
BTOOKCION y.vanetachr ocies 434 
SSAC UM OT Pia eckson aracolcat ketene aeen tis 172 
Augustine manner of defining free 
will, Warburton on............ 244 
Badham on corruptions of text in 
AGED ESS ies cee ater 320 
is on emendations to suit 
MOLT Cie cece mere 332 
Se on entrance of Volumnia 
TRAC DELL ses Callies metas 336 
Bald used contemptuously....... 311 


749 


75° 

Bale used as noun=sorrow, mis- 
DLP eat ci BOBS AEG 55 

Bare= er enn nyavmapanerernesrcnenuarehs 500 

Bathurstionte Plays. cecce, «er 656 


ENNONE VO AHIOS «cco omouanbucds 


Battles; numberOfe, waver 231 
s seen and heard of........ 266 

Bayfield on abbreviation of ‘it’ in 
FOLIO Meet r sata rete? 162 


“« on quadrisyllabic division. 469 
SeeeONn Thy thiniG prose nner. 428 
s on vagaries in Folio Text.. 164 


« on versification of play... 27 
Becwithsthemiene qeniern tare eee 353 
1BYSoiretoy BS ted Mans 5,5. Oe cookenaene cea 335 
Beast with many heads........... 395 
Bed ward wack we eee ree 123 
Beeching on Act II, sc.i.......... 17I 

on Shakespeare and the 

MASSES Sts Poker ee 709 

on Time in Tragedy..... 203 
Beesome for bisson.............. 183 
Beethoven’s Coriolan Overture... .. 726 


Benson, R. F., as Coriolanus...... 
Bestriding of friend in defense. ... 
‘Better usedasiverbaeeee memeriee 
IBeWray = 7evedl ys cater ae 
Birch on mockery of religion in this 


DAV cee he nee ee eee 557 
Bisson conspectuities = distorted 
UCWS ITN i een ae 184 
<< derivationiof: 5. e oe ae 184 
“multitude, Collier’s MS. 
correction... 301 
“ es for ‘bosom mul- 
tiplied’ dis- 
cussed...... 590 
Bit, the symbol of temperance..... 376 
Bleeding =unjfintshed............. 186 
Bless from = preserve by blessing.... 92 
SLOSU Hap PVinwtcrrinvare site eerie 227 
mL OLD) OSL es Siete scares Stee 227 
Blood, movement of...:........ 47 
Blown swelleds cae mac coce cee 559 


Boas on character of Coriolanus.... 
Bonnet =take off cap. ............ 222 
Booth, Edwin, on part of Coriolanus 729 
Booth, J. B., on his unfitness for 
part of Conolanusy. cn. arets one 72 
Bosom, the seat of digestion...... 


INDEX 


Bosom-multiplied.............. 


. 300 
Botcher=mender of garments...... 187 
Bower=chamveresa. oct ecen 361 
Brace=a pair of dogs............ eas2 


Bradley, A. C., on character of Corio- 


LanS An ee 684 
“ on comic relief..... 441 
oe on effect of closing 
SCONCH he Yatra 573 
sf on scene between 
Coriolanus and 
Volumnia....... 530 
sf on Shakespeare and 
the Masses...... 707 
ee on the Play... . .661, 662 
Brandes on Halliwell-Phillipps test- 
word as to Date....... 602 
“* on inconsistency in charac- 
ter of Coriolanus....... 265 
“on Shakespeare and the 
M asses See ae 704 
SMe onitHe Datesten an eee 605 
‘Break’ in sense of escape from.... 103 


Brereton, A., on Irvingas Coriolanus 736 
Bride, Roman, lifted over threshold 437 


Briefly =a short time ago.......... E2E 
Bring = 00k Shoes oo eee 558 
‘S. (himeanipeacewe © utes eae 332 
Broil =noisy contention........... 284 
Brook=(oiendurescc soe en ee 76 

Brooke, S., on Aufidius’s place in 
Tragedy s.sssre.. aad 

or on Coriolanus as an ob- 
dect ofspitya nee 527 
os on epitaph of Coriolanus 581 

#6 on scene between Ser- 
ViligMene = cee 441 

on supreme sacrifice of 
Gonolanus-ee eee 531 

Brooke, Tucker, on comparison be- 
tween Biography and Play...... 620 
Brothers Guard. 29s eon eee 169 
Brunhilda, punishment of......... 334 
Budge=to give way.............. 125 
Bulk=«a'stall: ote ee 208 
Burbage, Rs elépy one . seer 726 
Business a trisyllable............ 528 


Buss and kiss, distinction between. 354 
But and not confounded 


INDEX 


Buttock of the night............. 180 
by and by =abionce. 2.5. 6 we «- 238 


“ the poll and by Tribes........ 


Calderon’s Armas de la Hermosura, 
founded on Livy’s version of 


COnLOLAN US. «ese dala nitees 726 
Calues (Calvus), Theobald on..... 113 
Cam-onkam =awrye. occ ene ee 320 
Cambric, origin of word.......... 97 
Cambridge Edd. on the Text....... 587 
Camels used in war.............. 215 


Cannon stronisthesasciciast.csree 291 
Capitulate= make conditions....... 539 
Carbuncle: a cuby.i ics. ee cs ox 113 


‘Cato, reference to, an anachronism. 113 


MSALSIOIACIIIS Rane cin ielein a cio ak ere 412 
(Catclous aan eae cece mee ee 403 
Cement, accentiotirk css eu 463 
KS CNSOLNUS cnc oe ae a 275 
Censured = estimated. ............ 174 
Century=a company of a hundred 

SEI Pre tPA oR Sia SNORE RO SES 136 


Ch, pronunciation of, in Shake- 


SPEATeS) LUNE s0 5. tia d eeseiom 230 
Chalmers on the:Date... -5505.).6.015 597 
Chambers, E. K., on Act II, sc. i.. 171 

y on Act V, sc. ili... 527 


. on dramatic ef- 


fectiveness of 
ACHE ner. 
on opening scene 
on Shakespeare’s 
descriptive 
passages...... 
on symbolism of 
Young Marcius 
and butterfly. 
Chambers, R. W., on similarity of 
ideas and treatment in this play 
and Sir Thomas More.......... 
Change of honours...........5.5- 
Se MP OM CHUP EP aidistes istic 9 ccsleedens 
Changeling =turn-coat............ 


“ 


“ 


203 
“ 


94 


(Ghats=7al hs Ghouls. en sidl-cor 207 
Ghecks my COUFAL) fo ficeceieis.s ols + 383 
Gheeksiot the alt saucy yr ccealecthe sone 546 


Cheer = shout of applause, Inglebyon 481 
Chiastic construction, an example of 219 
Children in Shakespeare, Verity on. 86 


751 


Choir, a modern form of ‘quire’... 484 
Citizens, First and Second, charac- 
ters of, in ActI,sc.i.. 28 


ss number of, discrepancy in. 251 


City Mills in Shakespeare’s time... 170 
Clarke, C. & M., on Shakespeare’s 
character-portraits..........:.. 547 
Cleep or clip=embrace............ 436 
Clutched, a neologism............ 381 
Gockletandidarnel enmmmaateis 288 
Cos = cheats; Vata tesen ves 369 
Coleride, H., on the Play......... 657 
Coleridge, S. T., on change in char- 
acter of Tullus 
Aufidius....... 166 
se on imperfection in 
speech by Au- 
hidirsera. ee 473 
* on Shakespeare and 
the Masses..... 701 
He on short _ side 
SCENES He tates 415 
ss on the Play....... 19 
Collienon:theplextaem. «ice: 587 
Colliers Wirclogy sas. oo Sore 589 
Collin’s Cortolanus........-....:- 726 
Colon used to mark emphatic 
PAUSewsircinnees eee 102, 537 
Come off =quit the fight........... 120 
Coming oncom tera eee 400 


Cominius, character of, Pageon... 1 


Comma used to mark emphasis.... 55 
Commanded =to be entrusted with a 
COMMUNE Deeks oc 76 


Companion=fellow........... 425, 523 


Comparative, double............. 471 
Complaint =ailment, date of....... 177 
Complexion =disposition.......... 208 
Composition=making terms....... 281 
Compound nouns or adjectives en- 
closediinebrackets mncr ter sinc 46 
Condition =disposition........... 255 


# play on two meanings of 164 


Confound=t0 expend.............. 121 
Confusion between ancestors and 
descendants of Coriolanus...... 276 
Conies:aiteritain:..ca.a) ora sen oh 448 
COnsmlamagcmus ami riers ce 229 
Y election, custom connected 
With. jeecioa deren oe 269 


752 


Consuls, election of, by Senate.... 241 
‘Contenning’ as proper noun...... 
Contest between King and Parlia- 

ment as an external evidence of 


ate eee reams at Giem oharter lel ete 604, 605 
Converses=conversant with....... 180 
Coriolanus and Alcibiades, compari- 

son between......... 365 
Ss character Of-aers sere 675 
os compared to Frederick 

at Turgantey... cee 107 


Coriolanus, record of performances 
of, on American stage 
record of performances 


(f3 


of, on English stage. 726 
Gorioles:orCoriolus:eiy- cam <2 80 
Cormorant as symbol of voracity... 45 
Cornwall, Barry, Sonnet on Mac- 

ready as Coriolanus......-..... ren 
Cotus as proper noun............ 424 
Couragevor carriage er ee ee 383 
Courtenay on opening scene....... 20 
ss on Source of Plot...... 613 


Coy, in sense to disdain, a hapax 

Levomenon iawn. cree ee 
Grack—¢ clyijad eee 
Craig on Secret Motive of Aufidius 
Cranks 2windi7es. ee eke ee 
Croce on characters of Coriolanus 

and otsp uta anaes 


Cry = packiof houndsi. 122... 388 
Cubborditigucateacgt cette eerie 42 
Cunning = calmness. Sn eee eon 307 
Cuirdied OT CUlded «4 eee 537 
Custom, Greek reverence for...... 265 
Dangerous lenitye «een eee 205 


Daniel on introduction of Titus 
Lartius in Act II, sc. i.. 105 
on Time Analysis........ 738 
Darkened, pronunciation of....... 
Dashes to mark interruption in 


cc 


Gli emma ator PRR ateibeac setae 228 
Date, recapitulation of views on... 613 
Dead march played at close of trag- 

OO ia rae eek RP EE 583 
Death at wild horses’ heels........ 334 
Debile = weak ax ana eee cerns 158 
Deed achieving honour........... 197 
Detective for. requitaljeeces aes = 225 


INDEX 


Definite article used for emphasis. . 557 
= <> withsvocatives:-.ce 120 
Deighton on character of Coriolanus. 686 


§ ONC) RIG rae ee 664 
Delay=postpone............-+-.- 127 
DeliusionwerDatenaan eee 599 

“on use of prose... .86, 171, 220, 
416, 515, 555 
Democracy, Shakespeare’s views on, 


NVerity:0n} acaen eee 306 
Dennis onithePicyneens are 650 
Dennis’s Invader of His Country, an- 

alysis Ob sci ne ee ee 717 
Dickins, R., on Benson as Corio- 

latiusspe se Serene 735 

és on Irving as Coriolanus 737 

Differency:..pv sta ore te 556 

Diréctitudes 44 eee eee 446 

Directly = without ambiguity....... 444 

Discharge= play a part........... 365 
Discrepancy between Shakespeare 

and Plutarch in Act I, sc. ix.... 163 
Disease troubles as ee ee (ers) 
Disgrace=hardsiip. ..........5.. 39 
Disposition =caprice............. 339 
Dispropertied =dis possessed....... 255 
Dissolved =dispersed............. 63 
Distinctly =separalely......... 317, 419 
Dortkvalueioihys sere ee II7, 422 
Doth for ‘do not’ a misprint..... 386 


Double stage-directions, Rhodes on. 109 

Doves’ eyes 531 

Dowden on character of Coriolanus.. 677 
“on Shakespeare’s meta- 


phors ew es eee 537 
Drachmesvalueroleea a eee LLY 
Drake. onihesRlayae. ee eee 655 
Dress worn by candidates for con- 

sularioficest ts... eee 241 


Drinking together as mark of amity 554 
Dyboski on evidence of declining 


powersnsthe player aaa eee 675 
Hachiatiother.. 77sec eee eee 575 
“used for ‘both’ with plural 
Verb vin), kare eee 346 
Bato plough tees ee ee 566 
Hasy=slights..tot eee 521 


Ecclesiasticus, comparison of pas- 
sage in 


INDEX 


Ed in past participles not abbrevi- 


ated ree tee fa ie naa 462 
Eject a hapax legomenon......... 328 
ibpsisvartermasaqee 7eee) ae aves 222 
’Em as contraction in present play. 63 
Bmbarquements.....25...5.)-00- 168 
Emendations Adopted in Cambridge 

Pextelistonaane 588 
« to suit metre, Badham 

ONG F.henke oe 332 
mpiricuticke ayers At encae. Seen ale 190 
End=housing a crop. ............ 567 
WO SGOT (Ot let es oe ges 566 

enemysansadjective se. «128 oe 42 
PUNVIEd ALANS Es oicys. oro. c10 haccrrp cn ene 385 
Envy =exupress hatred............. 379 

“ to=malice towards.......... Shy 
Er final prolonged as additional syl- 

MA ees couato) saeeeai che Siem steak 331 


SUIS on Ons eatin ee eA GC 
harpideantformulas. tn.01..06eais 2 
Euripides and Plutarch.......... 
Ev’n an unusual form of abbrevia- 


PRM SACCENE. Oboe sycrene Genes oe 
HES POOSLUITE sonic sraie ease. chet Pairs 404 
Extra syllable rarely a monosyllable 542 
Extremities used collectively...... 396 


Fable as told by Menenius dra- 


matically ineffective..... 51 
“of Belly and Members, Douce 
OU aioe Rialto coseiericese 39, 48 
“of Belly and Members, Jacobs 
OL RP eee Pees a pele 40 
“of Belly and Members, other 
FOLMSLOLs eo eee 40 
“of Belly and Members, ver- 
sion of, in Camden’s Re- 
MULES WRG oR OEE 48 
«* of Pheedrus, possible allusion 
Oren Mean er alensesretaretavoravexats 175 
Faces used for face-cards......... 181 
Fail=found wanting in........... 539 
Fame and envy=envied fame..... 137 
Farmer on Shakespeare’s use of 
ErANS|ATIONSs anime ws sero eres +s 540 
Fear used in its two meanings.... 12 
Feeble=make weak.............. 60 


48 


753 

Fen as type of ill-smelling spot.... 380 
‘Fiddious’d’ a coined word....... 192 
Biery;culit ee. tecctya ote cists a 361 
Bind =expervences n-ne sete ee 541 
Rirsticomplaintasscme tiers ate 176 
HIVE! OF [ie ctor seers eae a 545 
HAMENS OLE Ofsaaaes a. ecee 209 
Flatter’d or fluiter’'d.............. 577 
Bleaysonte-Daleye see sere 602 
Followes a typographical error.... 108 
Rootycerviceotsthewewa eee oe 320 
HOR=0CCGUSE ns a Vee 282, 526 
Ca SATINCHCLercerm nna ee ae ee oF 214 
SP that'== because, otecasee i oe = es 384 
ONCE =U C6 wis ho re aaietn pene ania te 347 
Bore=tnijrontiofanenen eee 420 
Foreshadowing of future scene..... 333 
Former =aforesaid...........-... 46 
er ea NOLL LPINET annrne eeae is 553 
Forrest, Edwin, as Coriolanus..... 731 
Forsworn=sworn not to........... 539 


53 
Forth used as preposition=from... 103 


Rortune’siblowseataeeee ee ae oo 307 
Forty used to imply indefinite num- 

DEL sexnse ttisher rc dae ene 321 
Posset:sellers nxyssgescest bee ere 185 
Four shall draw out my command.. 132 


Fox, the symbol of ingratitude.... 410 


POxshipytrrace son eee oe te 410 
Pratres qutatimecntadcn orc eo 254 
Friendship between men, high ap- 
preciationOL-amime aerate 437 
‘From every meaner man,’ a com- 
MON Idiotoe eee. eae 123 
pm AINOMIO Meer eget centr oheisc es. 387 
Furnivallon the Plays... 2.0... 33. 659 
Further and farther, distinction 
DEtWeEH et oes crc eins ome 336 
Future used for subjunctive or in- 
TELL V Oat tatncr nelare ne miter cree eet 459 


Galen, reference to, an anachronism 190 
GarlicwtorsmmeliOre. nh tie. ee 
Garnett on the Date........... 604, 606 


GAVE = MS CQVe ne nein ern ote rote 442 
Generosity =high birth............ 64 
Genitive, :doublésassca1 nese ees 293 
Gentle wounded................. 308 


754 


Gervinus on character of Coriolanus. 679 
“on Shakespeare and the 


IMEGSSOS ie aaa ie neta 7O1 
ee OMe Daten. arene 599 
Sone Pay) yaa cn eikees 671 
Gildonionitie Play on 2. eee 649 
Gilt oti gee eee 89 
Gird =lollautinces.. Asie Oooo 72 
Give=(o represent.......0.-%.--5- 159 
God=makeaiod0jnepe ee ee 528 
Se SMOTST OOM xu ach tee Sebo tet oa 2092 
Goddene crs hore cn oie rae: 187 
Goethe and Shakespeare’s Corto- 
lanus KochtOna nee 203 
Goodtor: God n1eno she. eee 461 
“used in mercantile sense.... 22 
Gordon, G. S., on North’s Plutarch. 616 
se on the Daten. 2... 610 
oh ON tHE CXtaere teers 588 
Gratity =/cqizices eae rere 224 
Great frost of 1607-8, possible allu- 
SiON CO iors. 2 cae ern eee tee 58 
Griffiths, Mrs, on Act I, sc.i...... 19 
«¢ on pride of Corio- 
lanustsaceeee 196 
“ on transformation of 
Coriolanus....... 532 
GUess thinkin ne oor 23 
Guli= whirlpools aa eee 41 


Hales on ‘coal of fire upon the ice’ 


as reference to great frost....... 58 
Halliwell-Phillipps on edition of 
Plutarch used by Shakespeare... 600 


Hang by the wall=wseless........ 
Hardy’s Coriolan, analysis of...... 
“cc “cc 
Harmony in prose of Shakespeare 
compared to that of Demosthenes 
Harrington’s Political Aphorism. . . 
Hautboy, an important musical in- 


SENUMLEML iter moire Aten. cceceneens 560 
lave srer.OL Place.4. nets tae 223 
se MOLUMLCK Eonar irstan eNO 423 
Hee SOL CUVO vie, 5 bs 4 oe anne ee 222 
HAVOGHCEY Sa nce seen aaron 325 
Hazlitt; We, on thesPlaye a. eee 653 
Héadsor Aad: sociaten peer 355 
Heard’ a dissyllable: o. . 5.0. .0 552 
Heart ot hopedseiras. soem 126 


INDEX 


Heartiorherd scan ascites teeters 345 
“ the seat of understanding... 45 
“with composite meaning.... 272 

Heath on Warburton’s reference to 
Augustinian metaphysics....... 245 

Hector, the scourge of the Greeks.. 139 

Henry VI. and this Play in close af- 
fmity asitorstageryema. ne 612 

Heroic verse used to express excited 
Condition: cena ee ee eee 255 

Herwegh on un-Shakespearian coup- 
lét scene eee 194 

Highest degree used in legal sense. 574 

Him for ke by attraction......... 504 

Hisvor this 5 se eee 549 

History, Shakespeare’s truth to.... 241 

Hob=a rustic variation of Robert... 264 

Home=completelyinae- ese ae 234 

Hookham on the Play............ 666 

Hoop=hollow sie ee eee 431 

Horn on scene between Coriolanus 

and Volummnia: seme 550 
fo ONENEIPLEV Re Se ee oe 669 

Hospital for London’s Follies, un- 
known composition quoted by 
Stevens 5. .clee ee 205 

Houresioripousess sas eee 421 

Hours used for time generally..... 421 

Hudson on character of Coriolanus.. 675 

“on character of Volumnia.. 690 
os KonithenDates. va. saree ene 600 
Se SOWUHESPLGYe eee 659 
“Soul omie dient woaawne ate 587 

Hugo, F.-V., on the Play.......... 674 

Humaneyaccentiotse.acs ae ere 333 

Humble verb not adjective........ 358 

Humourous passages in Shake- 
speare’s Tragedies, Bradley on... 441 

Hungry =siertlenina ces ae ee 535 

Hunting language, Shakespeare’s 
CXACt USE. Of i500 eee rae 124 

HurdisionwheDatems sane 507 

LUSH t = S21 Onidi.te, sucveresrarersya eee 549 

Hiyperbolese.).-.asentrnn eee 435, 501 

Thad thought=J had a mind...... 442 

“say used emphatically.......... 248 

“was pronounced as one syllable.. 576 


its 


as) one: syllableay-a-eane 


“ thou wert, etc., pronounced 


INDEX 


Ignorant, unusual use of......... 270 
Impression through faulty expression 253 
In =at or during, as applied to time 529 
cm THO MEN eV. Wise <2..8VS7NOS oleae d 
STATO eri atels atxics. Sua nave nale 
sa thellast=at the lasto. 4.05.6. 0 


‘ 


= 
oO 
Me 
g 
> 
° 
ph 
=a 
oO 
8 
BE 
wn 
oO 


‘In blood,’ not in common use as 
phrase in hunting. ............ 
Infinitive indefinitely used for forms 
OES CLUNG Ne ceria cies Ret 
Inflated speeches of Shakespeare’s 
Romans, Minto on............. 
Influence of mother on child’s char- 


Information =informant.......... 
Ingleby on ‘cheer’ as shout of ap- 


459 


A481 
«« on philological tests as to 
genuineness of corrections 
in Collier’s Folio....... 17” 
602 
202 
42 
275 


Inherited = possessed... chee 0s 
Instrument =bodily organ......... 
Interpolation by Pope........... 
sf of line in Collier’s 

341 
Interruptions not interfering with 
completeness of verse.......... 
Intransitive and reflexive verbs... . 
Invader of His Country, date of first 
perform- 
ance and 
CASU ie 
Talfourdon 
Iphigenia in Aulis, similarity of 
SLE ALIONMN A raphe cis wine eae ere 
aronyaramaticn ...¢..ancweus 406, 407 
ss eerie Acts JI; 
Verityson cess 

mmm TAC Crt she 4 Bi acd us Rate One 
Irving, H., as Coriolanus......... 
‘Is,’ use of, with intransitive verbs. 
It used emphatically............. 


461 
88 


“ “ “ 


WackaGardanters iry.rvectttes’s 4 shes 
Jacobs on antiquity of Fable of Belly 
HOD IAAL oe SRO OAL. 


199 
Jameson, Mrs, on character of 

V olemnia Senet oe cose 688 
Johnson on the Play.............. 650 
JOve.StOwni book ert eee 328 
Judicious=judicial............... 578 
JUMP =7isk Wee eee 308 
Kellett on Medieval Allegory...... 647 

“on Young Marcius........ 543 
Kemble, J. P., appearance of, as 
Coriolanus....... 55 
os as Coriolanus...... 730 
sf L. Hunt’s account of 
peculiarity in pro- 
nunciation....... 160 
Kilbourne on Thomson’s Cortola- 

WS festa) Bi kee er ie es, seo aH 720 
King and no King, similarity of situ- 

AtONINGe, aes ous as 534 
Kneemisediasaverbaeayreencaeter vate 496 
Knightoniihe Daten eos. 2. ae 598 

SME ONS C LONY Re Bel rnc ete 587 
Koch on influence of Shakespeare’s 

Coriolanus upon Goethe......... 203 
Kreyssig on solicitation scene..... 265 

os OUUERE IOV Eee eee 669 
Lapse of memory of Coriolanus.... 163 
Latham, Miss G., on character of 

VOluaniniian oS ears oe ake 691 
Law, benefit of, lost through re- 

SISTANCE a eetece ee 324 
Lee, S., on character of Coriolanus.. 682 

“on character of Volumnia... 697 
“on characters of the Tribunes 72 
Sem ONSLGEMD GLE e tear ie ees ca 609 
SPROTL HEEL CLD mR ce ose soles oe 588 
het tion lost Meamice pact eles 112 
Leg, to make a=fo bow........... 184 
Leo on edition of North’s Plutarch 

used by Shakespeare........... 614 
‘Less’ and ‘more,’ confusion be- 

CIV CED eee etrtete anetnsia ctaiaiet azote IOI 
Messen. nisiperson semana ed 6 acne. 127 
Let go used to express dissent..... 338 
Wetsias false forming. jeune 514 


Lex Attinnia relating to Tribunes.. 227 
Like to a lonely dragon........... 403 
Line of four feet not Shakespearian 462 
Lines of four accents apparent..... 427 


756 
Link between Coriolanus and Vol- 


umnia, Miss Latham on........ 25 
Locality, of “ACE, SC vied tgacrrie 563 
TOckrananeneca eters ckeiets forte 208 
Ong = Gin LOmaeine etree ee 558 
Longs=to be appropriate to........ 548 
eOOkstheein en cio aeaerin Giore eeare 524 
Looks = promises t0.2......+++++++ 376 
ots itor blanks qaaerly ies hens «0 515 
Love the State more than doubt the 

Change nwa sate ser si averiae 306 
Lover=one kindly disposed........ 516 
TLowestihell ise interes dsc Sete 381 
Lungs the source of laughter...... 43 
Murch, Meanin slots co. eaaiate 232 


Lurcht all Swords of the Garland.. 232 


MacCallum on charges brought by 
Tribunes against Co- 


TIOlANUS 3 shesecsiesesyens 370 

iN on comparison between 
Biography and Play. 617 

“ on Coriolanus’s love for 
family erase 388 
S on death of Coriolanus. 580 

« on flaw in yielding of 
Conolanussenee eer 551 

aS on formation of plot by 
Coriolanusie: sees 406 

on radicalism of Corio- 
lariusdaracees sere ters 265 

ss on Secret Motive of 
INMEGINC ce wu ko anos 472 

Se on Shakespeare and the 
MOSSES Raia MO 0x0 706 

ss on Shakespeare’s di- 

vergence from Plu- 
Catchers at pee: 287 

se on Shakespeare’s feel- 

ing for Rome’s great- 
TESS hassel tompeies rte 562 

on source of passage in 
Act UI iscalc cn 221 
$ Onithe Pater tae 610 
f ONHELP lava. Be eee 663 
Macready as Coriolanus.......... 730 
Made=committed..............4. 572 
<>, fa ANUS Aes wean iste Welsee 467 
Maims ot shame pemcn se sae 432 
Make road=tnvades 2 oo. ee ed 282 


INDEX 


Making but reservation.......... 390 
Malkin=aislaitcria eae er 208 
Malone on the Date........... IQ, 595 
Mammock =¢0 cut into fragments... 96 
‘Man’ in combination with adjec- 
tivecof enclitic:totces.2 so eer 58 
Man-childi s, yatecrncoee ener 88 
Manifest=notorious.............. 93 
Mankind, a term of reproach..... 409 
Many-headed multitude.......... 246 
Map, figurative use of............ 182 
Marcius or Martius as form of 
proper Noun TA. ses sae ee ese 22 
Marcius, Jr., character of, Thiimmel 
(0) RRR ConG AAs non Ds bc.c ae) 
Martius Caius, Schmidt on transpo- 
SitION Of NAMERsaeo ee ee eee 196 
Matthews, B., on Shakespeare and 
the Masses....... 714 
ss ON PCAELay, cere 668 
Meazels or measles.............. 289 
WON POR BG oa poo oueuunceda€ 287 
Memory=memorial........... 430, 582 
Menenius Agrippa, character of... 1 
Merely = entirely. nan ee ete 320 
Merit and demerit equivalent... .. 78 
“to choke it in utterance..... 478 
Merye Jest of a Man called Howle- 
Plas TCLETENCE ALO Mate te 256 
Microcosm=the body of man; a 
world im miniature. ............ 183 
Minto on inflated speeches of 
Shakespeare’s Romans........ 61 
Misety' = avarice.) mie os ae 230 
Mob, the, in Shakespeare, Raleigh on 21 
Moe, unnecessary use of.......... 266 
Monosyllable containing vowel fol- 
lowed by 7, prolonged.......... Cat 
More used as noun and adverb in 
juxtaposition: +. .aaeee ee 460 
Morley, H., on Phelps as Coriolanus 733 
Morial=deqdiven ne eee 551 
Mother’s blessing, kneeling to re-_ 
CELVE; a CUStOM eee oe ee 197 
Muckof thewworldsas, aa.c 0s aeee 239 
Mulberry as type of softness... ... 359 


“cc 


introduction of, by King 
James as external evi- 
dence of date, 
596, 598, 603, 610 


INDEX 


Mulled=sofienednaascdee oes cae 453 
Mummers, origin of.............. 186 
Muniments=defences............. 45 
IMiturrenirieweee iret tens ook eran mer ee 116 
Murry, J. M., on Shakespeare and 
the Masses...... 710 
4 onthe Playoae en 665 
IMutiners, accent of....$..2..5- 0. 71 
EMivgdars tiSOMesy pica ney. eae eae 404 
SSePCTACIOUS: SUENCE. . 0c oa acetate 197 
Naked=narmed:..2.2 3006 es eee 241 
Names, Roman, how constructed.. 160 
Native=native cause............. 299 
“Needer,’ inclusive use of......... 405 
INicely=fawdedevnao saa cc loathe Soe 211 
Nominative omitted... 5.2 oe 323 
INOSEC=LOTS Melaka es HEMI. koa 501 
INGE= 2101 ONE o5e ioe ood c 352, 386 
Notion = understanding. .......... 576 
Oak-garland as mark of honour... 87 
Oath of Coriolanus not to yield.... 506 
Obadiah, parallel passage in....... 218 
Object iof our misery... 50.5: 2..802 23 


Objective use of possessive pronoun 31 
Occupation = mechanics........... 464 
Odds beyond arithmetic.......... 
Oechelhaiiser on scenic arrangement 


OLPACE WMA SCSEIVA=K eats ss kat ees 100 
@erbeat Oro erbeati ren oasis as 439 
OP =CONLEUING sue ed a oa ee 77 


“ =out of, with verbs signifying 


LEDIDUUIE nmap ns Pete ee 564 
Rate WGlaen aye oe eh ssecenevare arz!sohe 240 
OH CE— CHOI PE tee o 5a sie cine. fiche 501 
Obymer done sacs ahene kis coe ete 128 
Olympus to a molehill............ 532 
On =F MEANS Of cies css ceweees 371 
ONRCE=AS'S00W GS CVE oct c oe acees 240 
One=complete, entire............. 327 
EY NOTA) ene of i eae a Se a 443 
Spe SEVEIAV CATS a iin Sin oh candice 407 
“time will owe another........ 321 


OAKO Oulart eal teres Wis i 32 


Operas on subject of Coriolanus.... 725 
Opposite=opponent.............. 221 
OTAWHELNEH mente erst ae oles bees. 96 


Ordinance in sense of rank a hapax 
KG USNO Tp pabnoueua een coor 


757 


Origin, modern, of Collier’s MS. cor- 


rections proved by test-word... 481 
Our misprinted for your in Folio... 319 
Out=completely.. 0... c ee cae 438 
Overture not used in sense of musi- 

calpreldemass. nee 146 

es OLICOUELLULE = Nantel ere 146 

Owe = diene selene od, Mech ee 581 

Painted =stained ana ee ee 236 

Pallate=to smack of.............. 296 
Parentheses used to mark a qualify- 

ENQGEXPLESSION eens aCe ee 83 
Participate = participant or partici- 

PALE Saas shai mie dae ee ee 42 
Participle formed from adjective 

and from noun...... 525 


ae past, curtailed form of.. 331 


Participles of verbs ending in d and 
t, omission of ed in termination of. 412 


Particular = personal relation. ..... 496 
Particulars, by=im defail......... 248 
Patriotism not an incentive to his 
valor with Coriolanus.......... 107 
Payne, J. H., on J. P. Kemble’s ap- 
pearance as Coriolanus......... 55 
Peace, unpopular: ores eee 452 


People, Shakespeare and causeof the 392 
“the cause of the, not a sub- 
jectitor poctrys-.er 4a O53 
Peremptory=firmly determined.... 326 
Perfidy, royal, against prisoners... 360 


Pester=to crowd nn anata ene 456 
Phelps, Samuel, as Coriolanus..... 733 
Philological tests as to genuineness 

of corrections in Collier’s Folio.. 177 
PICK SHC eras eee. 62 
Pikes trailed at military funeral.... 582 
Plague mark on house............ 236 

STOO AIAN mE e vio Sette 401 
Planet-stricken = to any sudden 

CLOT Re ET rae eke NG 
Pleading for bleeding, Collier’s re- 

Pra CHOOKOLHIR Phen seria se at aniks 503 


Plebeians a dissyllable........... 296 
Plebemfor plebelans:.....-..0 «5 o<- 
Blot =Muman Codyow. de. cue oe 
Plutarch, Shakespeare’s additions to 
Poetical art, Shakespeare’s want of, 

WJEnNIStON 77 aay tee ore eee 


758 INDEX 
Point=sienalGeecr a accniiesn ee 468 | Rabble, the, Horn on.....:...... 
SPOISON OF PFUSOMwieieiyaials nate oie) 525 | Rake as type of leanness.......... 
Policy =s1ratacein. meen es Se 346 | Raleigh on Act I. of Play........ 
Political wisdom in this play...... 265 | Ransom =releasé..........6000-5% 
Polled=cutithewiair.: 02-0. e oe 446)|Rapture=ayitaaaed eee eet 
Poor suitors have strong breaths... 30 2 or rupture.............. 
Poor-rich 37 tac 162) | Rascal lean deere eee eee 
Porter, Miss C., on scenic arrange- Reason = argue foresee eee 
ments. .85, 100, 171 C= there 1S CASON een re 


Rotche=1o thrush abs. a. ee 
Power signifying natural and moral 


167 


DOWEL ee he ees ae saree eee 245 
Prenomen, nomen, and agnomen.. 160 
Prank—=d7enfye- seme eoererie 283 
PLAY OL PALE Vas tie res Hate naan 533 
Prayer aidissyllablerum- te cee: 541 
Precipitation = precipitousness..... 335 


Preposition, omission of, in adverb- 


ial expressions...... B78 

“ redundant use of..... 173 

M2 transposition of...... 435 
Present=this present time......... 378 
Presently =instanily...........0.. 578 
Press’d=impressed......s0++e0+s% 81 
Pretence=expressed dim.......... 83 


‘Pretty tale’ used as epithet both by 


North and Shakespeare........ 33 
Processiof.laweemeas eet oe 331 
Prolss on character of Coriolanus... 143 
Prompts yous. saeeee a ree 348 
Pronoun in nominative after con- 

junction and before in- 
finite meee eee 360 
se OMUSSIONVOL sae eee ee 311 
Pronouns, relative, neglect of in- 
HECLIONSIN weesces.Pe oe hee eee 72 


Prose and verse, Delius on use of, 

22, 86, 159, 171, 220, 416, 515, 555 
Provand = provender.............. 216 
Proverbs, use of, as mark of lack of 


reed oar musmut amen sare ne eae 63 


Psaltery, a stringed instrument.... 560 
Buling whine cates ale nes 414 
PUpIAG EF es trotsn st ocis are 231 
Pythagorean precept............. 367 


Quadrisyllabic division, Bayfield on 469 


‘Quake’ as active verb.......:... 142 
Quarry =reward given to hounds.... 62 
Quired ‘or chowed Seen ne eee 366 


Red flag the signal for battle...... 
Soc pestilencenseds Werte noe aes 
“rose and lily, conflict between, 

on cheeks enema 

Reechie= Smoky van ass en oneaeee 

Rejourn= postponé..............-- 

Relative, omission of, where ante- 

cedent clause is emphatic....... 

Remission= pardon............5. 

Repent for necoor ce eee eee 

Repetition in latter of two clauses 
connected by relative.......... 

Require=Gskas cee ee eee 

‘Return’ used in transitive sense. . 

Revel =act without restraint....... 

Rhodes, R. C., on architectural fea- 

tures of Eliza- 
bethan stage... . 
on early date of this 

y on staging of Act I, 

SCAU S eels cathe 

Rhyme, use of, by Coriolanus...... 

Rhythmic prose, Bayfield on...... 

Right-hand ile ssresy-e0e- eee 

Rights by rights fouler........... 

Robertson on Shakespeare’s de- 

pendence on North’s Plutarch. . 

Rome, pronunciation of 

Roted or rooted 


oe WK be le, 8) 6 e) © 6/0, eo 8a 


on scene between Corio- 
lanus and Volumnia. . . 
Ruskin on silence of Virgilia...... 
Ruskin’s appreciation of Shake- 
SPEAtes iekarn, eee 

es ‘prettiest bit in Shake- 
Speare-ti Geen 


“ 


er rs 


S or es final omitted in nouns ending 

ANS GL ATICNS SA eemacpy cee caelre in ae 
SAVE =TCMED Nite aecainie Gio Gio wieeiorents 
Salvanivas! Coniolanusies. case eek 


Sanctuary a dissyllable........... 
Scaletorvstalewes<.sclae0 ahienitee eae 
Scaling =wetghing.............00% 
SCAELGEOP SCORED Mic inode Wier Wareasten ch 
Scenic divisions on Elizabethan 

stage, Verity On, sacs: sie oon 
Schelling on Shakespeare and the 


Scherer on too sudden transitions in 
Shakespeare santa cient cerns 
Schlegell onthe Plays. .5.045 00006 
Schmidt on transposition of name 
Marist Caius: ycic-uin eee 
Schmidt’s ignoring of Collier’s MS. 
COTTECHONS =, penis ecige eee 


Scott’s Kenilworth, use of Shake- 

spearian phrases in............. 
Scratchmy of heads ja. sss. 5 ome 
SeastAT a CACON siaeiae iors seiner 
Seasoned =quelified.............+ 
Seat=royal seat or throne......... 
Secession to Mons Sacer, Shake- 

speare’s omission of............ 
DECODCICOUTSO amc abled tices on cise a 
Seem, peculiar use of, in Shake- 

SHCALe SukiMere oe ar Sita rakis 
SG SAUL WP coon cae Reser eRe RIA OL 
Sensible= having sensation........ 
Sententia Pueriles.......000..000. 


SOLOW =AdvONG’. «6 ats Osten a aed ane 
Shadow, conduct towards, as an il- 

lustration of character.......... 
Shakespeare’s truth to history... .. 
‘Shall’ used as impersonal verb.... 
SEIU SCOMICH my te Sia, uesa vals ae eee 
Sheridan’s Coriolanus; or, the Roman 

Matron, analysis of............ 
Sherlock on comparisons...... eae 
Sherman on relationship between 

Biography and Play........... 
ShootaasHOUly wa een pecans «sie 3.0.4 
Shooting their emulation......... 


INDEX 


556 
670 


196 


422 
304 
444 


283 
220 
538 
380 

48 


32 
118 


221 
200 
III 
545 
329 
286 


76 
241 
469 
526 


759 
Shop and store-house, distinction 


betweentaiarns. 2. eee 47 
Should=should have............. 458 
Showsiohipeace manveceninece alse aeae 377 
Siddons’, Mrs, portrayal of Volum- 

nia in ovation scene............ 195 
‘Side,’ verb used intransitively = 

tolakepartetweumaricae crt ts. os 60 
Silent Woman, passage in, to deter- 

mine date or playsrme es cee. 233 
Similarity of situation in Ajax of 

sophoclesaeae smetnni tae oe 582 
Simpson, P., on Shakespeare’s 

knowledge of acting........... 533 
Single =imsignificant.............. 175 
Singularity = personal peculiarity... 78 
Sir Thomas More, comparison of 

ideas in, and in this Play....... Gps 
Sit in gold=enthroned............ 505 
Snider onuvezb1ay mien eee 660 

“on yielding of Coriolanus... 542 
So inserted redundantly.......... 380 
‘* never-needed help............ 501 
“ omission of, after think........ 125 
Solicitation, seasonable time for... 504 
Sowle=io seize by the ear.......... 446 
Spoils got on the Antiats......... 371 
Spot anes cin trees eee ee tess 93 
Stage arrangement of scenes in 

ACE LaF) lator ro arr ore eae 281 
Stage-directions, confusion in..... 140 

4 = REG; 
Rhodes on 109 
Stand naked=wuncovered.......... 303 
“ to me=support me......... 552 


PSMPON=A1SISbs. cas wae eae oe 242 


Stapfer on character of Coriolanus.. 680 


“ on Shakespeare and the 
MASS CS SeINe ae rite n 702 
State =CHhari On Staten. aves eve ees 557 

Statute, Shakespeare’s use of 
MELIN Aerie emer iseseterion’. aie nears 32 
Stay upon=wWail for. ........660-- 556 
Steel grows soft as silk........... 147 
DLCEVEMOTSLAPUC Maayan trale-stemariielt tats 414 
Stokesionier dreahasas. sen ee: 603 
SLOOC=—= 24S USTED eet tareieit orciesaimrene 463 
StOOpito the Meartarnviicii seins 345 
Stan slOck@ean maine tawar enters 540 
DLPALEHION: 16 LAE aia sire were tere) clei 604 


760 


Strife between Consuls and Trib- 
UNES; ISSUCION ee ae nee temteies 207 

Struck = malignant influence of planet 237 

Subjunctive with indicative form.. 221 


Subtlesgroundéatmatiecnti so 520 
Success, a word requiring qualifi- 

Cations... sees eae 76 

ST N= 7 OSU 5 ai. ce hianseteees 505 

Such as=sucle (idiom erecta ea 467 


“ the antecedent to which...... 


“used as antecedent to that.... 


Sued=for tongues. 5 1... sins =.tie 273 
Suggest=to prompt to evil......... 215 
Sun dancing on Easter-day....... 561 


Supreme,caccentiolanmmeatenee es 
Swinburne on the Play............ 
Sworn brothersa.ctoaese-te meres 
Syllable, unaccented, in trisyllabic 


FOO tay carol gsnca cee ee eee: 274 
Symons on Irving as Coriolanus... 736 
Tag =rabble i. 5 erase tire met Sere Bye 
‘Taintingly’ or tauntingly......... 43 
Lake iti=ovbdetes vee isk ery 351 

“ up=encounter......6...25.. 322 
Talfourd on Dennis’s Invader of His 

COUP Ys sceke So matohacs seo as Ne 719 
Mameror tamed. tikes arene 454 


Tate’s, N., Ingratitude of a Com- 


monwealth, analysis of.......... 716 
‘each: the: peoplessaraanaee settee 216 
Temple Fortuna Muliebris........ 555 
Nent=1ake7estdences... 01... noes 367 

ces 7020 ODE. 9 ck ara eee eae 144 
Tetzlaff on Young Marcius and but- 

(en 5 Ne aren SINR c= icant Rapes 95 
Text, corruptions of, in Act III, sc. i, 

IsfVolorhual Cle ee ote Aan 320 


That as conjunctional affix, 49,347, 408 
“* conjunctional, omitted and 


thenunsertediass ein ee 128 

“ omission of, after as........ 213 
** used demonstratively in con- 

ditional sentence......... 211 

That like nor peace nor war...... 56 

The, omission of, after prepositions 470 
“present wars devour him, an 

IM pPrecacion anwar tees 72 
“Roman Gods as an invoca- 

HON ahead See eee 120 


INDEX 


The things or thwartings.......... 
Theirs used as pronominal adjec- 


Think upon=remember with com- 

PASSLOM ME toe a ee 

Thomson’s Coriolanus, analysis of. . 
Coriolanus, Verplanck 

on incident in... .427, 

Coriolanus, Victor on... 

Those as genitive plural of their or 


ce 


Thou and you to indicate change 
of -thought<n. ase ete 


Thow=f7si Pe Ren act eae ee 
Thread = pass through............ 
Time Analysisn..Gsacs ven eeeee 
“compared to ancient vol- 
WME LFS, eee eee 

Titus Lartius, character of, Mac- 
Callumion yas. 

ws S introduction of, in 
ACTS LE SSC e =i: 

Danielson neers: 


TO= against. ee nee eee 
“ =1in proportion to............. 
be partly proudsa.47 ose 
the port for ‘to the pot,’ Collier’s 
retractionOf ss: sacs cance 


“ 


‘ 


“ac 


with the infmitive omitted in 

former of two clauses and in- 

sertedinilatter sea 
Tolmanonihe Plays eee 
Tomb so evident as a chair....... 
Took=1mjected 2 sore ee 
‘Touch,’ varied significations of... . 
Transitions, too sudden, Scherer on. 
Treaty =themesc: sds 2 hase oe eae 
Trench on Shakespeare’s use of 

North’s translation............ 
Tribunate, an innovation......... 
Tribunes as magistrates 


“ce 


demagogical craft of..... 
not permitted to enter 
Senate House......... 


oe 


INDEX 


Tribunes, the, characters of, Ger- 


VANUSION ras ee eras 8 

s the, characters of, Mac- 
Callumvons an. gene. Io 

€ the, characters of, Oech- 
elhatiser ona. eee 9 
BRICK PGi 6 os ncoikeceere rere nk oe 423 
Triton of the minnows........... 290 
POEM 5 See roe ecloalee ke 89 
Troth used with speak =truth..... 444 


Tullus Aufidius, change in character 
of, Coleridge on. 166 


e se character of....11, 12, 
13, 14, 80 

ARTI =F EF SOUP oe oo here cok 460 
* “to=put to trouble. .... 20.2. 326 
EE winsUSed aS: Verbena sence 422 
NONTIGIONGTHETPLGY 4. eaten ct 673 
Un- or in- used as negative suffix.. 41 
Wnbarbedscc.). ac car eases 362 
Wndersiends*) avers. Seeders 433 
Under-crest=to support........... Lol 
WnkniestheknOte se o42). 0 ccm ece 412 
Unsevered =unseparable.......... 346 


‘Upon’ used with ‘love’ 
Upper end of table 
Urge =Iay stress upon 


Vail your ignorance 
Valeria, character of, Clarke on.... 
Vaward = advance guard 
‘Vengeance’ used as an intensive 


ACV ELD rsa ere ats 220 
tf used to strengthen in- 
terrogation........ 32 
BoM ==C16 POSE: Off ag ephe ie ole node eesksiahe 67 


“a 


full of 
Verb of motion, omission of prepo- 

sition with 
omitted with 


“cc “ 


plural, by attraction from in- 

tervening noun 

signifying negative idea pro- 

ductive of ambiguity 
singular, with plural subject, 

431, 459 

524 


“ 


366 


“ce 


34° 


“ 


Verbs, reflexive 
Verified = establish by testimony... . 


Verity onvAct [Lscuue nen es 
“on couplet pronounced by 
White un-Shakespearian. . 

on opening scene.......... 

on resemblance between Act 
I, sc. iti. and scene in Mac- 
Dethes LV EMS ets ne 
on scenic divisions on Eliza- 
bethan stage 
on Scott’s familiarity with 
Shakespeares ee ae 4 ia. 
on Shakespeare’s use of 
North’s Plutarch 
on Shakespeare’s view of 
democracy 
on the play as a Tragedy of 
premonitory hints 
on Tullus Aufidius element 
of the play 

Verplanck on incident in Thomson’s 
Coriolanus 

on Thomson’s Coriolanus 

Verse supplied by Pope 

Versification of play, Bayfield on. . 

Vexation = mortification 

Victor on Thomson’s Coriolanus. . . 

Viper as type of unnatural offspring 

Virgilia, change in character of... . 

o> characteriofien214, 15,57, 
silence of, Ruskin on 

Virgin, an infelicitous epithet 

Virginal palms 

Virtues which our divines lose..... 

Voice in sense to vote for a hapax 
legomenon 

Voided for avoided 

Volce, form of name discussed 

Vowel, short, preceded by long, fre- 
quently contracted 


(73 


“ 


“ 


Wage=to pay wages to 
Warburton, ‘Take my cap’ 
Wars for war 
‘Watch’ used as in language of 

falconry 
‘We’ used for us 
Weeds or waves 
Well-ended, meaning of, when ap- 

plied to wheat-rick 
Well-found = fortunately 


761 


171 


104 
20 


86 
fis 
283 
615 
30 
203 
281 


542 
576 
275 

27 
393 
721 
323 
4Il 
199 
198 


762 

Were but one danger............. 327 
Where=wheredsence oct) ce 42 
Whether pronounced where....... 323 


Which for as with antecedent such. 365 


While she chats him............. 206 
Whipyotprogenyz cere ote es 139 
White, R. G., on the Date....... E5599 
is oni: Lentven ome. 587 
Ss on un-Shakespearian 
coupletameriaee 194 
Whitelaw on the Play............ 657 
ue on value of contrast be- 
tween Coriolanus and 
AUIEICLTUG Rees oe teter se 579 
‘Who’ personifying irrational ante- 
Coden tases ve tacapaeiite cle tieercs 367 
Whole name of the war........... 192 
Wholesome=reasonable....... eee 250 
‘Whom,’ confusion of two construc- 
tonsiwithhet mre eee 408 
Will used with 3d person=pre- 
LOND LOSI es Ke 60 
«you be gone?=Are you going? 409 
WilsUpom Powers. aac acne 66 
Winter, W., on Salvini as Coriolanus 737 
Wit, small amount of, needed for 
vettingtwiles chi ee oe 247 
Wolf=a peasant’s coat............ 256 


“« in sheep’s clothing, fable of.. 256 


INDEX 


Wood, S., on death of Coriolanus as 


atonement ’s. .)isieeohien eee 


| Woolvish toge...). aeurts ss esse 


S tongue resin sc 


‘Worth; to haye hisses 
Wounds of Coriolanus, correct 


Wreak=rcverce- on ce ree 
Wreckidiortrack'd ae eee 


Yea and nay, yes and no......... 
Vield=report 2. pani Ones 
You and your, confusion of, in 


Wousheard ot@Bylesn aaa eee 
Young, J. C., on Mrs Siddons in 
ovation to Coriolanus.......... 
Young Marcius and butterfly, 
Chambers on 
and butterfly, 
Tetzlaff on.. 
Your and our, confusion between. . 


Your favour is well appear’d...... 
(79 


“ce “cc 


You’st a provincialism for you'll... 


* 
Cz s , 
% aes om 
“ 
~ 
~ 
on 
ye 
part 
ar) 
7: 
- 
a . 
Fa 
te ~ 
etd 4 ” 
; 
= 
t 


Fs. AD 

ee 

i - Pod . 
= Betas ss 

ae, : hs % 
: * ; be 4 
rig 


4 eh ii 
PF care. S : 
AA btigh ae) ' 
a aa? | 


af 


” 


@ 


f 


a 


iy 


l 


SS 


| 


ui 


— 


til 


| 


| 


— 


[ 


4587 


ae 


= 


Ee 


etfs 


ee 


“2 


Wine 


=e 


Yor 


Sa at 


cae 
S25. 


Pan 


SN 


EE cert 


zi : 


5 
S 
x 
:: 


et bars 


