eae 
=e, 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 


httos://archive.org/details/unset0O000unse_m8h0O 


26145 


A NEW VARIORUM EDITION 


OF 


SHAKESPEARE 


TT g/L DT 


OF 


CVYMUBE LINE 


EDITED BY 


HORACE HOWARD FURNESS 


PHILADELPHITA 
joabe LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 
LONDON : 16 JOHN STREET, ADELPHI 


LO18 


Property Of 

L. A. Baptist 

COLLEGE LIBRARY 
Newhall, Californie 


Copyright, 1913, by H. H. FURNESS, JR. 


IN MEMORIAM 


FOREWORD 


Tue last letter written to me by Dr Furness on August to, 
1912, three days before his death, contains, in reference to this 
his final work, words far fitter than any I might write to serve 
as an introduction to the present volume. Thus he wrote:—‘All 
the Commentary is ready for the printer, and Preface almost 
ready. The Source of the Plot, and Date of Composition, all 
finished and type-written. Dve many atime gone to press when 
I’ve been not nearly as ready as I am now with Cym.’ I have 
considered it best to present the volume as left by its Editor, and 
have, therefore, not ventured to supply the articles on Stage His- 
tory of the Play, Actors’ Interpretations, or the List of Books con- 
sulted. The Index—indispensable to these volumes—has been com- 
piled by Dr Benson B. Charles, of the University of Pennsylvania. 


ir eR 
October, 1913 


ath ae ‘ hl 


a i a ae 


i. Z 


fl 


TA i 
WA v : 
Ml ie 


PoR Bae ASCrrE 


‘Tus play has many just sentiments, some natural dialogues, and 
some pleasing scenes, but they are obtained at the expense of much 
incongruity. 

‘To remark the folly of the fiction, the absurdity of the conduct, the 
confusion of the names and manners of different times, and the impos- 
sibility of the events in any system of life were to waste criticism upon 
unresisting imbecility, upon faults too evident for detection, and too 
gross for aggravation.’ Time was when my youthful eyes were dazzled 
by the charms of Imogen, that my only comment on this note by Dr 
Johnson was irrepressible laughter,—so stately was it in its language, 
so patronising in its tone, and so purblind in its appreciation of one 
whose name Dr Johnson could never, never have imagined would be 
pronounced ‘the greatest in all literature.’ Time brings in its revenges, 
however, and if grizzling hair the brain doth clear, what clarifying 
results may not be expected from hair snow-white? It is even so. 
Laughter died away into a smile, the smile lapsed into a sad brow, 
and the wrinkled brow into a vague assent. Ay, Dr Johnson was 
right in his estimate of this play of Cymbeline,—the sweetest, tender- 
est, profoundest of almost all the immortal galaxy. 

If, then, this play be open to such a criticism as Dr Johnson’s, 
which by one eminent critic* has been pronounced ‘true’ and even 
‘moderate,’ whence comes then this deterioration? It can be only 
indirectly due to advancing years. Although forty-six years of age 
can hardly inaugurate physical or intellectual senility, yet into that 
span there may have been compressed an emotional life far outspan- 
ning the Psalmist’s threescore years and ten. Indeed, it is not difficult 
to fancy that at this period there may have crept into Shakespeare’s 
study of imagination a certain weariness of soul in contemplating in 
review the vast throng of his dream-children. What possible joy can 
thrill the human breast that he has not experienced and revealed? 
What pain or anguish, remorse or guilt that can rack the soul has he 
not vicariously borne? And now a sufficing harvest of fame is his, 


*See Shakespeare, by Walter Raleigh, 1909, p. 142. 


vi PREFACE 


and honest wealth, accompanied by honour, love, obedience, and 
troops of friends. Thus at last, safe moored within a waveless bay, 
what more has life to offer? 

But inaction is not rest, and I can most reverently fancy that 
he is once more allured by the joy of creation when by chance there 
falls in his way the old, old story of a husband convinced, through 
villainy, of his wife’s infidelity. Thereupon there begins to live and 
breathe before him the heavenly Imogen, fair as Miranda, in colour 
warmer than Hermione. The woman tempted him and he fell,— 
to the infinite happiness of all. 

For a secondary plot anything will do, only let its scene and time 
be remote enough to allow free scope in manners and customs. 
Holinshed, the faithful old standby, will quickly enough furnish all 
that is needed. As for the tedious drudgery of the minor char- 
acters, is there not many a friend who will assume all this portion 
of the task? When my fancy thus works I do not forget what en- 
thusiastic Leonard Digges, who must have been one of Shakespeare’s 
ardent young admirers, says on this very subject, that Shakespeare 
does not 


‘Plagiari-like from others gleane, 

Nor begges he from each witty friend a Scene 
To peece his Acts with, all that he doth write, 
Is pure his owne, plot, language exquisite.’ 


We of this day, however, know better, and love Shakespeare with a 
truer respect than even his warm-hearted friend. There are scenes 
on scenes in many of the Plays which no love for Shakespeare can be 
so blind as not to see that they could never have been written by him. 
‘That some portions’ [of Troilus and Cressida], says Dyce,* ‘particu- 
larly towards the end, are from the pen of a very inferior dramatist 
is unquestionable.’ Sprpp1nc has conclusively proved that there is 
a joint authorship—Shakespeare and Fletcher—in Henry the Eighth.} 
Freay has shown that only a portion of Timon is by Shakespeare, tf 
and Tennyson maintained the same in regard to Pericles.§ Thus, 
then, I believe that Cymbeline grew,—the joint work of two minds; and 
in studying it the uncritical position is forced on us of claiming for 
Shakespeare all that is good and abandoning to the unknown assist- 


* Works, vol. vi, p. 2. 
t Shakespeare Society Transactions, 1874, D: tr: 
} See op. cit., p. 130. § See op. cit., p. 252. 


PREFACE Si 


ant all that is weak or trivial, or, in short, all that Dr Johnson con- 
demns. 

Regarded broadly, I believe that the Imogen love story and all that 
immediately touched it interested Shakespeare deeply; the Cymbeline 
portion was turned over to the assistant, who at times grew vainglor- 
ious and inserted here and there, even on the ground sacred to Imogen, 
lines and sentiments that shine by their dulness. Nay, one whole 
character was, I think, confided to him. It is Belarius—who bored 
Shakespeare. To rehabilitate that hoary scoundrel was not (I may 
not say) too great a task for Shakespeare, but one that would divert 
him from fairer and more entrancing subjects. He, therefore, per- 
mitted his fellow-craftsman to convert into a sanctimonious braggart 
a man who, for a personal affront, committed a crime against human- 
ity as black as may be found, and an act of treachery against the State 
so foul that death by torture would have been, for that era, the sole 
amends. This treason Belarius did not commit unwittingly. He 
knew it was treason and acknowledged it.* And he knew well enough 
that in stealing the King’s sons he crushed a father’s heart, and the 
more agonising the father’s tears, the more highly he exulted in his 
success.f And finally, as the lowest abysm of his baseness, he has 
the brazen effrontery to demand of Cymbeline payment in cash for 
his sons’ board during all the years they have been stolen.{ To 
be sure, he adds that he will return the money as soon as it is paid. 
Not he. Once a thief, always a thief. He is not for an instant to 
be trusted. 

Of course, I would not be understood as asserting that Shakespeare 
had no part or lot in the Holinshed scenes. Here and there through- 
out our course, first on one side and then on the other, we feel the un- 
erring noiseless stroke that keeps the canoe headed straight for the 
goal. 

In the Fifth Act a masque is given, which from Pope’s day to the 
present is regarded by a large majority of editors and critics as an 
intrusive insertion by some hand not Shakespeare’s. STEEVENS 
termed it ‘contemptible nonsense.’ Although this eminent editor 
may not be far wrong on the present occasion, we cannot but remember 
that he it was that asserted that the ‘strongest act of Parliament that 
‘could be framed would fail to compel’ us to read the Sonnets. STAUN- 
TON called it ‘pitiful mummery,’ and there is many another uncompli- 
mentary remark by eminent critics. In discussing his treatment of 


* Act V, sc. v, line 411. ft Act V, sc. v, lines 411-413. 
t Act V, sc. v, line 386. 


viii PREFACE 


the Text, Pope, in his excellent Preface, explains that ‘some suspected 
‘passages which are excessively bad and which seem interpolations 
‘by being so inserted that one can entirely omit them without any 
‘chasm, or deficiency in the context, are degraded to the bottom of 
‘the page.’ To this degradation to the foot of his page Pope has 
subjected the whole of this ‘excessively bad’ masque. If an audacious 
hand has thus dared to thrust its fingers into one of Shakespeare’s 
wonderful scenes, and interpolate nigh a hundred lines, may we not 
suspect that no sense of sacrilege would restrain it from similar inter- 
polations elsewhere? I do not say it is always the same hand, but it 
is a hand which had a faith in its own cunning greater than in Shake- 
speare’s. And it is these intrusions, sometimes inane and sometimes 
silly, which in the aggregate possibly prompted some of the allusions 
in Dr Johnson’s criticism. 

No consideration for the solemnity of hour or for consistency of 
character restrains the interpolator, who had evidently a knack for 
rhyming, and liked a jingle at the end of ascene. For instance, in the 
Sixth Scene of the First Act, when the desperate character of the 
Queen is for the first time fully revealed to us in all its enormity, and 
there are dark intimations that Imogen is to be killed by poison, she 
sounds Pisanio to see if she can make him her accomplice, and leaves 
him with the ominous expression, uttered with penetrating signifi- 
cance, ‘Think on my words!’ After the door has closed behind her 
Pisanio says, with equal significance, ‘And shall do!’ and we receive 
instant relief in this assurance that he sees through her evil designs, and 
will remain staunch and true to Imogen and to Posthumus. And then 
comes in the interloper with his jarring tag: 


‘But when to my good lord, I prove untrue 
Pll choke myself; there’s all I'll do for you.’ 


Were this play a comedy, these lines would be well enough. They 
superfluously make assurance double sure. But the atmosphere is as 
tragic up to the very last scene as any downright tragedies; there is 
not a comic character in it, and to give a comic turn to any speech of 
Pisanio, on whose weary, faithful shoulders so much of the tragedy 
rests, is, as it seems to me, utterly unShakespearian. 

Again, it is rather too late a day to urge the truth to themselves of 
all of Shakespeare’s characters; they are always perfectly consistent; 
they may in fleeting expressions bear the impress of Elizabethan times, 
as Imogen in her intensest agony may refer to A=neas and to Sinon, 


PREFACE i 


whose faithful stories were told in the pictured tapestries of her child- 
hood, and whose names instinctively now rise to her lips as best ex- 
pressing her breaking heart. But what I mean is that Shakespeare 
does not put ethical problems of life into the mouth of a born fool or 
stupid dolt. Yet, mark the following passage, and say, if you can, 
that Shakespeare ever could have wished us to believe that an ‘ass’ 
like Cloten—who cannot take two from twenty, for his heart and leave 
eighteen—could have moralised the time and the effect of saint- 
seducing gold: 


‘Cloten. If she be up, I’ll speak with her: if not 
Let her lie still and dream: by your leave, ho. 
I know her women are about her: what 
If I do line one of their hands, ’tis gold 
Which buys admittance (oft it doth) yea, and makes 
Diana’s rangers false themselves, yield up 
Thewr deer to the’ stand o th’ stealer: and ’tis gold 
Which makes the true-man kill’d, and saves the thief. 
Nay sometimes hangs both Thief, and true-man: what 
Can it not do and undo? I will make 
One of her women lawyer to me, for 
I yet not understand the case my selfe. 
By your leave.’—I], iii, 70-82. 


There are instances, possibly even more gross than this, where 
sentiments utterly foreign to their characters or to their experience 
in life are ascribed to the speakers. Thus, in the exquisite lament over 
Imogen by young Arviragus, whose thoughts dwell on the flower-like 
beauty of his lovely sister, and he tells of pale primroses, and the 
azured harebells, and the leafy eglantine with which he could cover 
her, and then— 


‘the ruddock would 
With charitable bill (O bill sore-shaming 
Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie 
Without a monument) .’—IV, ii, 292, etc. 


Had the interpolator no wit, manners, nor modesty to put sucha simile 
into the mouth of a sorrowing youth who had been from his swathing 
clothes housed in a rock? And, as though unwilling that Arviragus 
should be solitary in the use of impossible allusions, the interpolator 


x PREFACE 


gives to Guiderius a reference which is quite as foreign to any possible 
knowledge that the mountain-bred youth could have acquired. It 
is in the same scene a few lines further on, where the younger brother 
proposes to sing the Dirge, although their voices have got the mannish 
crack. (Would Shakespeare have made this mistake? Guiderius 
was now twenty-three and Arviragus twenty-one. If it be urged that 
the only youths in the company at the Globe at that time capable 
of playing the parts of these two brothers had the ‘mannish crack,’ 
I can only say that this is to set a limit to Shakespeare’s resources in 
framing palliations for such deficiencies, which I for one refuse to set. 
He probably encountered the same deficiency in Twelfth Night, where 
the song that Viola should sing was most adroitly shifted to the 
skill of Feste.) Guiderius, however, refuses to attempt to sing, but 
says: 
‘T’ll weepe and word it with thee, 
For notes of sorrow, out of tune, are worse 
Than Priests and Fanes that lie.’ 


Apart from the absurdity (of which Shakespeare could never, never, 
never have been guilty) that a false note in music betokened false 
. sorrow, what could Guiderius have known of priests, be they truthful 
or lying? Or what of fanes, either hallowed or fictitious, when he had 
never seen a church? Not of such are Shakespeare’s oversights made. 

Amid these surreptitious interpolations it is refreshing to come 
across one which openly proclaims itself a quotation. Why there 
should be this spasmodic honesty it is not easy to divine. Though 
the favour be small, yet we should be grateful. In the Second Scene 
of the Fourth Act, Imogen, broken in heart and body, begs Belarius 
and the two youths to set forth on their daily hunt without regard to 
her, for she is ‘very sick’; they must not stay behind on her account, 
society is no comfort to one not sociable, and then, with an exquisite 
attempt at self-forgetting cheerfulness, she adds, ‘I am not very sick 
since I can reason of it.’ Each of the youths in turn protest their 
love and devotion to the fascinating boy. The elder, Guiderius, as- 
serts that he loves him as much as his own father, Belarius. The 
younger, Arviragus, of a temperament more poetic and sentimental 


than his brother, goes further and says that he loves him better than 
his father. 


: ‘ ; ; 
: O noble strain!’ muses Belarius aside, 
O worthiness of nature! breed of greatness! 


PREFACE xi 


“Cowards father cowards and base things sire base; 
“Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace. 
I’m not their father; yet who this should be 

Doth miracle itself, loved before me. 

’Tis the ninth hour of morn.’ 


The inverted commas here mark the honest man. Let us not tarnish 
his virtue by the suggestion that to shift elsewhere the paternity of 
such commonplace twaddle is not devoid of shrewdness. This mode of 
indicating a quotation, which, I believe, has not been here retained 
in the text of any modern edition, is to be found occasionally in the 
Folio. Mr Stmpeson, in his excellent and observant little book on 
Shakes pearian Punctuation, has noted four or five examples of it. 

The insanabile emendandi cocethes is not alleviated, however, by 
any inverted commas; a recrudescence of the ailment, aggravated by 
an attack of rhyme, at times befalls on most inopportune occasions, 
even while Imogen is speaking. Thus, in the scene just quoted, a few 
lines further on, Imogen says aside: 


‘These are kind creatures! Gods, what lies I have heard! 
Our courtiers say all’s savage but at court; 
Experience, O, thou disprovest report! 

Th imperious seas breed monsters, for the dish 
Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish. 

I am sick still, heart-sick. Pisanio, 

T’ll now taste thy drug.’ 


Scant wonder that the poor child was sick. 

Not even an occasion more serious than this, nay, even more solemn, 
could restrain the interpolator’s sacrilegious hands. Again, in this 
same scene, as Belarius and Guiderius are returning to the cave they 
hear the plaintive sighing of the ‘solemn music’ of an A®olian harp, 
and Belarius exclaims, 


‘My ingenious instrument! 
Hark, Polydore, it sounds! But what occasion 
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark! 

Guiderius. Is he at home? 

Belarius. He went from hence even now. 

Guiderius. What does he mean? since death of my dear’st Mother 
It did not speak before. All solemn things 


Hii PREFACE 


Should answer solemn accidents. The matter? 
Triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys 

Is jollity for apes and grief for boys. 

Is Cadwal mad?’ 


After such exhibitions of pressing in where angels tread, can we be 
surprised that a jingling tag, with the monotonous rhyme of ‘must’ 
and ‘dust,’ is appended to three of the stanzas of ‘The Dirge’? After 
the first stanza is there, in the assertion that ‘golden lads and girls 
‘all must like chimney-sweepers come to dust,’ a feeble jocosity in- 
tended in the reference to the dust of the chimney-sweeper’s bag? No 
suggestion is too trifling or too bad. And any one who would believe 
that Shakespeare could have written the lack-luster line ‘All lovers 
‘young, all lovers must’ will believe anything. Unquestionably the 
author of the word ‘consign,’ in the phrase ‘consign to thee,’ would have 
been most grateful to Dr Johnson for devising a meaning for it; he 
knew of none himself. 

Rhymes occurring in blank verse are suspicious, especially if pom- 
pously enunciating a commonplace. Thus, 


‘Imogen. Your life, good master, 
Must shuffle for itself. 

Lucius. The boy disdains me, 
He leaves me, scorns me; Briefly die their joys, 
That place them in the truth of girls and boys. 
Why stands he so perplex’d?’—V, v, 125, etc. 


The omission of the lines in italics leaves a hardly perceptible gap in 
the metre. 

In the following passage I mistrust the concluding lines. It is in 
the First Scene of the last Act,—a scene whereof it is impossible to 
exaggerate the dramatic importance. We meet Posthumus for the 
first time since Jachimo’s triumph and since his unpardonable 
distrust of Imogen and brutal commands to Pisanio. And although 
we have not seen him, yet every fresh sorrow that has befallen Imogen 
has quickened our hot anger against the cause of it. Now, however, 
as we draw towards a serene close of the tragedy, more lenient feelings 
towards Posthumus must be the harbingers of peace. We must see the 
devotion of a love so triumphant that every thought of sin is cast 
away and the object of it accepted by the throned gods. There 
must be the revelation of a repentance so profound that its only expia- 


PREFACE Xili 


tion is death; every phrase, every word must stamp this high resolve; 
and every phrase, every word that does not bear this stamp weakens 
the impression and blurs our sympathy. 


“Tis enough 
That, Britain, I have killed thy mistress-piece, 
Pll give no wound to thee. Therefore, good heavens, 
Hear patiently my purpose; I’ll disrobe myself 
Of these Italian weeds, and suit myself 
As does a Britain peasant; so I’ll fight 
Against the part I come with; so I’ll die 
For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life 
Is, every breath, a death; and this, unknown, 
Pitied nor hated, to the face of peril 
Myself Pll dedicate. Let me make men know 
More valour in me than my habits show. 
Gods, put the strength o’ the Leonati in me! 
To shame the guise of the world, I will begin 
The fashion less without and more within.’ 


Can anything allay the good precedence more effectually than these 
last four or five lines? It was not then, it appears, to die unknown and 
unpitied for Imogen’s dear sake that he put on a peasant’s dress, but 
to show off and make people stare. This braggart poseur would be 
dressed as a beggar and fight like a lion. Instead of seeking death, he 
would give it, and, by thus winning so much cheap admiration, he— 
he, whose every breath was death for Imogen’s sake, would—Heaven 
save the mark!—set the fashion of bad clothes to offset good fighting! 

The last line of the Fourth Scene of the Second Act jars in the 
reading, and seems to me an excrescence of the interpolator: 


‘“Posthumus. Tl write against them 
Detest them, curse them; yet ’tis greater skill 
In a true hate, to pray they have their will; 
The very devils cannot plague them better.’ 


Were this a solitary example, it would not be worth the mention. 
It is given here for cumulative effect. 

I doubt the genuineness of the whole of the following passage. Its 
metaphors are forced and involved, and in the reference to ‘winds that 
‘sailors rail at’ there is an allusion that no inland, mountain-bred youth 
would ever dream of: 


Xiv PREFACE 


‘Arvir. Nobly he yokes 
A smiling with a sigh; as if the sigh 
Was what it was, for not being such a smile; 
The smile mocking the sigh, that it would fly 
From so divine a temple, to commix 
With winds that sailors rail at. 
Guid. I do note 
That grief and patience rooted in him both, 
Mingle their spurs together. 
Arvir. Grow patience! 
And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine 
His perishing root with the increasing vine. 
Bel. It is great morning—Come away!’—IV, ii, 70, etc. 


Finally, the last scene of all has been most highly extolled for the 
marvelous dramatic skill wherewith all the characters, without any 
violation of probability, are brought together and all dramatic knots 
are untied. The scene is not, however, flawless. There are, I think, 
two passages where the trail of the interpolator may be traced. One 
is where the Soothsayer is called in to explain the ‘label’ which the 
interpolator had left on Posthumus’s bosom; the label and its explana- 
tion are merely vapid; and as they are compressed within forty lines 
they may be stoically endured. 

The other passage, however, involves a fault not so readily condoned, 
although in both cases the sovereign’st remedy is omission. If what 
Dr Johnson said of Henry the Eighth be true, that ‘the genius of Shake- 
‘speare comes in and goes out with Katherine,’ it may be asserted, I 
think, with equal truth that in the present play this same genius comes 
in and goes out with Imogen. While she is before us we have eyes and 
ears and hearts and thoughts only for her. And as, in this last scene, 
we approach the crisis of her fate and mark her heaving breast, with 
her whole soul sitting in those eyes which are fastened on Iachimo, and 
every feature glowing in the triumph of a mystery now solved, and hear 
once more the tones of that dear voice, agonised yet heavenly, and, with 
her, we are smitten to the earth by that blind hand, who of us, who has 
ever felt what it is to love or be loved, but knows that with the first 
glimmer of returning consciousness there is the one sole impulse to 
spring into those arms, now stretched in staggering welcome, with the 
glad cry that here again was love as firm as earth’s rocky base? In- 
stead of this, what has the wretched interpolator given us? With 
reviving consciousness Imogen begins an unseemly squabble with 


PREFACE xv 


Pisanio! About a drug! It made her ill! Then poor old doddering 
Cornelius must needs be brought forward, and must tell again in prosy 
words what he had told us all once before, even to the very same refer- 
ence to ‘cats and dogs’! All this while poor Posthumus has nothing 
to do but shift first on one foot and then on the other, and listen open- 
eyed to Imogen’s quarrel about some mysterious poison. When at 
last Pisanio’s and Cornelius’s explanation has satisfied Imogen, and 
the curiosity of Belarius and Guiderius and Arviragus is allayed about 
the boy Fidele, then Imogen arises and, it is to be hoped, after care- 
fully dusting her clothes (I marvel that the interpolator did not insert 
this tidy act as a stage direction), she turns at last to Posthumus. 

Oxen and wainropes cannot hail me to the conviction that the pass- 
ages which I have specified in the foregoing pages are Shakespeare’s. 
Whose they are I care neither to know nor even to surmise. I know 
only that they are not Shakespeare’s. 


From the earliest editorial days, the days of Pope, as I have already 
remarked, gross inequalities have been recognised in this play. To 
account for them it has been suggested in modern days that it was 
written by Shakespeare at different periods of his life, begun in youth, 
possibly, and revised in his maturer prime. Let those believe it who 
list. For myself, by no stretch of imagination can I picture Shake- 
speare young enough (and we know him in pretty early youth in 
Venus and Adonis and in Lucrece) to be so devoid of dramatic instinct, 
so barren of poesy as to intermingle within the limit of a single play 
such heights of poetry and depths of ‘unresisting imbecility.’ 

In the course of conversation between two Gentlemen at the open- 
ing of the play it is stated that Imogen is ‘wedded’ to Posthumus, and 
again that the latter is banished because he had ‘married’ Imogen. 
And Imogen herself in the next scene says, ‘a Wedded-Lady, That hath 
her Husband banish’d: O that Husband,’ and further, in the last Act, 
exclaims to Posthumus, ‘why did you throw your wedded lady from 
you?’ If Imogen were thus irrevocably married, how is it that the 
Queen plots to force her son Cloten on Imogen as a husband, and Cloten 
himself woos her to be his wife? How can she be married to another 
while Posthumus is alive? He is merely banished. But does not the 
Queen here supply a solution to the problem? She says in effect that 
Pisanio as long as he lives will be a witness, or a ‘remembrancer,’ 
possibly the only witness, to the ‘handfasting’ between Posthumus and 
Imogen. Their marriage was not then complete. It was merely a 
‘trothplight,’ and, not having been blest by Holy Church, was not irre- 


xvi PREFACE 


vocable,—certainly not if royal influence be brought to bear. When 
Cloten (II, iii.) woos Imogen, not once did she appeal to the insuper- 
able barrier of her marriage. That the Handfasting was to her a 
ceremony as holy as marriage itself is evident by her calling Cloten 
a ‘profane fellow’ when he had asserted that her pretended contract 
with Posthumus was no contract, at least among royalties, as he says, 
although among the common people a self-figured knot, such as a 
‘handfast’ is, might be deemed an impediment. Among the legal 
depositions taken for the violation of Trothplight, printed by Furnivall 
in his Essay on Child-Marriages, &c. (E. E. T. Soc., p. Ixxx, foot-note, 
1897), there is one which sets forth the ceremony of hand-fasting: 
‘22 July, 1563, . . . the said Gilberte, holding Margery bie the hand, 
said, “I Gilberte, take the, Margery, to be my wedded wief.” & the 
said, Margery, said likewise, she holding the said Gilberte by the hand, 
and they witnes, seynge them handfast and trought-plightid, thought 
it ynoughe; but Gilberte would be more sure, and sware upon a boke 
which the clark, at the instance of the said Gilberte, send for, and 
the said Margery and Gilberte sware upon the boke: & the said Mar- 
gery swore she would neuer wedd any other man but the said Gilberte. 
and after that, they kissed, and so went into the clarkes house, and 
Dined together after.’ 

In the chronology of these plays,—a subject which cannot add 
anything to their inherent charm, and wherein I am by nature inca- 
pacitated to take more than a tepid interest,—it is conceded, with an 
unusual degree of unanimity, that The Winter’s Tale, The Tempest, 
and the present play are among the latest written by Shakespeare. 
So different are they from the Comedies, the Tragedies, and the 
Historical Plays, in substance and in form, that they have been placed 
in a class by themselves and styled the ‘Romantic Plays,’ or ‘the 
Romances.’ In the distinguishing characteristic of their form, such as 
involved and elliptical sentences, condensed thought, and somewhat 
erratic versification, Cymbeline is held to be most pronounced, and, of 
the three, it is also considered the earliest. To account for these in- 
equalities, or differences in style from preceding plays, various causes 
have been assigned,—riper years with a broader outlook on life and a 
profounder philosophy, or it has been supposed that the play was left 
unfinished and another and inferior hand had completed it; again, 
that it had been begun many years earlier, abandoned, and finished 
later,* without erasing the youthful passages. These causes may be 
all well found. They do not, however, satisfy me. I do not object to 


*See Appendix, p. 445. 


PREFACE XVii 


accepting the condensed and elliptical sentences as an indication of 
the wisdom of the years which bring the philosophic calm, but it is 
impossible to believe that Shakespeare would have uttered in any 
year of his life such trivial improprieties as I have specified above. 
As to the fable and its dramatic treatment, there is, so it is alleged, 
a divergence between the Romantic Plays (and Cymbeline in particular) 
and Shakespeare’s earlier plays so wide that it can be accounted for, so 
it is maintained, only on the supposition that it is due to some external 
influence. This influence is to be found, so it has been stoutly and 
very ably argued,* in the tragi-comedy of Philaster, by Beaumont and 
Fletcher, which was acted some time before 1610, at The Globe 
Theatre, by ‘his Majestie’s Servants,’ that is, before Shakespeare’s 
own audience and by his own company. For the preceding seven or 
eight years the town had been abundantly supplied with Comedies, 
Tragedies, and Historical Plays, and here was now a play, built on 
different and novel lines, which achieved an instant and extraordinary 
success. There was in it but very slight development of character, 
almost none at all, it might be said; the close of each Act left the au- 
dience at a fever-heat; the heavens grew darker and darker until no ray 
of light seemed possible, when of a sudden in the final Act the sun shone 
out from a cloudless sky; and through it all from first to last there 
gleamed and glinted a sweet idyllic devotion forgetful of self and 
lost in love. The sight of such a dramatic treatment, seeking 
mainly immediate effect, coupled with a very, very close approach 
to tragedy, and stamped with the instant approval of the public, 
must give a professional dramatist pause if he wished to do his 
duty to his employers. To Shakespeare it gave such a pause, and 
the result was—so it is urged—Cymbeline. 

Those who dislike the thought that Shakespeare was an imitator, so 
glibly and speedily, must appeal to chronology to decide the priority 
in the case of the two dramas,—only to be met with chagrin. For 
neither play can the date be decided with certainty, and for both the 
only authoritative external date is the year 1610. Dr Forman saw 
Cymbeline acted ‘at the glob’ in 1610;7 and in a book called Scourge 
of Folly, by John Davies, of Hereford, whereof the solitary date is that 
it was entered at the Stationers’ Register October 8, 1610,{ there is a 
wretched epigram on ‘Love lies ableeding,’ etc., addressed ‘to the 
‘Well Deserving Mr. John Fletcher.’ Thus chronology, in one of the 


*See The Influence of Beaumont and Fletcher on Shakespeare, by Ashley H. 
Thorndike, Ph.D., 1901—Appendix, p. 443. 
Tt See opens p. 445. t See Vey Pp. 443. 


XVili PREFACE 


few cases where it is of importance, deserts us altogether, and we 
must abandon any attempt to decide whether or not Shakespeare, con- 
sciously or unconsciously, imitated the twin poets. In this dilemma 
may not those who wish to claim priority for Shakespeare appeal, Iwill 
not say to the past history of the respective poets, because those who 
uphold Philaster as the original maintain that Cymbeline is composed 
on new lines, but to the power, originality, and ultimate success of the 
two dramas. This last point is capable of a proof more undeniable 
than the two others. Philaster would not to-day draw an audience 
for its inherent charm; its fable is forgotten; its very name is unknown. 
Were it even put upon the stage it is doubtful whether or not the 
exquisite charm of Euphrasia would avail to make a hero tolerable 
who could wound, almost unto death, two women who idolised him. 
The temptation is irresistible to refer here, maugre its inappropriate- 
ness, to the most, most touching lines of Euphrasia, who in trying to 
allay Philaster’s repentence for having wounded her (killed her, as he 
believes) soothes him with the words: 


‘Alas, my lord, my life is not a thing 
Worthy your noble thoughts! ’tis not a life, 
’Tis but a piece of childhood thrown away.”* 


It is no wish of mine to say one word in dispraise of Philaster. It 
is a noble drama, the first, according to Dryden, to bring Beaumont 
and Fletcher into fame, and it continued, for more than a hundred 
years, to be highly popular. The causes, however, of its present eclipse 
are not far to seek. 

I have spoken of public success as a test of superiority, and if of 
superiority, then, possibly, of priority, -to which those may appeal who 
are anxious to believe that Philaster followed Cymbeline. Personally, 
however, I am not of those who have any anxiety on this score. 
Shakespeare so towers above all other dramatists in his pride of place 
that no questions of priority or of imitation or of plagiarism reach him. 
Secure in this faith, we can afford to listen with interest to whatever may 
be urged in favour of the humbler circle about him. ‘Shakespeare,’ 
says Hazuitt, ‘towered above his fellows, “in shape and gesture 

“proudly eminent,” but he was one of a race of giants, the tallest, the 
‘strongest, the most graceful and beautiful of them; but it was a com- 
‘mon and a noble brood.’ Dyce quotes this sentence, with the 

* Philaster, V, ii, 14. 
} Lectures on the Dram. Lit. of the Age of Elizabeth, p. 12, ed. 1840. 


PREFACE as 


following comment: ‘A falser remark, I conceive, has seldom been 
‘made by critic. Shakespeare is not only immeasurably superior to 
‘the dramatists of his time in creative power, in insight into the human 
‘heart, and in profound thought, but he is, moreover, utterly unlike 
‘them in almost every respect,—unlike them in his method of develop- 
‘ing character, in his diction, in his versification.’* 

Whatever betide at the hand of the jade Chronology, or of any 
iconoclast, no wave of anxiety for Shakespeare need roll across our 
peaceful breast. And here I am so forcibly reminded of a passage 
in one of SypNEY SmitH’s Lectures that I cannot forebear quoting it; 
longissimo intervallo, be it understood, from any frivolous disrespect 
on my part; it is in his Lecture On the Faculties of Animals, as compared 
with those of Men: ‘I confess I feel myself so much at my ease about 
‘the superiority of mankind,—I have such a marked and decided 
‘contempt for the understanding of every baboon I have yet seen,— 
‘T feel so sure that the blue ape with a tail will never rival us in poetry, 
‘painting, and music,—that I see no reason whatever why justice 
‘may not be done to the few fragments of soul and tatters of under- 
‘standing which they may really possess. I have sometimes, per- 
‘haps, felt a little uneasy at Exeter "Change, from contrasting the 
‘monkeys with the ’prentice boys who are teasing them; but a few 
‘pages of Locke or a few lines of Milton have always restored me to 
‘tranquillity, and convinced me that the superiority of man had 
‘nothing to fear.’ 

Be it not supposed that Shakespeare is to be held as flawless, that 
he is utterly Zors de concours, even in his eminent domain of knowledge 
of human nature. Yet even here we must be cautious. May it not 
be urged that human nature has not been forever the same? When 
every atom in the world around us is in a state of flux, is our nature a 
solitary exception? When all else is shifting, are we alone stable? Our 
education has been in vain if we have not departed widely from the 
nature of our forebears. When Imogen, in her hour of keenest anguish, 
with her heart torn by ineffable torture, appeals to A¢neas as a proto- 
type of Posthumus, and finds a parallel to his perfidy only in the false 
tears of Sinon, are we, forsooth, to pronounce her classical allusions 
as untrue to human nature and condemn her distraction as mock he- 
roics? Is it not merely because our childhood has not been passed in 
halls and chambers where every picture on the tapestried walls portrays 
some classical story, which becomes ineradicable in our minds, and 
recurs to us forever after as the fittest expressions of our deepest 


_ * Works of Shakespeare, vol. i, p. 130, 1866, 2d ed. 


xX PREFACE 


emotions? Possibly the criticism which denounces Shakespeare’s 
inveterate love of playing on words may have a better show of justice. 
When Lady Macbeth says that if Duncan bleed she must ‘gild the 
‘faces of the grooms withal, For it must seem their gilt,’ does she here 
intentionally make a pun? I think not. But even if she did, the 
worst that can be urged is that a pun was to Shakespeare, in Dr John- 
son’s words, the fatal Cleopatra, for which he lost the world and was 
content to lose it. It is one of his idiosyncrasies and we must put up 
with it. Has he not himself taught us that a friend should bear a 
friend’s infirmities? 


Dramatis Perfonze 


CYMBELINE, Azzg of Britain. 2 
Cloten, Son to the Queen by a former Husband. 


1. As first given by Rowe. Om. Ff. 


2. Cymbeline] The original of this character in history is Cunobelinus. 
There is, however, as Professor T. F. Tout says (Dict. of Nat. Biog., s. v.), ‘nothing 
but the name in common between the historical and the poetical King, for the plot 
of Cymbeline is only partially derived from the legendary history of Cunobelinus 
that Shakespeare found in Holinshed’s Chronicle [see Appendix, Source of the Plot), 
and that even has no claim to historic truth.’ Inasmuch as Shakespeare wrote 
dramas and not histories, historic truth was of small moment either to him or to 
his audience—or is it to us, here and now.—HERTzBERG (Introd., p. 298) observes 
that the name is first found as ‘ Cinobellinus’ in Suetonius (Caligula, 44), and that 
during his reign Christ was born. Moreover, Hertzberg considers it worthy of 
Italics that ‘not a single extant author has stated that Cymbeline carried on war 
with the Romans, except Shakespeare.’ Dramatic purposes are adequately served 
when, by the use of a primitive name, our thoughts are transferred to primitive 
times, and an atmosphere is thereby created half real and half legendary, wherein 
we are prepared to accept characters and events beyond the scope of our ordinary 
life—Ep.—BOSWELL-STONE (p. 6): Holinshed’s Chronicles contain all the his- 
torical or pseudo-historical matter which appears in Shakespeare’s Tragedy of 
Cymbeline. The historic Cunobelinus, son of Tasciovanus, was a King of the 
Britons, whose capital was Camulodunum (Colchester). In A. D. 40 Cunobelin’s 
son, Adminius, whom he had banished, made a submission to Caligula which the 
Emperor affected to regard as equivalent to a surrender of the whole island, but 
nothing was then done to assert the imperial authority. Cunobelin was dead 
when, in A. D. 43, Aulus Plautius was sent by Claudius to subdue Britain; and 
the Romans were opposed by the late king’s sons, Togodumnus and the renowned 
Caractacus. These are the sole authentic particulars relating to Cunobelin, 
besides the evidence derived from his coins.—Utrict (ii, 170): Cymbeline, 
the husband, father, and king—who is more or less directly affected by the 
complications in the lives of all the others, hence, as it were, the point where 
all the radii of the wide circle meet, and from which they in the first instance 
proceed, and upon whom everything turns, although he himself appears the 
least active,—he forms the quiescent centre of the action, and in his undutiful 
lassitude and passiveness regulates the fortunes of all, but is ultimately obliged 
to take all their fortunes upon himself. The drama very justly, therefore, bears 
his name. 

3. Cloten] If Shakespeare derived a portion of the plot of the present play 

£ 


2 DRAMATIS PERSONZ 


A Gentleman in love with the 4 
Leonatus ae Princess, and privately Mar- 
vied to her. 6 


5, 6. Leonatus Posthumus...to her] Posthumus, a noble gentleman, Husband to 
Imogen. Cap. 


from Holinshed’s Historie of England, which Hertzberg, however, denies, it is 
possible that he also read the brief history prefixed to the Description of Britaine, 
by Harrison, at least that portion which refers to the same Epoch. Tf this be so, 
he must have noted (p. 117, col. a, line 73, ed. 1587) that after the death of Ferrex 


and Porrex, ‘Cloten, by all writers, . . . was the next inheritour of the whole 
Empire. . . . But after the death of this Cloten, his sonne Dunwallo Mulmutius 
made warre vpon these foure kings. . . . In token of which victories he caused 


himselfe to be crowned with a crown of gold, the verie first of that metall (if anie 
at all were before in vse) that was worne among the kings of this nation.’ (See 
111, i, 64-67, post.) Then, a few lines before this mention of Cloten, three times 
there occurs a reference to ‘Morgan,’ who was ‘one of the heirs of Ebranke.’ 
Again on the next page (118, 6, line 67) we find, ‘Marius, the sonne of Aruiragus, 
being king of all Britaine.’ etc—Rucctes (p. 28, note) finds certain resemblances 
between the person and character of Cloten and the description of Claudius by 
Suetonius [Cap. xxx, xxxiii, xxxiv.], but I cannot, I fear, accept them as suffi- 
ciently numerous or as close as to warrant more than a haphazard similar- 
ity in one or two details; both may have been devoted to games of chance, but 
assuredly Cloten could hardly have followed Claudius in writing a book on the 
subject.—Eb. 

5. Leonatus] This name, according to MAtong, followed by FrEay (Manual, 
53), ‘is from Sidney’s Arcadia, which Shakespeare used for his Lear.’ ‘Leonato’ 
is a character in Much Ado, where the scene is laid in Italy. In changing the scene 
to Britain and to Roman times, could not Shakespeare’s ‘small Latin’ suffice to 
change ‘Leonato’ to ‘Leonatus’? Is Sidney to have the sole right to select his 
own names?—Ep. 

5. Posthumus] In the Latin adjective the penult is, of course, short, but is it 
not conceivable that Shakespeare regarded it as compound of post and humus, 
vaguely connecting humus and burial, and, therefore, throughout the play places 
the accent on the second syllable; and had he not ample right to place it where he 
pleased? The Latin adjective may be posthwmus, and it will; the proper name is 
Posthimus. Just as the accent in The Tempest is Stéphano, and in The Mer. of 
Ven. it is Stephano.—Rrrson asserted that in two lines the accent is correctly 
placed—the first is I, i, 52: ‘To his protection, cals him Posthumus Leonatus.’ 
“‘Leonatus’ may be left out of the scansion altogether, as a proper name (see 
Dyce’s note on I,i, 52). The line must then be read with ‘protection,’ not as a 
trisyllable, as Ritson erroneously read it, but as a quadrisyllable. The ictus then 
falls in the penult of Posthimus. The second line is IV, ii, 400, where Imogen, in 
the agony of her belief that the headless corpse beside her is her husband’s, shrieks: 
‘Strooke the main top! Oh Posthumus, alas.’ Here Ritson is right, if no allow- 
ance is to be made for Imogen’s horror as the truth gradually dawns on her.— 
CaPELL tried to mend the line by reading ‘Posthimus, Oh,’ but there really is 
no need; the slight pause before ‘oh’ is all sufficient to throw the accustomed 
accent on the dearname. The Anonymous author of A New Study of Shakespeare, 


DRAMATIS PERSONA 3 


Guiderius, voce under the Names of Polidore 7 
Arviragus, and Cadwal, supposed sons to Bellarius. 
Roleaing: { A Banisl’d Lord, disguis’d under the name 

\ of Morgan. 10 - 
Philario, Az Italian, Friexd to Posthumus. 


7: Disguis’d] Sons to Cymbeline, Cap. Poilydore, Var. ’73 et seq. 
disguised Knt. 9. Bellarius| Belarius Theob. et seq. 
Polidore| Paladour, Theob.,+ 


wherein a connection is traced between the plays and the Platonic philosophy 
through The Mysteries, suggests that ‘in this name there may be a profound 
intention, connected with some masculine birth of time, involved in the poet’s art, 
some Posthumus birth of time.’ What this portentous masculine birth may be 
I have been, with all diligence and a mind as open to conviction as Danaé to the 
stars, unable to discover. The page is 338, and I trust that the undeterred zealous 
student may be more fortunate than the present Ep. 

7. Polidore] STEEVENS, in a note on ‘Paladour,’ III, iii, 95, remarks: ‘The 
old copy of the play (except here, where it may be only a blunder of the printer) 
calls the eldest son of Cymbeline, Polydore as often as the name occurs; and yet 
there are some who may ask whether it is not more likely that the printer should 
have blundered in the other places, than that he should have hit upon such an 
uncommon name as ‘Paladour’ in this first instance. Paladour was the ancient 
name for Shaftsbury. Soin A meeting Dialogue-wise betweene Nature, the Phenix, 
and the Turtle Doue, by R. Chester, 1601: ‘This noble King builded faire Caer- 
guent, Now cleped Winchester of worthie fame, And at Mount Paladour he built 
his Tent, That after-ages Shaftsburie hath to name.’—[p. 27, ed. Grosart.]— 
Matone: I believe Polydore is the true reading. In Holinshed, where is an ac- 
count of Cymbeline, Polydore (i. e., Polydore Virgil) is often quoted in the margin; 
and this probably suggested the name to Shakespeare.—STEEVENS: The trans- 
lations of both Homer and Virgil would have afforded Shakespeare the name of 
Polydore. 

8. Arviragus] HerrzBerc is the earliest, I think, to note that Juvenal (Sat., 
IV, 127) gives this as the name of a distinguished British soldier. The penult 
in Juvenal is short: ‘Excidet Arviragus. Peregrina ’st bellua cernis,’ but Shake- 
speare makes it long (see III, iii, 105). See note above on Cloten. ‘The name 
Cadwal,’ says Malone (III, iii, 95), ‘is found in an ancient poem, entitled The 
strange Birth, honorable Coronation, and most vnhappie Death of famous Arthur 
King of Brytaine, by Robert Chester, 1601: “And foure Kings before him did 
abide, Angisell King of stout Albania, And Caduwal King of Venedocia.”’—[p. 50, 
ed. Grosart.] 

9. Bellarius] Tote (Jahrbuch, xviii, 140): When the enemy to his country 
is at hand, with Fatherland and King in danger, the leonine courage of aforetime 
breaks forth in this hoary headed Hero: ‘Have with you, boys; If in your country 
wars you chance to die, That is my bed too, lads, and there I’ll lie.’—[IV, iv, 62.] 
Alongside of his boys he flings himself upon the foe and saves that Britain whereof 
the Throne had banished him. A through and through Germanic nature, defiant 
and gentle, of steel-tried courage and an affectionate heart withal! 

10. Morgan] See note on Cloten, above. 


4 DRAMATIS PERSONA 


Iachimo, /7iend to Philario. vp 
Caius Lucius, Améassador from Rome. 

Pisanio, Servant to Posthumus. 

A French Gentleman, Friend to Philario. 15 
Cornelius, A Doctor, Servant to the Queen. 


14. Servant] Gentleman Cap. 


12. Iachimo] Matone: The name of Giacomo occurs in The Two Gentlemen of 
Venice, a novel, which immediately follows that of Rhomeo and Julietta in the 
second tome of Painter’s Palace of Pleasure, 1567.—GERVINUS (ii, 274): This name 
sounds like a diminutive of Jago, and the bearer resembles him in his way of think- 
ing of men.—Tueo. Exze (Jahrbuch, xv, 260): Iachimo, with the accent on the 
antepenult, belongs to that list of foreign names where, in English, the accent is 
changed, such as Rémeo, Desdeména, etc. In several plays where the scene is 
not laid in Italy, Shakespeare introduces Italian names. Of course, in Twelfth 
Night, where the scene is laid in Illyria, and in the Com. of Err., in Ephesus, we can 
understand the use of Italian names. But it is noteworthy that, on the other hand, 
in Meas. for Meas., where the scene is Vienna, we meet with Angelo, Escalus (de- 
rived from the French rendering of Scala, Escale), Claudio, Lucio, Bernadino, 
names which do not occur in the Novel whence the play is taken. Our wonder is 
still further aroused at finding that Shakespeare does not scruple to introduce 
into Cymbeline, which belongs to primitive times, this peculiar name, Iachimo, 
which clearly corresponds to the Italian Gioachino. But when, however, we 
reflect that Rome and Italy are very properly the reason for this rather strange 
selection, no such reason will avail to explain the occurrence of Italian names in 
Hamlet, such as Bernardo, Francisco, Horatio, Baptista (as a woman’s name), and 
even an Italianate Rynaldo (Old German Raginolt, that is Reinold, Italian 
Rinaldo). To be sure, this Italianising fashion in names is found in Shakespeare’s 
predecessors, but what was the reason that moved Shakespeare to adopt this 
infantile custom, and expand it to an extreme? It could not have been, assuredly, 
mere homage to a poetic fashion; was it some special predilection for Italy and for 
what was Italian? And whence did it come? 

13. Caius Lucius] Holinshed might have suggested Lucius on more than one 
page, but HERTZBERG says (Introd., p. 295) that Shakespeare was not likely, of his 
own motion, to hit upon forming one name, Caius Lucius, out of two prenomens, 
against all ancient Roman custom. Hertzberg disbelieves in Holinshed as the 
original source of Cymbeline, but goes further back, to Holinshed’s sources. But 
if he has suggested where the original erroneous combination, Caius Lucius, is to 
be found, it has escaped me. I cannot avoid the conviction that such a refine- 
ment of classical scholarship as Hertzberg demands was entirely unknown to 
Shakespeare, and that even if the oversight had been made known to him, he 
would probably have retained it—Ep. 

16. Cornelius] BuCKNILL (p. 227): Cornelius was the name of the physician 
to Charles V, who gained European reputation by curing the Emperor of gout 
and general ill habit of body. It seems more probable, therefore, that Shakespeare 


adopted the name from this source, than from the more classic one of Cornelius 
Celsus. 


DRAMATIS PERSONA? f 


Two Gentlemen. U7 
Queen, Wife to Cymbeline. 

Imogen, Daughter to Cymbeline dy a former Queen. 

Helen, Woman to Imogen. 20 


Lords, Ladies, Roman Senators, Tribunes, Ghosts, a 


17. Lords, of Cymbeline’s Court, four; 
Gentlemen, of the same, two; 
ae etn Ket Added : 
two Britain Captains, an Attendant, Messenger, and two nS 
Jailers. 
21. Ghosts] Spirits, in the Vision, of Sicillius Leonatus, his Wife, and two Sons, 
Father, Mother, and Brothers to Posthumus: and Jupiter. Cap. 


19. Imogen] FLETCHER (p. 42): In bringing ourselves to feel, as well as under- 
stand, the character of anyone of Shakespeare’s more ideal heroines, we should be- 
gin with considering the very form and sound of her name; for in them we shall 
commonly find the keynote, as it were, to the whole rich piece of harmony developed 
in her person, language, sentiments, and conduct. In the present instance, 
resolving to give in one delightful being, ‘a local habitation and a name’ to ‘all the 
qualities that man Loves woman for, besides that hook of wiving, Fairness which 
strikes the eye,—resolving to give to that sweet ideal of feminine excellence all 
possible prominence and elevation. by combining it with, and making it proof 
against, the possession of the most exalted rank,—it would seem asif the very re- 
volving in his mind of this intended quintessence of feminine beauty and dignity, 
physical, moral, and intellectual, had caused his inmost and most exquisite spirit to 
breathe out spontaneously the name of Zmogen—a word all nobleness and sweet- 
ness, all classic elegance and romantic charm. ‘Sweet Imogen’ ever and anon, 
throughout this drama, comes delicately on our ear, even as the softest note swept 
fitfully from an A®olian lyre. And as ‘her breathing perfumes the chamber,’ 
even so does her spirit lend fragrance, and warmth, and purity, and elevation 
to the whole body of this nobly romantic play.—[MALOonE observes that ‘ Holin- 
shed furnished Shakespeare with his name, which in the old black letter is scarcely 
distinguished from Innogen, the wife of Brute, King of Britain.’ I do not wish to 
gainsay Malone’s assertion, especially since he may have had before him the first 
edition of Holinshed, wherein the black letter may have been more obscure than 
in my copy, that of 1587, the second edition. The name occurs there only three 
times (Hist. of England, ii, p. 8, b), and of these one is in large white letter; in all 
three the name is distinctly Innogen, a softened form of the Ignogen of Layamon’s 
Brute. It seems hardly possible that Shakespeare could have obtained ‘Imogen’ 
from Holinshed. Moreover, Dr Simon Forman, in his account of a performance 
of this play which he witnessed during Shakespeare’s lifetime, gives the name as 
unmistakeably Innogen: which is also the name of the wife of another Leonatus, 
or rather Leonato in Much Ado, who, albeit she does not afterward appear in the 
play, enters, according to the First Folio, in the very first scene. Verily, it seems 
that if Imogen be a misprint for Innogen, our debt for it is due to the compositors 
of the First Folio, in this particular play; the name is found nowhere else. The 
testimony of Forman is almost decisive in favour of Innogen; and with its sugges- 
tion of Innocence, it certainly hes a charm,—and a very great charm. But at 


6 DRAMATIS PERSONA 


Soothsayer, Captains, Soldiers, Messengers, and 22 
other Attendants. 


ScENE, for some Part of the first, second, and third Acts, 
lyes in Rome; for the rest of the Play, im Britain. 25 


22. Soldiers] Soldiers, etc., a Dutch Gentleman, a Spanish Gentleman: Musi- 
cians; Cap. : 


this late day, when from boyhood our heart-strings have been woven around 
Imogen, to turn to Innogen would make earth’s base seem stubble.—Eb.] 


Te iabis, 1 AMC le IDA 2One 
GYENT Desa leNeiee 


Actus Primus. Scena Prima. 


Linter two Gentlemen. 


: I. Gent. 5 
()YZ| Ou do not meet a man but Frownes. 

-) Our bloods no more obey the Heauens 

Ge Then our Courtiers : 


Still feeme, as do’s the Kings. 9 

1. TRAGEDIE] TRAGEDY Ff. 7. no more] Not more Walker, Huds. 

3. Scoena] Scena F2. Scena F,F,. Heauens| heavens F.F;. Heavens 
A Palace. Rowe. Cymbeline’s F,. Hear ns Rowe. 
Palace in Britain. Pope. A Part of the 8. Then] Than F,. 


Royal Garden to Cymbeline’s Palace. 
Capell. Britain. The Garden behind Sta. 


Courtiers:| courtiers’ Var. 773, 
courtiers’, Var. 78, ’85, Ran. 


Cymbeline’s Palace. Steevens. 
6-8. YOu...Courtiers] Two lines, end- 
ing: bloods...Courtiers Rowe et seq. 
6. do] doe F>. 
man] man, Warb. Johns. Cap. 
Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Coll. 
Frownes.] frownes. F.. frowns. 
F;F,, Rowe, Pope, Han. frowns: 
Theob. et seq. 
7. Our bloods] Our blouds F3F4. than 
our looks Herr (p. 135). 


Courtiers Tyrwhitt, Var. ’21, Knt, Coll. 
Sing. Dyce, Cam. Wh. ii, Ingl. Dtn. 
9. Still] But Rowe, Pope, Warb. Han. 
JSeeme,| feeme Ff, Pope, Han. Knt, 
et seq. 
do’s the Kings.] do the King’s. 
Han. Sta. does the king. Tyrwhitt, 
Knt, Coll. Coll. (MS), Sing. Dyce, 
White, Del. Cam. Glo. Clarke, Huds. 
Dtn, Dowden, Herford, Rlfe, Gollancz, 
Wyatt. 


2. Cymbeline] CoLERIDGE (p. 345): There is a great significancy in the names 
of Shakespeare’s plays. In Twelfth Night, Mid. N. D., As You Like It, and Wnt. 
Tale the total effect is produced by a co-ordination of the characters as in a wreath 
of flowers. But in Coriol., Lear, Rom. & Jul., Hamlet, Othello, &c., the effect arises 
from the subordination of all to one, either as the prominent person or the principal 
object. Cymbeline is the only exception; and even. that has its advantages in 
preparing the audience for the chaos of time, place, and costume by throwing the 
date back into a fabulous King’s reign.—OdLeE (p. 62): [Inasmuch as all critics 
are generally agreed in discerning a welding together, unusually artistic and 
skilful, of heterogeneous elements in this play] it seems to me that, in these cir- 
cumstances, it is not out of place to ask, as a preliminary question, what is the 


7 


8 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AckI, SC. 1. 


[2. Cymbeline] 


connecting thread, the woof, of it? The answer is not easy; it is clear enough that 
he who gives the title to the play is cast completely into the shade by Posthumus 
and Imogen. We must not, however, allow the hint to pass unheeded which is 
supplied us even by the wrongful naming of the play by the poet. It is extremely 
probable that the bearer of the title réle constituted the oldest and chiefest con- 
stituent of the piece; possibly, in the course of time he gradually lapsed into his 
present secondary position. Accordingly, it would follow readily enough from this 
sufficing reason that King Cymbeline and his fate represent,—to use our former 
simile,—the thread of the original treatment and the other characters the woof, 
that is, that they were subsequently added and became connected and interwoven 
with Cymbeline, until finally they overtopped and obscured him,—the new and 
young gods have always suppressed the old.—WuirE (p. 281): We pronounce the 
name of this play Sim-bé-leen; but its proper pronunciation is Kim-bé-line. [For- 
man who heard the play ‘at the glob’ in Shakespeare’s day evidently did not there 
hear its ‘proper pronunciation,’ else, with his phonetic spelling, he would not have 
spelled it Cymbalin or Cimbalin, and, in one instance, Cambalin.—Ep.] 

3. Sccena Prima] Ecctes: No circumstance appears which can be supposed 
to mark the particular time of the day when the action of this play commences. 

4. Enter ...] Buttoca (p. 267): One of these gentlemen must have been as 
ignorant of matters as if he had come from another country. The facts related 
must have been known to the poorest peasant, for they concerned the King’s 
own family, and incidents that had lately taken place and with which people’s 
ears were still tingling. In the play we have two Italians, a Roman, a Frenchman, 
etc. Why not have named the speakers a British Gentleman and a Foreigner? 
[See EcctrEs, line 73, post.] 

5. 1. Gent] Dezrus (Sh. Soc. Trans., ’75~76, p. 213), in an Essay on Shake- 
speare’s Use of Narration, remarks that ‘if Shakespeare had dramatised all the 
circumstances narrated by the First Gentleman he would have doubled the length 
of the play [which is true], but hardly have made it more interesting or artistic 
[which is doubtful].’ 

7-9. our bloods ... Kings] In hearing these lines on the stage, we find no 
difficulty; we at once gather from them that our moods are no more dependent on 
the state of the weather than courtiers are dependent on the state of the King’s 
moods,—as the Heavens affect us so the King affects his courtiers; the King frowns 
and immediately all his courtiers frown. It is almost a commonplace, and parallels 
may be found throughout literature ancient and modern. But when, in the 
closet, we analyse the lines as they stand in the Folio, the case is altered, and the 
passage, even to Dr Johnson, becomes ‘so difficult that commentators may differ 
concerning it without animosity or shame.’ The earliest editor to change the text 
was Sir Thomas Hanmer, who, as speaker of the House of Commons, may have 
acquired the art of reducing verbiage to conciseness, and, undeterred by the 
scholastic ductus literarum, or the durior lectio, boldly, without comment, gave 
as the true text: ‘Our looks No more obey the heart ev’n than our courtiers, But 
seem as do the King’s.’ This reading Dr Johnson befittingly pronounced ‘licen- 
tious,’ and added, ‘but it makes the sense clear, and leaves the reader an easy 
passage.’—WARBURTON sneered at it, however, by saying that it ‘ventured too 
far’ [this, from Warburton!]. He then proceeds to retain and improve the thought 
and sentiment by reading ‘our brows No more obey the heavens,’ etc., because it 


INEM Th, Eb ty] CYMBELINE 9 


[7-9. Our bloods . . . as do’s the Kings] 


had just been asserted that everybody was frowning, and because ‘though the 
blood may be affected with the weather, yet that affection is discovered not by 
change of colour, but by change of countenance.’ This reason is so ‘obscure and 
perplexed’ that we may well agree with Dr Johnson in ‘suspecting some injury 
of the press.’ It may be worth while to note that the sagacious THEOBALD (Nichol’s 
Illust., ii, 264) accepted Warburton’s ‘brows,’ in his private correspondence with 
Warburton, and even suggested as an addition to the text ‘they are courtiers,’ 
because ‘to say their brows were courtiers, in conformity with the King’s, I think 
is not very hard; and may seem grounded on Alexander’s courtiers affecting to be 
wry-necked.’ He did not, however, adopt his friend’s emendation in his edition, 
or even allude to it; we may, therefore, conclude that his added emendation was 
withdrawn.—Dr Jounson, having criticised his predecessors, ‘tells his own 
opinion,’ which is, that the lines stand as they were originally written, and that a 
paraphrase, such as the licentious and abrupt expressions of our author too fre- 
quently require, will make emendation unnecessary. ‘We do not meet a man but 
frowns; our bloods’—our countenances, which, in popular speech, are said to be 
regulated by the temper of the blood,—‘no more obey the Jaws of heav’n,’ which 
direct us to appear what we really are,—‘than our courtiers’; that is, than the 
‘bloods of our courtiers’; but our bloods, like theirs,—‘still seem, as doth the 
King’s.’ This paraphrase seems well nigh as ‘obscure and perplexed’ as that of 
Warburton. With both critics the main difficulty seems to lie in the interpretation 
of ‘bloods.’ In the meantime, or rather, in the same year with Johnson, Hratu, 
whose opinions are always respectable, put forth his paraphrase (p. 469), and for 
the first time interprets ‘bloods’ correctly, as it seems tome. He thus paraphrases: 
‘Every one you meet appears to be displeased and out of humour; the heavens 
have no more influence on our dispositions’ than they have on the courtiers. 
Both seem to be equally determined by the humour the King happens to be in. 
If he is cloudy, all are instantly cloudy too.’ The punctuation seems to have 
misled Heath; the colon after ‘courtiers’ kept him apparently from seeing what 
I think is correct, that ‘courtiers’ is the nominative to ‘seeme.’—CAPELL accepted 
Heath’s interpretation of ‘bloods,’ as referring to our dispositions, which are in- 
fluenced by the blood and this in turn by ‘the heavens, —thus understood, and with 
making ‘courtiers’ a genitive, and an emphasis on ‘our,’ thereby importing ‘of us 
who have no dependence on court,’ ‘the passage will be,’ he says, ‘sufficiently clear 
without further explaining.’ In the following year, TyrRwuitt proposed a reading, 
which by the omission of the s after ‘Kings,’ has been accepted more widely than 
any other. His reading is as follows: ‘Our bloods No more obey the heavens than 
our courtiers Still seem, as does the King.’ ‘That is,’ he adds, ‘Still look as the 
King does’; or, as he expresses it a little differently afterwards, “—wear their 
faces to the bent of the King’s looks.’—The Text. Notes reveal how widely this 
reading has been followed. As for the omission of the final s in ‘Kings,’ all, who 
are familiar with the First Folio text, know how extremely common this intrusive 
letter is at the end of a word. SmwNEY WALKER (Crit., i, 233) has devoted a long 
article to this interpolation, and goes so far as to surmise that it may have arisen 
from some peculiarity of Shakespeare’s handwriting. The chiefest difficulty in 
this passage has been solved, I think, by the conversion of ‘Kings’ into King; 
there are, however, other minor difficulties connected with several other words, as 
well as sundry emendations which must not be overlooked.—CoLERIDGE (p. 302) 


IO PHE TRAGEDIEAOR (ACT's, Ge) 4: 


[7-9. Our bloods ... as do’s the Kings] 


in his Lecture, delivered in 1818, says: ‘I have sometimes thought that the 
word, “courtiers,” was a misprint for countenances, arising from an anticipation, 
by foreglance of the compositor’s eye, of the word “courtier” a few lines below. 
The written r is easily and often confounded with the written x. The compositor 
read the first syllable court, and—his eye at the same time catching the word 
“courtier” lower down—he completed the word without reconsulting the copy. 
It is not unlikely that Shakespeare intended first to express generally the same 
thought, which a little afterwards he repeats with a particular application to the 
persons meant;—a common usage of the pronominal “our,” where the speaker 
does not really mean to include himself; and the word “you” is an additional 
confirmation of the “our” being used, in this place, for men generally and in- 
definitely, just as “you do not meet” is the same as one does not meet.’ [In propos- 
ing countenances, can it be that Coleridge overlooked the metre?]|—JosrpH HUNTER 
(ii, 292) remarks that the punctuation of neither the old nor the modern editions 
can be right. ‘The following regulation,’ he adds, ‘was suggested to me by Mr 
Bright: ‘‘our bloods No more obey the heavens then: our courtiers Still seem as 
does the King.”’—BuLtocu (p. 266), to whom a little knowledge was apparently 
a dangerous thing, proposed to substitute for Shakespeare’s text, the following of 
his own: ‘ You do not meet a ‘manly hail!”’ but frowns. Our bloods no more obey 
the heaven’s call Than do our courtiers; they Still seem as does the King.’— 
STAUNTON,—admirable as was his fertility of invention,—at times, sfflaminandus 
erat, offers the following,—can it be termed an emendation? ‘Tyrwhitt’s reading 
is now generally followed, though no one perhaps ever believed or believes that this 
was what the poet wrote. It has been accepted because the editors had nothing 
better to offer. The real blot lies, we apprehend, in the words ‘Still seem as,” 
which were probably misheard or misread by the compositor for still-seemers, 
z. €., ever dissemblers; and the meaning appears to be “‘our complexions do not 
more sympathise with the changes of the sky, than the looks of our courtiers (those 
perpetual simulators) do with the aspect of the King.” The expression “‘seemers” 
occurs again in the same sense here attributed to it, in Meas. for Meas., I, iii, 53, 54.’ 
There seems to be here a return to the spherical predominance that overshadowed 
Warburton and Johnson. Do our ‘complexions sympathise with the changes of 
the sky’? Almost the last trace of this belief is discerned in a note by BoSwELt in 
the Variorum of 1821, as follows: ‘This passage means, I think, “our bloods, or 
our constitutions, are not more regulated by the heavens, by every skyey influence, 
than our courtiers apparently are by the looks or disposition of the King; when he 
frowns, every man frowns.” ’—WALKER (Crit., i, 72) thus criticises this note of 
Boswell: ‘This explanation,—to say nothing more,—is irreconcilable with the 
words of the passage, which, to admit of it, ought to be “Not more obey,” etc. 
But it suggested to me the former part of a conjectural emendation. I suspect 
that a line is wanting; e. g. (to illustrate my meaning) ,— ‘“—our bloods Not more 
obey the heavens, than our courtiers [Mirror their master’s looks: their counten- 
ances] Still seem, as doth the King’s.”” There are, as it seems to me, several in- 
stances in the Folio (several, considered collectively, though few compared with 
the number of lines) of single verses having dropt out; and the Folio is the only 
authority for Cymbeline. The similarity of termination, courtiers—countenances, 
was the cause of the omission. This conjecture is merely thrown out as a may-be.’ 
It may seem strange that Walker was not aware how closely he was anticipated by 


NEW Th SEs "ty || CYMBELINE LI 


2. Gent. But what’s the matter ? 10 

1. His daughter ,and the heire of’s kingdome (whom 

10. what’s|] whats F,. hath] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. 

11. of’s] ofs F.. of his Cap. Varr. Han. kingdom, whom...(a widow...mar- 
Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt, Ktly. ri’d) hath Cap. et seq. (subs.) 


11-13. kingdome (whom ... married) 


Coleridge, but we know that his library was scanty and he probably had never 
heard of Coleridge’s criticism. What is, perhaps, a little more strange is that he 
refused to accept Boswell’s ‘No more’ as ‘Not more,’ when later on (Crit., ii, 123) 
he has an article on ‘No more apparently misprinted for not more,’ and, among other 
examples, cites this present passage and even refers, without-comment, to his 
previous note; but aliquando dormitat, etc.—Dyce in his first edition adopted 
Tyrwhitt’s emendation, without demur; but, in his second edition, having read, 
in the meantime, Walker’s valuable criticisms, and finding that Walker suggested 
the loss of a line, that honest but vacillating editor asks, ‘But does the emendation 
[Tyrwhitt’s] now adopted set all right in this much-disputed passage?’—WEL- 
LESLEY (p. 31) thinks that the chief difficulty lies in the word ‘Heavens,’ a mis- 
reading by the compositor for Queens, with the consequent false idea of obeying the 
heavens; taking into consideration the next two speeches of this First Gentleman, 
wherein ‘the frowns, faces, looks, and outward sorrow of all, King, Queen, Courtiers, 
and Gentlemen,’ are contrasted ‘with their bloods, or inward heart,’ Dr Wellesley 
believes that we shall arrive at a consistent meaning in this first speech if ‘Heavens’ 
be changed to Queens; that is, ‘our bloods no more obey the Queens Than our 
courtiers; Still seem as does the Kings.—To VAUGHAN (iii, 327) the difficulty is 
centred in ‘Courtiers,’ which, by conversion into court eyes, gives ‘a quite satis- 
factory sense,’ and is withal, so he asserts, ‘the slightest change that has been 
proposed, involving neither omission nor addition of the number of letters.’— 
KEIGHTLEY takes a broader and more liberal view than Vaughan and believes that 
what the Courtiers lack is not ‘eyes’ but ‘faces,’ and his text accordingly reads 
‘our courtiers’ faces’; in other respects retaining the Folio text. ‘There remains 
the jejune task of citing,—for I shall not quote them,—passages which have been 
detected in various authors parallel in sentiment with the present passage. At 
best they show that Shakespeare was merely the child of his age and shared thoughts 
with many a fellow writer,—a very needless revelation,—and at worst it is a vain 
parade of reading on the part of the critic and half insinuates plagiarism on the 
part of Shakespeare. Of course I refer to sheer parallelisms from other writers. 
Passages identical in sentiment or similar in expression from Shakespeare’s own 
writings, especially from the Sonnets, are always profitable-——STEEVENS quotes 
from Greene’s Wever too Late, 1590, p. 22, ed. Grosart; MALone, from Ant. & 
Cleop., I, v, 64, ed. Var.; INcLEBy, from the Com. of Err., I, ii, 30-34; Greene’s 
Menaphon, 1580, pages 23, 24, ed. Pearson; Chapman’s Tragedie of Byron, p. 279, 
ed. Pearson.—Larocue, in his French Trans., 1842, quotes from Racine’s Britan- 
nicus, V, v. To the citations from Shakespeare, may be added, 2 Hen. IV: 
V, i, 73, and Tempest, II, i, 142.—Ep. 

11. of’s] This contraction should be of course retained, as it has been, I believe, 
by every editor since Collier, except Keightley. The same is emphatically true of 
‘shall’s’ (III, ii, 303) instead of shall we, which, the Cowden-Clarkes say, is to be 
found only in the group of plays consisting of the present play, The Winters Tale, 
Coriolanus, and Timon.—ED. 


12 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT’ 1, sc. 1. 


He purpos’d to his wiues fole Sonne, a Widdow 12 
That late he married) hath referr’d her felfe 
Vnto a poore, but worthy Gentleman, She’s wedded, 
Her Husband banifh’d; fhe imprifon’d, all 15 
Is outward forrow, though I thinke the King 
Be touch’d at very heart. 

2 None but the King? 

1 He that hath loft her too: fo is the Queene, 


That moft defir’d the Match. But not a Courtier, 20 
Although they weare their faces to the bent 
Of the Kings lookes, hath a heart that is not 22 


12. wiues] wives Ff. wife’s Rowe. 
13. referr’'d| Ff. affied or assur’d 


F;F,, Rowe. wedded....banish’d;...im- 
prison’d. Pope. wedded;...banish’d;... 


Lettsom ap. Walker (Crit. iii, 313). 
14. Vnto] To Cap. Walker (Crit. iii, 
313). 

She’s| Shes F2. 

She’s wedded] Separate line Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. She’s 
wed Steev. conj. Om. Mitford ap. 
Cam. 

14, 15. She’s...all] One line Ktly. 
She’s...imprifon’d| Separate 
line Han. Steev. conj. Ingl. 
wedded,...banifh'd;...imprif- 


imprison’d: Theob. et seq. (subs.) 
15, 16. all Is] All’s Han. Steey. conj. 
16. forrow,| Ff. Rowe,+, Coll. sor- 
row; Cap. et cet. 
18. 2] 2 Gent. Rowe. 
21, 22. Although...lookes| In paren- 
theses Pope, Theob. Warb. Han. Ktly. 
22. lookes] look Pope ii, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. 
hath} but hath Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Han. Huds. 
is not] is Pope ii, Theob. Warb. 


on'd,| wedded....banifd;...imprifon’d, Han. Huds. 


13. referr’d] WALKER (Crit., iii, 313) asks ‘what is “referr’d” here?’—Scumipt 
(Lex.) answers that it is a ‘Euphuism’ which is ‘explained by the speaker in the 
next words: “she’s wedded.” ’—INGLEBy substitutes outright in the text pre- 
ferr'd, because ‘Imogen had not “‘referr’d herself” to Posthumus, in the only sense 
“referr’d” can well have, but preferr’d or commended herself to the man she would 
marry.’ But why may not ‘referr’d’ be here used in its derivative Latin sense, a 
use Shakespeare frequently employs? The King purpos’d to prefer Imogen, 
that is, to advance her to the position of wife to the Queen’s son, for though she 
was his heir, she was as a woman inferior to a prince, but Imogen refused and 
referred herself unto Posthumus, that is, she drew back, she retreated to a station 
lower down.—Eb. 

22. hath a heart that is not] Pope (ed. i.) inserted a but before ‘hath,’ thereby 
anticipating WALKER (Crit., ili, 314), who conjectured it also, and remarked that 
‘the common reading is absolutely unmetrical; and the proposed one, though 
more incorrect in point of grammar than Shakespeare’s wont, is not perhaps 
without a parallel in him. Or is the error in “looks”’?” Pope in his ed. ii. amended 
the grammar by omitting ‘not.’ Is there, however, any defect needing change in 
the Foliop—VaucuHan (p. 330) says truly that ‘Not a courtier hath a heart that 
is not glad” is correctly equivalent to “Every courtier hath a heart that is glad”; 
and therefore, the text of the Folio is certainly right.’ 


ACEEIGSC. 1] CYMBELINE 13 


Glad at the thing they fcowle at. 23 
2 And why fo? 
1 He that hath mifs’d the Princeffe, is a thing 25 


Too bad, for bad report : and he that hath her, 

(I meane, that married her, alacke good man, 

And therefore banifh’d) is a Creature, fuch, 

As to feeke through the Regions of the Earth 

For one, his like ; there would be fomething failing 30 
In him, that fhould compare. I do not thinke, 

So faire an Outward, and fuch ftuffe Within 

Endowes a man, but hee. 


2 You fpeake him farre. 34 
23. Glad at] Glad of Sta. conj. (Athe- 30. one, his like;] one, he like; F.F;. 
nzum, 14 June, ’73). one, he likes; F,. one his like, Pope et 

the thing] the the thing F;. seq. 
Jcowle| fcoule F;. fcowl F,. 33- but hee] but him Rowe,+, Var. 

24. why] wy Fo. Te. 
27, 28. (I...banif’d)| TI...banish’d 34. farre| F,. fair F;F,, Rowe, Pope, 
Johns. Cam. Theob. ii. farr Theob. i. far Han. et 

27. man,| man! Theob. et seq. seq. 


27. alacke good man] STAUNTON (Atheneum, 14 June, ’73) thinks that Capell’s 
punctuation, generally followed, which places this exclamation between dashes, 
and with an exclamation mark, appears to imply that ‘Posthumus is to be com- 
miserated for having married Imogen!’ We ought, therefore, to read, ‘I mean that 
married her—alack, good man, And therefore banish’d!—’—Hupson adopted 
the suggestion. 

31. In him, that should compare] IncLEBy: That is, in the case of him who 
should be selected to stand the comparison. 

33. but hee] For numberless examples of irregularities in the use of personal 
pronouns, see ABBOTT (§§ 205-243). 

34. farre] THEOBALD wisely followed F:, and paraphrased it, ‘You speak widely, 
with latitude, in his praises’; and then the other replies with great propriety, ‘as 
widely as I speak of him, I extend him within the lists and compass of his own 
merit.’ This true interpretation WARBURTON dogmatically asserted to be ‘the 
most insufferable nonsense,’ and proceeded to show that the passage should be 
read and pointed, ‘I don’t extend him, Sir; within himself Crush him,’ &c., for 
the substance of his note, he was bravely ridiculed by Edwards (p. 223). War- 
burton’s overbearing manner so intimidated poor Theobald, that in his second edi- 
tion he actually gave up ‘far’ without comment. Not so HANMER, who bravely 
adhered to ‘far’ in both his editions, but ignobly adopted Warburton’s emenda- 
tion in the second line. Warburton’s argument that ‘extend,’ ex w termini, 
signified ‘the drawing out anything beyond its “lists and compass,”’ so far pre- 
vailed with CAPELL, that he rashly followed Warburton’s text, but repented in his 
Notes, p. 102, and gives what he calls ‘the certain interpretation,’ namely, ‘admit- 
ting the extension, but asserting that, far as he may seem to have carry’d it, he has 
come short of what his real worth is; and has rather crush’d it together, than un- 


14 THE TRAGEDIE (OF facr 1,8¢. 1. 


1 I do extend him (Sir) within himfelfe, 35 
Crufh him together, rather then vnfold 
His meafure duly. 

2 What’s his name, and Birth ? 

1 I cannot delue him to the roote : His Father 


Was call’d Sicillius, who did ioyne his Honor 40 

35. do] don’t Han. Warb. Cap. 38. What's] whats F2. 

35, 360. (Sir) within himfelfe, Crufh] 40. ioyne] gain Wh. Jervis. Huds. 
Ff, Rowe, Pope, Cam. sir; within him- win Jervis ap. Dyce ii, Ingl. earn 
self Crush Han. Warb. Cap. sir, Anon. ap. Cam. 
within himself; Crush Theob. et cet. ioyne his] purchase Kinnear. joy 

35. within] which Ff. in Dowden conj. 


37. duly] dully Ff. fully Rowe. 


folded it duly.’—Jounson thus tersely expresses this meaning, ‘I extend him within 
himself; my praise however extensive is within his merit.’ And then asks, ‘what is 
there in this which common language and common sense will not admit?’ A 
writer, however, in the Critical Review, for February, 1766 (quoted by Eccles, p. 6), 
would not admit it. ‘We know,’ he says, ‘that to extend, in a legal sense, is to 
value lands, goods, and tenements. If the reader carries this in his eye, Shake- 
speare’s meaning, as it stands in the original, is as elegant and sensible, as Mr 
Johnson’s is forced and unnatural.’ Unquestionably, to extend has a legal mean- 
ing of to value, to assess, but did ever lawyer hear of extending lands or goods 
‘within themselves.’ It would be an enviable sight to see a writ of extent thus 
drawn up, or the puzzled face of the sheriff who received it! This note from 
The Critical Review would assuredly not have been recorded had not VAUGHAN 
(iii, 331), in our own day, supported it, and DowDEN given it recognition. To me, 
the use of ‘within himself’ puts all legal reference ‘out of court,’ and sustains the 
interpretation of Theobald, Heath, Capell, Dr Johnson, and of almost all subse- 
quent editors, as the true one-—DownbEN: ‘If emendation be needed, perhaps 
joy in (as in Love’s L. L., I, i, 104, “joyed in the glory”) would be the simplest.’ 
See ‘to extend him,’ I, v, 23.—Eb. 

40. ioyne] STEEVENS said that he did ‘not understand what can be meant by 
“joining his honour against,” etc., with, etc.’ Perhaps our author wrote, ‘join 
his banner.’ And INGLEBY asserted that ‘it cannot be right, on account of the 
opposed clause—“But had his titles,” etc.’ The opposition is not, I think, be- 
tween ‘Honor’ and ‘titles,’ but between ‘Cassibulan’ and ‘Tenantius.’ Subse- 
quent editors have found here little or no difficulty—DrEIcGHTON says that ‘the 
meaning seems to be that though Sicilius fought honourably with Cassibelan 
against the Romans, he did not obtain any recognition of his services in the way 
of titles, until later on he again served under Tenantius against the same enemies.’ 
—Ro tre thinks no change is really called for —Wvatr believes that ‘ “join” yields 
good enough sense.’—HErrorp paraphrases: ‘brought his renowned soldiership 
to the service of Cassibelan.—DeE tus, to the same effect—VauGHAN (iii, 332), 
however, considers that ‘neither the matter nor the language countenances these 
‘far-fetched explanations’ and, consequently, evades all difficulty by changing the 
words, and had ‘little doubt that we should read’ ‘did join his colour,’ etc. ‘I have 
adopted,’ says Dr Johnson, in his immortal Preface, ‘the Roman sentiment, that 


INED iy SKE Tal CYMBELINE 15 


Againft the Romanes, with Ca/idulan, 41 
But had his Titles by Zexantius, whom 

He feru’d with Glory, and admir’d Succeffe : 

So gain’d the Sur-addition, Leonatus. 

And had (befides this Gentleman in queftion ) 45 
Two other Sonnes, who in the Warres o’th’time 

Dy’de with their Swords in hand. For which, their Father 

Then old, and fond of yffue, tooke fuch forrow 

That he quit Being ; and his gentle Lady 


Bigge of this Gentleman (our Theame) deceaft 50 
As he was borne. The King he takes the Babe . 
To his proteétion, cals him Pofthumus Leonatus, 52 
41. Romanes] Romans F;F,. 50. Bigge] Big Ff. 
Caffibulan] Caffibelan Ff et (our Theame) deceaft] (our Theam 
seq. deceaft) F,. our Theam, deceas’d; Rowe, 


46. o’th’] o’the Cap. et seq. +. 
48. of] of’s Coll. (monovol. MS.), 52. Leonatus] Om. Pope,+, Cap. 
Huds. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 


it is more honourable to save a citizen than to kill an enemy, and have been more 
careful to protect than to attack.—DownpEN paraphrases: ‘Who gave the in- 
fluence of his personal reputation—or soldierly virtue, summed up in “honour”— 
to Cassibelan, but obtained his titles later from Tenantius.’ 

42. Tenantius] MALONE gives a long note here, which has been followed in 
whole, or in part, by many editors, to the effect that, this Tenantius ‘was the 
father of Cymbeline, and nephew of Cassibelan, being the younger son of his elder 
brother, Lud; . . . on whose death Cassibelan was admitted King. Cassibelan 
repulsed the Romans on their first attack, but, being vanquished by Julius Cesar 
on his second invasion of Britain, he agreed to pay an annual tribute to Rome. 
After his death, Tenantius, Lud’s younger son (his elder brother Androgeus having 
fled to Rome), was established on the throne of which they had been unjustly de- 
prived by their uncle,’ etc. These ‘facts,’ as Malone terms them, were furnished, 
as he says, to Shakespeare by Holinshed. But BOSWELL-STONE (p. 7, foot-note) 
says that ‘Shakespere seems to have adopted Fabian’s conjecture (reported in 
Holinshed, i, Hist. of Eng., 31) that Cassibelan, Androgeus, and Tenantius were 
sons of Lud, Cymbeline’s grandfather; for Cymbeline is reminded by Lucius that 
tribute was imposed by Julius Cesar on “Cassibulan, thine Vnkle” (Cym., II, 
ita) a 

51. King he] For other instances of this redundant pronoun, see ABporr (§ 243). 

52. protection] The -tion is to be pronounced, of course, dissoluté, which 
throws the accent on the second syllable of Posthumus, as it should be throughout 
the play. See Dram. Pers., ‘Posthumus,’ above. 

52. Leonatus] This ‘sur addition’ is omitted for the sake of the metre, by 
every editor from Pope to Knight, who remarks that ‘it was given to connect the 
child with the memory of his father, and to mark the circumstance of his being 
born after his father’s death,’ and should be, therefore, retained on the score of its 
meaning; and as to the metre, Dyce, in a note on 2 Hen. VI: 1, i, 7: ‘The Dukes of 


16 THE TRAGEDIE OF facr 1, 8c. 1. 
Breedes him, and makes him of his Bed-chamber, 53 
Puts to him all the Learnings that his time 

Could make him the receiuer of, which he tooke 55 


As we do ayre, faft as ’twas minisftred, 

And in’s Spring, became a Harueft : Liu’d in Court 

(Which rare it is to do) moft prais’d, moft lou’d, 

A fample to the yongeft : to th’more Mature, 

A glaffe that feated them : and to the grauer, 60 


54. to him] him to Var. ’03, 713, ’21. 
Learnings] learning Var. 78, ’85. 
55. receiuer of,] receiver, of Ingl. con). 
56, 57. As...And] One line Cap. 
Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Coll. 
Ktly, Huds. Ingl. 
56. miniftred,| Ff, Rowe, Johns. Sta. 
Glo. ministred. Pope,t+. minister’d; 
Cap-eticet: 


57. And in’s Spring] Ff, Johns. Knt, 
Sta. Dyce, Glo. Cam. His spring 
Pope,+. In’s Elze, Ingl. In his Cap. 
et cet. 

Liw’d| he liv’d Han. 
59. yongeft] young’st Pope,+, Cap. 
th’more| Ff, Rowe,+, Knt. the 
more Cap. et cet. 
60. feated| featur’'d Rowe,+, Cap. 


Orleans, Calaber, Bretagne, and Alencon,’ observes that Shakespeare, like other 
early dramatists, considered himself at liberty occasionally to disregard the laws 
of metre in the case of proper names, e. g., a blank verse speech in Rich. IJ: II, i, 
284, contains the following formidable line: ‘Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Water- 
ton, and Francis Quoint.’—Eb. 

54. Puts to him] INcLeEsy asserted that there is no other certain example in 
Shakespeare of this use of ‘put to,’ and because of the phrase ‘receiver of’ in the 
next line, he suggested that ‘puts to’? may mean ‘puts into. HoLcomBE INGLEBY, 
however, in a revised edition of his father’s work, quotes ‘and to him put The 
manage of my state. —Temp., I, ii, 69, which is, apparently, exactly parallel, but 
THISTLETON doubts, and suggests that ‘it is rather to be explained by the use of 
“put” in Henry VII.’s Statute De proclamacione facienda: ““Whiche lawes ought 
to be put in due execucion by the Justice of peas in every shyre of this reame. to 
whom his grace hath put and given full auctoryte soo to do.”’ Thistleton also 
quotes the parallel use of ‘put’ in Love’s L. Lost: ‘If their sons be ingenuous, they 
shall want no instruction; If their daughters be capable, I will put it to them.’— 
IV, ii, 80.—Scumipt (Levw., s. v., 4.) gives the present among several other instances 
to which he gives the meaning to impart, but none is exactly parallel in form, inas- 
much as their direct object precedes the indirect, which is common enough,—the 
Variorums of ’03, ’13, and ’2r so printed the present phrase,—but in our present 
text the indirect precedes the direct. This inversion, however, creates no real 
difficulty, the meaning is the same in either case. If imparts implies an active use 
as a teacher unbefitting the dignity of a King, then paraphrase it by offer, or assign, 
or place before —Ep. 

57, 58. Liu’d in Court... most lou’d] Jonson: This enconium is high 
and artful. To be at once in any great degree loved and praised is truly rare. 

60. feated] It is not worth while to repeat Dr Jounson’s long note wherein he 
attempted, in revolt against Rowe’s featur’d, to justify his reading of feared, i. é., to 
fright. It was reprinted in the Var. of 1773, but in that of 1778 this paragraph was 
added: ‘If “‘feated” be the right word, it must, I think, be explained thus: “a 


ACE tf, SC. i.] 


A Childe that guided Dotards. 


CYMBELINE 17 


To his Miftris, 61 


(For whom he now is banifh’d) her owne price 
Proclaimes how fhe efteem’d him; and his Vertue 
By her eleétid may be truly read, what kind of man he is. 
2 I honor him, euen out of your report. 65 
But pray you tell me, is fhe fole childe to’th’King? 


1 His onely childe : 


61. To] For Han. Coll. MS. 

62. banifh'd| banish’d... Ktly. 

62, 63. her...Vertue] In parentheses 
Vaughan. 

63. him; and his Vertue] Ff, Rowe i. 
him. And his vertue Rowe ii. him 
and his vertue. Pope,+, Ktly. him 
and his vertue; Cap. et cet. 


67 


64. what...he is] Separate line Rowe 
et seq. 

65. euen] ev’n Pope,+. 

65, 66. euen out...tell me] One line, 
Johns. et seq. 

66. pray] ’pray Mal. Steey. Varr. 
Knt, Sing. Ktly. 

to’th’| to thee Cap. et seq. 


64. read,| read Pope, Theob. Warb. 67. childe:| child? Ff. child. Rowe 


et seq. 


glass that formed them”; a model, by the contemplation and inspection of which 
they formed their manners.’—In MAtone’s edition of 1790, the first to appear 
after Johnson’s death in 1784, the note was suppressed, and of the added paragraph 
only the definition was retained: ‘A glass that formed them,’ etc.; and so it has 
appeared in all the subsequent Variorums. We have the adjective in this play 
(V, v, 106) where Lucius extols his page as ‘So feate,’ when it evidently means 
skilful, apt, etc. As this is the only instance known to the NV. E. D. of the verb used 
in a similar connection, every student is at liberty to form his own definition, and 
editors have availed themselves of the chance. To me, however, Dr BRADLEY’s def- 
inition (in the JV. E. D.) preceded by a qu.? is just: ‘To constrain to propriety. —Eb. 

61. To his Mistris] CapEtL has no parentheses in the next line, but places a 
dash after ‘banish’d,’ ‘which shews,’ he says, ‘that something is left to be supplied 
by ourselves,—which something is easily deducible from what goes before;— 
“to his mistress,”’ etc. (it is needless to say what he was); the value that she dis- 
cover’d in him, may be estimated by that of herself.’—Co ier’s MS. and HanMER 
read ‘For his mistress—.’-—Monck Mason says the ‘To’ means ‘as to.’ ‘As to’ 
appears, as an MS. correction in Warburton’s own copy of Shakespear (V. & Q., 
VIII, iii, 263) DEIGHTON says that here the construction is changed; to the same 
effect RoLFeE.—WyATT pronounces it an anacoluthon.—VAUGHAN asserts that 
these concluding lines ‘have not been properly understood by any critic,’ and that 
“To his mistress’ must be understood as depending directly on ‘what kind of a man 
he is.’ Whatever difficulty there be, is it not due to the punctuationP—DownEn, 
in agreement with Deighton and Rolfe, thinks ‘the construction with “to,” caught 
from the preceding sentence, is broken.’ This is true. To me it seems that the 
speaker means to keep up exactly the same construction, but was diverted, by his 
own explanatory parenthesis, and then failed to complete his sentence in harmony 
with what preceded. As the sentence now stands, I think Wyatt rightly pro- 
nounces it an anacoluthon. Had not the compositors placed a period after 
‘Dotards,’ the mental continuance of the construction might possibly have been 
clearer. Again in line 63 the punctuation is misleading: the semicolon after ‘him’ 
should, I think, follow ‘Vertue.’—Eb. 


2 


18 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT I, SC. ‘is 


He had two Sonnes (if this be worth your hearing, 68 
Marke it) the eldeft of them, at three yeares old 
V’th’{wathing cloathes, the other from their Nurfery 70 


Were ftolne, and to this houre, no gheffe in knowledge 
Which way they went. 

2 How long is this ago ? 

1 Some twenty yeares. 

2 That a Kings Children fhould be fo conuey’d, 75 
So flackely guarded, and the fearch fo flow 


68, 69. (if...it)] if...it; Johns. 71. gheffe] gueffe F;. guefs Fy. 

60. eldeft] eld’st Sing. Dyce, Huds. 75. conuey'd| Ff, Theob. Warb. 

69, 70. old I’th’...cloathes, the other] Johns. Coll. Glo. convey’d! Rowe et 
old, I’th...cloaths the other, Rowe et seq. cet. 

71. ftolne,| Fi, Rowe, Glo.  stol’n; 76. guarded,| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. 
Pope et cet. Sta. Glo. guarded! Cap. et cet. 


69. eldest] WALKER (Vers., 168) gives this word as an example of the suppres- 
sion of e in superlatives. The use of the word ‘suppression’ is here, I think, ob- 
jectionable, especially when it creates a word as harsh as eldst, which is almost 
unpronounceable by any one who aims at clear enunciation. Should mechanical 
metre ever interfere with the music of rhythm? When Wordsworth writes, ‘Where 
rivulets dance their wayward round,’ are we to silence the dancing melody and at 
the behest of scansion, lose a ripple in saying, ‘Where riv’lets dance?’ A man who 
cannot retain such redundant syllables and so pronounce them as not to mar 
the melody of the verse should never attempt to read poetry aloud or to speak 
it.— Ep. 

71. no ghesse in knowledge] IncLEBy: That is, ‘no guess’ resulting ‘in knowl- 
edge.—DowpEn: No intelligent, well-informed guess——HErrorp: No guess 
which approves itself as true——VauGHAN: No guess in ascertaining which way 
they went. [This last guess seems to me the best. If the order of the words be 
changed, will not the phrase then explain itself: ‘in the knowledge which way they 
went, there is not seen a guess’?—Ep.] 

73. How long ...ago?] Ecctes: The ignorance of the second Gentleman re- 
specting matters which we must necessarily suppose to be of such general notoriety 
can only be accounted for by imagining him a stranger, or one long absent from the 
Court. [See Buttocg, line 4, supra.] 

75. That] Cotter (ed. ii.): The MS., perhaps to render the sense more clear, 
and in conformity with the recitation of the passage to which his ear may have 
been accustomed, gives the line thus ‘Strange! a King’s children,’ etc. The emen- 
dation receives some confirmation from the next speech, which begins, ‘Howsoe’er 
’tis strange,’ etc., as if the 1 Gentleman had repeated the word just spoken by the 
person with ae he was conversing. 

75. conuey’d] Murray (WN. E. D., s. v.,6,b.): A euphuism for: To steal. one 
tions follow from The Babees Book, 14685 Cranmer, 1548, and from the oft-quoted 
passage in Merry Wives: ‘Nym. The good humour is to steal at a minute’s rest. 
Pistol. “Convey” the wise it call. “Steal! foh! a fico for the phrase!’—I, 
mols ire 


ACT I, SC.-i1.] 


That could not trace them. 
1 Howfoere, ’tis ftrange, 


CYMBELINE 19 


edi 


Or that the negligence may well be laugh’d at : 


Vets it true Sir, 
2 I do well beleeue you. 
1 We mutt forbeare. 
The Queene, and Princeffe. 


80 


Heere comes the Gentleman, 


Lexeunt 83 


Scena Secunda. 


Enter the Queene, Pofthumus, and Imogen. 


Qn. No, be affur’d you fhall not finde me(Daughter) 
After the flander of moft Step-Mothers, 


Euill-ey’d vnto you. 


Your Gaoler fhall deliuer you the keyes 


That locke vp your reftraint. 


77. That] That’t or That’ Elze (p. 
208). 
them.] Fi. them— Rowe, Johns. 
them!— Pope, Han. them,— Theob. 
Warb. them! Cap. et cet. 
79. at:| at, Rowe et seq. 
80. zs it] it is Han. ii. 
83. Exeunt] Exrunt. Fo. 
1. Scena Secunda] Scene continued. 
Rowe, Theob. Sta. Dyce, Glo. Coll. iii, 


You’re my Prifoner, but 5 
For you Pofthumus, 7 
Huds. 


The same. Cap. Mal. 

2. Imogen.] Imogen and Attendants. 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. Johns. Varr. 

5. Ewuill-ey'd] I’ll-ey’d Pope, Theob. 
Warb. TJil-ey’d Han. 

You're] Fi, Rowe,+, Cap. Sta. 
Dyce, Glo. Huds. You are Varr. Mal. 
Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. Sing. Ktly. 

Prifoner| pris’ner Pope,+. 


82. the Gentleman] It is not unlikely that the omission of these two words in 
the Var. 1803 was accidental. The entrance of Posthumus occurs in the stage- 
direction at the opening of the next scene; and REED, the editor of that Var., was 
a careful scholar. The Var. of 1813 and 1821 heedlessly followed the oversight.— 
Kwnicut, however, roundly denounces the omission, which he ascribes to ‘the 
editors,’ as though it had been intentional on the part of all his predecessors.—Ep. 

1. Scena Secunda] Cortmr: There is evidently no change of place, which, on 
the English stage, is usually necessary in order to constitute a new scene. 

2. Enter the Queene] Wyatt: The Queen allows the interview to take place 
in order that she may bring the King to witness it, and so incense him further 
against Posthumus. See lines 41, 42. 

4. slander] From the days of the novercalia odia of Tacitus, and possibly long 
before, this ‘slander’ has accompanied the human race.—Ep. 

s. Euill] For many examples from Shakespeare, as well as from other dramatists, 
where this word is evidently contracted to a monosyllable, see WALKER (Crit., il, 
196).—Popr, followed by THEOBALD and WARBURTON, prints J’//, to show that it is 
a monosyllable-—HAnMER prints J/].—ED. 


20 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act 1, $C. ii. 


So foone as I can win th’offended King, 8 
I will be knowne your Aduocate : marry yet 
The fire of Rage is in him, and ’twere good 10 


You lean’d vnto his Sentence, with what patience 
Your wifedome may informe you. 
Poft. ’Pleafe your Highneffe, 
I will from hence to day. 
Qu. You know the perill : 15 
Ile fetch a turne about the Garden, pittying 
The pangs of barr’d Affections, though the King 


Hath charg’d you fhould not fpeake together. Exit 
Imo. O diffembling Curtefie! How fine this Tyrant 

Can tickle where fhe wounds? My deereft Husband, 20 

I fomething feare my Fathers wrath, but nothing 

(Alwayes referu’d my holy duty) what 22 
13. ’Pleafe] Fy. Ran. Knt, Coll. i, Sta. Om. Pope,+ 
17. pangs] bangs Fy. As closing line 18 Cap. Mal. Steev. 


A ffections,| Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. Varr. Sing. Dyce, Ktly, Glo. Huds. 
Coll. Sta. Glo. affections; Theob. et Oh Coll. ii, Ktly. 
Cts 20. wounds?] Ff, Cap. wounds! 
19. O] Ff, Rowe, Var. ’73, ’78, ’85, Rowe et cet. 


g. marry] WALKER (Vers., 187) says this is commonly a monosyllable and gives 
the present line as an instance. I cannot quite accept this assertion; actors on the 
stage generally endeavour to speak intelligibly. Hath not here at least the zeal of 
Walker’s metre eaten him up?—Eb. 

13. ’Please] Note the apostrophe before ‘ Please,’ which indicates, I suppose, the 
omission of so or an 7t,—as commendable as it is unusual. Helene, Imogen’s lady, 
says ‘Please you’ (II, ii, 4), but she lacks the philological strain of Posthumus; 
there is no apostrophe.—Ep. 

19. O] Led by CapeELt, some of the best modern editors have printed this ‘O’ 
as closing the preceding line. I say ‘printed’ because it is for the eye alone. Is it 
conceivable how, either in acting or in speaking this exclamation, can be so ut- 
tered as to indicate that, without it, the Queen had inconsiderately departed leaving 
behind her a metrically incomplete line? Perhaps Imogen called it quickly after 
her before she had quite shut the door.—Eb. 

22. (Alwayes reseru’d my holy duty)] Jonnson: I say I do not fear my 
father, so far as I may say it without breach of duty—Dettus understands ‘holy 
duty’ as referring to her husband. ‘As long as this remains undisturbed, she does 
not fear, in other respects, what her father’s anger can inflict on her.—HERTzBERG 
takes the same view: ‘that “holy duty” refers to her marriage is clear enough; but 
what, however, is not so clear is how her father’s wrath can cause any infraction 
of it, unless it be that Imogen intends to express that in some possible way her 
strength might prove insufficient to hold out in her passive opposition to her 
father’s determination to marry her to another.’ That Imogen could ever yield is 
unthinkable; and the possible interpretation of her words, suggested by Hertz- 


ING Wy SCs wa] CYMBELINE 


His rage can do on me. You mutt be gone, 23 
And I fhall heere abide the hourely fhot 
Of angry eyes : not comforted to liue, 25 
But that there is this Iewell in the world, 
That I may fee againe. 
Poft. My Queene, my Miftris : , 
O Lady, weepe no more, leaft I giue caufe 
To be fufpected of more tenderneffe 30 
Then doth become a man, I will remaine 
The loyall’{t husband, that did ere plight troth. 
My refidence in Rome, at one Filorio’s, 
Who, to my Father was a Friend, to me 
Knowne but by Letter ; thither write (my Queene) 35 
And with mine eyes, Ile drinke the words you fend, 
Though Inke be made of Gall. ey) 


28. Queene,] Queen! Rowe et seq. 33. Rome] Rome’s Ktly. 
Mifiris:| Mistress! Rowe et seq. Filorio’s,] F,. Florio’s, F;F;,. 
29. more,| Ff, Rowe,+, Var. ’73, Philario’s, Rowe, Pope, Han. Glo. 
Coll. Sta. more; Cap. et cet. Philario’s; Theob. et cet. 
leaft| left Ff. 34. Who,] who F,. Rowe et seq. 
31. Then] Than F,. 


berg, reveals, I think, the error in supposing that ‘holy duty’ refers to her marriage. 
In Imogen’s darkest hour a divine prohibition cravened her weak hand. So now 
the duty to her father is rendered ‘holy’ by the divine command in the Deca- 
logue.—EbD. 

23. on me. You must] COLERIDGE (p. 302): Place the emphasis on ‘me’; 
for ‘rage’ is a mere repetition of ‘wrath.’—Wyatrt observes that ‘you’ is also em- 
phatic. Whereupon DowpEeN remarks: ‘Perhaps so, but I am not sure that 
Imogen contrasts her fear for herself with her fear for Posthumus. She shrinks a 
little from the encounter with her father, the wrath itself has some terror in it, but 
she does not fear any punishment it can inflict.’ Is it not likely that the accent 
falls, as properly as metrically, on ‘must’? Imogen feels that Fate has decreed 
their separation.—ED. 

29. O Lady] What a halo Shakespeare throws about this common, often vulgar, 
title! He seems almost to reserve it, as the very highest: ‘Why did you throw 
your wedded Lady from your’—Ep. 

32. The loyall’st husband, that did ere plight troth] Note that while 
calling, and properly calling, himself ‘a husband,’ Posthumus here speaks only of 
having plighted his troth.—Eb. 

36, 37. Ile drinke ... Though Inke be made of Gall] Jounson: Shake- 
speare, even in this poor conceit, has confounded the vegetable gal/s used in ink, 
with the animal gall, supposed to be bitter—STEEVENS: The poet might mean 
either the vegetable or the animal-galls with equal propriety, as the vegetable gall 
is bitter; and I have seen an ancient receipt for making ink, beginning, ‘Take of 
the black juice of the gall of oxen two ounces,’ &c.—VauGuHan: A ‘conceit’ it is; but, 


22 : THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[Act I, SC. 11. 


Enter Queene. 38 


Ou; Be briefe, I pray you : 


If the King come, I fhall incurre, I know not 40 
How much of his difpleafure : yet Ile moue him 

To walke this way : I neuer do him wrong, 

But he do’s buy my Iniuries, to be Friends : 


Payes deere for my offences. 


41. difpleafure: yet] displeasure— 
yet Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
displeasure. Yet Johns. Var. 773, 778. 
Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Ktly. 

41-44. yet...offences.| As aside Rowe 
et seq. 

42-44. I...But...Friends: Payes| For I 
...But...friends; And pays or I...But he 


44 


(Oe, ING Motte, iol 

42, 43. wrong,...[niuries,...Friends:] 
wrong...Injuries;...Friends, Daniel. 

43. do’s buy] buys off Han. 

Friends:| friends. Fi. friends, 

Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Coll. 
i, ii. friends Johns. Var. 773. 

44. [Exit. Rowe et seq. 


who buys...friends, Pays J. Beale (N. & 


withal, a most loving pleasantry. [Though the accent in ‘Though ink be made,’ 
etc., falls metrically on ‘made,’ I prefer to place it on ‘be.’—Eb.] 

42-44. I neuer... offences] MALONE: He gives me a valuable consideration 
in new kindness (purchasing, as it were, the wrong I have done him) in order to 
renew our amity, and make us friends again—Knicut: The meaning of the crafty 
Queen appears to be, that the kindness of her husband, even when she is doing him 
wrong, purchases injuries as if they were benefits——STaunTon: ‘Pays dear for my 
offences’ is a clause intended possibly to replace or be replaced by the words 
‘buy my injuries to be friends’: the first thought through the carelessness of the 
compositor being inserted as well as the reconsidered one.-—B. NicHoLson (NV. & 
Q., IIT, x, 346, 1866): At present these two clauses are more tautological than is 
usual with Shakespeare, but this objection may be removed, and a distinct meaning 
given to each by placing the colon after ‘injuries’ instead of after ‘friends.’ She 
commences by saying, with direct reference to the present instance, that when she 
would do the king an ill turn, she so disguised it in kindness, that he took it not as 
an offence, but, with misplaced affection, bought it of her at its seeming value. 
The bringing together of Posthumus and Imogen, though contrary to his com- 
mands, would be put down to such kindliness of disposition, and to such over- 
fondness for all that was his, as overcame her remembrance of the wrong done to 
her son. The bringing of himself to view the interview would be but forgetfulness 
of everything in her pleasure in his society, and desire to withdraw him from the 
general throng of courtiers into the precincts of her own more private garden. 
Such simulations of love would be met, she says, with a greater lavish of love. 
After this, however, she in her pride of craft completes the portraiture of an old 
and doting husband ruled by a cunning woman, and goes on to say that when she 
quarrelled with him, or maliciously or craftily bouded [sic] with him, or gave him 
open offence, he, as though the offence and blame had been his own, would seek a 
reconciliation, and pay dear to be friends again. On examining the wording, it 
will be found that ‘injuries’ (that is, wrongs) and ‘buys’ in one clause, and ‘offences’ 
and ‘pays’ in the other, are especially chosen to make the difference in meaning 
more clear.—VAUGHAN (p. 337): ‘I shall incur the King’s displeasure if he come; 


AGGIE ESCo lis] CYMBELINE 23 


Poft, Should we be taking leaue 45 
As long a terme as yet we haue to liue, 
The loathneffe to depart, would grow : Adieu. 
Imo. Nay, ftay a little : 
Were you but riding forth to ayre your felfe, 
Such parting were too petty. Looke heere ( Loue) 50 
This Diamond was my Mothers ; take it ( Heart) 
But keepe it till you woo another Wife, 
When J/mogen is dead. 


Poft. How,how? Another? 54 
47. depart,| depart Rowe ii. et seq. Glo. Ktly, Cam. How! How! Var. ’73 
48. little:] littlke— Pope,+. eurcets 

54. How, how?] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 54. Another?] Another! Rowe,+, Var. 


Theob. i, Han. How, how, Theob. ii, WR. 
Warb. Johns. How, how! Cap. Dyce, 


and I will take care he does come, in order to make a quarrel, in this way between us, 
which he will seek to make good by some round payment to me in return for my 
ill-treatment of him. In this way I make him pay dear for my misbehaviour to 
him.’—ABportt (§ 244, ‘Omission of Relatives’): So, after disobeying Cymbeline 
by allowing Posthumus to speak of Imogen, the Queen, while purposing to betray 
Posthumus, says aside: ‘Yet I’ll move him (the King) To walk this way; I never do 
him (the King) wrong But he (who, like Posthumus) does buy my injuries to be 
friends, Pays dear for my offences.—[This interpretation, if I understand it (the 
punctuation is defective, I think there should be a semicolon after ‘wrong’) is as 
novel as it isingenious. It takes ‘But he does buy,’ etc., as a general truth, equiva- 
lent to ‘But whoever buys,’ etc. It may be right, but, possibly, we do not know 
' quite enough of the past relations between the Queen and Posthumus, or to what 
extent he had bought her injuries, to accept it.—Eb.] 

45-48. Should .. . little] VAUGHAN would read ‘taking our leave’; and to 
gain this trifling immoment change, would end the lines, ‘be . . . yet . . . depart 
. . . little, pronouncing ‘Stay’ as a disyllable,—a linguistic feat which arouses 
unavoidable and ardent curiosity to know how it is performed.—Eb. 

54. How, how ?] Can it be that the interrogation mark is here correct? Does 
Posthumus ask ‘how?’ twice, as though he had not heard aright? I know that 
this interpretation can be defended, and yet I cannot believe it gives the true 
meaning. It is, I think, the spelling which misleads us. Ho! the imperative of the 
verb ‘to ho,’ to cease, stop, halt, is frequently in the Folio printed ‘how’; as in 
‘Ware pencils, ho!’ (How in the Folio), in Love’s Lab. Lost, V, ii, 45), where it means 
stop! That ho was frequently printed ‘how’ Dyce abundantly shows (Few Notes, 
elc., p. 57); in cases where it does not mean stop, cease, as in ‘Peace, how the morne’ 
(Mer. of Ven., V,i, 120), where a large majority of editors have accepted Malone’s 
change to ‘Peace, ho.’ Again, in Ham., V, ii, 298, ‘How?’ to Ho! (here Staunton 
opines that it means Stop! and is addressed to the combatants). Dyce adduces 
‘From Scicion how the news’ (Ant. & Cleop., I, ii, 128), but this is somewhat 
doubtful. These instances, however, suffice, I think, to show that it is possible 
to take Posthumus’s ‘How, how?’ as Ho, ho in either of the two meanings given 
above; or it may even have a faint tinge of satyric laughter.—Ep. 


24 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT I, Sc. it. 


You gentle Gods, giue me but this I haue, 55 
And feare vp my embracements from a next, 

With bonds of death. Remaine, remaine thou heere, 

While fenfe can keepe it on : And fweeteft, faireft, 58 


56. feare] F.F;. cere Steev. conj. Warb. Cap. Coll. ii. here! Pope. here 
Wh. Ktly, Huds. seal Eccles conj. Rowe ii. et cet. 


Sing. fear F, et cet. 57. [Putting on the Ring. Rowe et 
from for Cap. conj. seq. 
57. bonds] bands Wh. i. brands 58. it on] thee on Pope,+, Var. 773. 
Jervis. in on Ran. (misprint). 


heere,| Ff, Rowe i, Theob. Han. 


56. seare] The fact that ¢o cere, i. ¢., to wrap in a cerecloth, was, in the 16th and 
17th centuries (according to the NV. E. D.), spelled as in the text, seare, 7. e., to dry 
up or burn up, led to some controversy among the early editors, and to a long 
note by B. Nicholson (NV. & Q., VI, iv, 444). But the reference to ‘bonds of death’ 
leaves no doubt that the word here alludes to the cerements of the dead.—Eb. 

57, 58. Remaine thou heere, While sense can keepe it on] In reference 
to Pope’s unauthorised change of ‘it’ to thee, CAPELL (Notes, i, 102) asks: ‘is 
the ear perfectly satisfied with the concurrence to two open vowels in thee and on? 
and might this not be a reason for the preference given to “it”?’—STEEVENS 
refers ‘it’ to ‘sense’ and paraphrases ‘while sense can maintain its operations.’-— 
MALtoneE upholds ‘it,’ because Shakespeare has ‘many similar inaccuracies,’ and 
proceeds to quote several, especially another in this play, ‘they took thee for their 
mother, And every day do honour to her grave.’—III, iii, 114.—STEEVENS refused 
to allow his interpretation to be thus summarily swept aside, and rejoined, ‘as 
none of our author’s productions were revised by himself as they passed from the 
theatre to the press; and as Jul. Ces. and Cym. are among the plays which originally 
appeared in the blundering First Folio; it is hardly fair to charge irregularities on 
the poet, of which his publishers alone might have been guilty. I must, therefore, 
take leave to set down the present and many similar offences against the estab- 
lished rules of language, under the article of Hemingisms and Condelisms; and, as 
such, in my opinion, they ought, without ceremony, to be corrected.’—R. G. WHITE 
in an unhappy hour was ‘inclined to think that “it” is used in a possessive sense, 
and that “on” is a phonographic spelling of own; in which case Posthumus says to 
the ring, “Remain thou there while sense can hold its own.”’ This conjecture 
would have been more plausible, had ‘on’ been spelled one. White in his ed. ii. 
makes no reference to this emendation, having, in the meantime, it may be pre- 
sumed, wisely taken ‘advice of his washerwoman.’ (See White’s Preface, vol. i, 
p. xii.).—To Malone’s reference to III, iii, rr4, INcLEBY adds two more from the 
present play: IV, ii, 284, 285, and V, i, 4-6, where there is a change of the personal 
pronoun, similar to the present.—B. NicHorson (NV. & Q., VII, ix, 324) shows how, 
in action on the stage, this verbal difficulty may be solved, and rightly, as I think. 
‘Posthumus,’ he says, ‘having received the ring with the injunction to keep it 
“till Imogen is dead,” places it on his finger with the heartfelt and emphatic 
adjuration; ‘Remain thou here,” naturally, I should say, kisses it, and then, while 
continuing his words, he naturally looks towards Imogen, and, replying to her 
injunction, addresses to her the bowed promise, “Not for your lifetime,” but “while 
sense can keep it on.” But here we want a new punctuation, such as “thou here—.””’ 


NEW 1h, SES || CYMBELINE 25 


As I (my poore felfe) did exchange for you 
To your fo infinite loffe ; fo in our trifles 60 
I ftill winne of you. For my fake weare this, 
It is a Manacle of Loue, Ile place it 
Vpon this fayreft Prifoner. 
fmo. Othe Gods! 
When fhall we fee againe ? 65 
Enter Cymbeline,and Lords. 
Poft. Alacke, the King. 
Cym. Thou bafeft thing, auoyd hence, from my fight : 
If after this command thou fraught the Court 
With thy vnworthineffe, thou dyeft. Away, 70 
Thou’rt poyfon to my blood. 
Poft. The Gods protect you, 
And bleffe the good Remainders of the Court : 
I am gone. Exit, 74 


59. (my poore felfe)] my poor self Pope hence, Theob. Warb. Cap. avoid! 


et seq. hence! Johns. Var. ’73. avoid! hence, 

61. this,| this; Theob. et seq. Var. ’78 et cet. 

63. Prifoner] pris’ner Pope,+. 68. fight:] sight! Johns. et seq. 

[Putting a bracelet on her arm. 70. dyeft]| dy’st Rowe ii,+, Cap. 

Rowe et seq. ~  Varr. Mal. Ran. 

66. [SCENE mr. Pope, Han. Warb. Away,] Away! Rowe et seq. 
Johns. 71. Thowrt) Thou art Var. ’73, Varr. 

67. King.| King! Rowe et seq. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt. 

68. auoyd hence,) Fi (avoid F;F,). 74. I am| I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii, 
avoid, hence, Rowe, Pope, Han. avoid; Huds. 


What Nicholson says as to the need of a punctuation which shall indicate a change 
of address is eminently just, but this punctuation already exists, begun by Capell 
and fallen unfortunately into disuse. See note on ‘Fye,’ line 116, below.—Ep. 

61. winne of you] That is, my bracelet is not as valuable as your ring.—Ep. 

62. Manacle] STEEVENS: This properly means what we now call a handcuff. 
[Under the figurative use of manacle, meaning bond, restraint, MurRAY (N. E. D.) 
quotes the present passage, and also ‘the manacles of the all-building Law,’— 
Meas. for Meas., U1, iv, 93, which is somewhat doubtful; Claudio was actually in 
prison.] 

65. When shall we see againe] Dyce (ed. ii.): The very same words are ad- 
dressed by Cressida to Troilus in Tro. & Cress., IV, iv, 59. [For examples of 
similar ellipses, see, if need be, ABBorT, § 382.] 

69. fraught] CAPELL (Various Readings, p. 13) conjectured fraught’st —EccLES 
justly supposes that ‘fraught’ may be considered as in the subjunctive. 

73. blesse] RoLFE, DowDEn, and probably others detect irony in this blessing 
of ‘the good remainders,’ and they may be right. And yet is it natural that, when 
a man is utterly, abysmally, hopelessly crushed, he can find any relief in a piece 
of petty irony? To indulge in irony a man must go out of himself and for a flash 


26 THE TRAGEDIE. OF [ACT a, Se. 11 


Imo. There cannot be a pinch in death 75 
More fharp then this ts. 

Cym. O difloyall thing, 
That fhould’ft repayre my youth, thou heap’ft 
A yeares age on mee. 79 


78, 79. heap’ft A yeares age] Ff, conj. (withdrawn). heap’st instead A 
Rowe, Pope, Johns. Sta. Glo. Cam. year’s age Cap. heapest years of age 
heap’st A yare age Warb. Theob. upon Ingl. conj. heap’st at once A year’s 
heapest many A year’s age. Han. Ktly. age Dowden. heapest rather A year’s 
heap’st years, ages Johns. conj. age Craig. heapest a year’s age Var. 
heap’st A meer or A: hoar age Theob. P7aieticet. 


imagine its effect on the victim. But at this instant what there was not of himself 
on Posthumus’s breaking heart, was all Imogen. Moreover, we are expressly told 
that all the courtiers were his secret friends, and he could not but have known or 
felt it. Wherefore, then, should he wish to leave behind him a sting in their hearts? 
—ED. 

75. pinch in death] Does Imogen refer to Posthumus’s death or to her own? 
It is easy to reply ‘to both.’ Possibly, she refers to neither separately, and this 
exclamation is forced from her by a premonition that this present separation is an 
eternal farewell.—Eb. 

78, 79. thou heap’st A yeares age on mee] THEOBALD: Surely, the 
King’s sorrow was not very extreme, if the effects of it added only one year to his 
age. But we must correct, as my ingenious friend, Mr Warburton, acutely ob- 
served to me, ‘A yare age on me,’ 7. e., a sudden, precipitate, old age. For the word 
signifies not only nimble, dextrous, as it is many times employed by our author, but, 
likewise as Skinner expounds it, fervidus, promptus, preceps, impatiens. And so 
in Chaucer, in his Legend of Philomela, we find it spelt, ‘This Tereiis let him make 
his shippis yeare,’ 7. e., yare, nimble, light vessels fit for sailing. [This quotation 
from Chaucer (which Theobald did not repeat in his ed. ii.) I have given as a 
proof of Theobald’s wide reading in English literature at that early day. In 
extended knowledge of English and exact scholarship in Greek he was shoulder 
high above the critics, Pope, Johnson, Steevens, who looked down on him and 
dubbed him ‘poor piddling Tibbald.’]}—Hears (p. 471): Yare never signifies 
untimely, what comes before its time, which is the sense the context requires. Here 
Mr Warburton seems to have been deceived by the ambiguity of the Latin preceps, 
which Skinner gives as one of the interpretations of the word yare. It is extremely 
probable that Hanmer’s conjecture restores the genuine text.—STEEVENS: If 
Cymbeline meant to say that his daughter’s conduct made him precisely one year 
older, his conceit is unworthy both of himself and Shakespeare. I would read 
with Hanmer.—CoLeEripcE (p. 302): How is it that the commentators take no 
notice of the un-Shakespearian defect in the metre [line 78], and, what in Shake- 
speare is the same, in the harmony with the sense and feeling? Some word or 
words must have slipped out after ‘youth,’—possibly and see—B. NicHoLson 
(NV. & Q., III, x, 347, 1866): How, if he used the word ‘repair’ in its ordinary sense, 
could Cymbeline talk of repairing his youth when he had wholly lost his youth? 
and why should any one talk of repairing his youth instead of repairing his old 
age in a passage where youth’s lustiness and heat are intended to be contrasted 
with a decaying old age? The true meaning of the word will, I think, be found on 


NEM Wy SE, Tie | CYMBELINE oT, 


[78, 79. thou heap’st A yeares age on mee } 
examination to be that, in the wished-for marriage, he had thought to see his 
youthful days re-equalled; and, in the happy contemplation of it, feel his days- 
spring renewed. A similar thought is found in Sonnet ii: ‘This were to be new 
made when thou art old And see thy blood warm when thou feel’st it cold.’ And 
again in Sonnet ili. we have: ‘Now is the time that face should form another; 
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest.’ And from the wording of this, and 
from the phrase ‘repair my honour lost’ (3 Henry VI: III, iii, 193) it seems clear 
that, in accordance with its derivation, Shakespeare sometimes used this word 
‘repair’ as equalling again and making anew, and not merely as patching or reno- 
vating. It does not, however, seem probable to me that Shakespeare would have 
made Cymbeline use the phrase, ‘repair my youth,’ unless he had some anti- 
thetical conceit in view. Hence, and from a general review of the passage, I hold 
that ‘thy years’ age’—that is, the age or number of thy years—is a certain part 
of any emendation; and if any one will compare this with Hanmer’s ‘Many a 
year’s age, it will be seen how definite the ‘thy’ makes an otherwise indefinite 
and indifferent passage, and how much it recovers of our author’s style. Imogen’s 
age added to Cymbeline’s would be death or an old age—‘sans eyes, sans teeth, 
sans everything.’ What else may be required is more doubtful. Some might 
think that the safest restoration of the sense and metre would be—Thou heapest 
thy Years’ age [up]on me. Or we might read, ‘heapest up Thy years’ age on me’; 
but this is hardly accordant with Shakespeare’s usage in regard to heap. For 
myself, however, I prefer thinking that the ‘heap’st’ of the Folio is right, and that 
the original reading was, or was nearly, as follows: ‘thou heap’st [more than] Thy 
years’ age on me.’—Hupson: This expression has been thought too tame for the 
occasion. Gervinus regards it, and, I think, justly, as an instance of the King’s 
general weakness; his whole character is without vigour; and whenever he under- 
takes to say or do a strong thing, he collapses into tameness. [‘Thou’rt poison to 
my blood’ is not so very tame.—Ep.]—(P. 200): Perhaps it should be ‘thou 
heapest more than A year’s age,’ etc—VAUGHAN (p. 339): All the amendments 
involve the interpretation of ‘age’ as ‘a portion of the time of human life’ merely, 
whereas in truth ‘age’ means old age. We might read: ‘thou heapest so A year’s 
age,’ etc. That is, ‘By such an answer as yours, you, who should make me young, 
heap a year of old age upon me.’ But I prefer, ‘thou heapest so Early age on me.’ 
That is, ‘thou heapest premature old age on me.’—{I have reserved to the last 
Capell’s note (p. 102); ‘If we place ourselves in Cymbeline’s state,—a king, and at 
the end of his years,—we shall not think the losing of one of them a very light 
matter.’ Herein I agree with Capell. In the first scene we are told that Cymbe- 
line’s eldest son, Guiderius, is now twenty-three years old. We may, therefore, 
infer that Cymbeline’s own age was about forty-three or four; certainly not a great 
age, as at present reckoned. But we must bear in mind that it was probably not 
so reckoned in Shakespeare’s time, to judge by the longevity of the lives of his 
friends and contemporaries. The average age of Sidney, Bacon, Lyly, Lodge, 
Greene, Nash, Spenser, Chapman, Peele, and Nat. Field (the only actor of Shake- 
speare’s contemporaries whose birth and death is, I believe, undisputed)—the 
average age of these ten men is 49 and 48; years. If Shakespeare’s 53 be added, 
the average is almost exactly 50. If the average span of life among intellectual 
men in Shakespeare’s time be only fifty, what must it have been in Cymbeline’s 
unhygienic days! Even by the Shakesperian standard, Cymbeline could count 


28 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACE 1, 8G. 11. 


Imo. I befeech you Sir, 80 
Harme not your felfe with your vexation, 
I am fenfeleffe of your Wrath ; a Touch more rare 
Subdues all pangs, all feares. 

Cym. Paft Grace? Obedience? 


Imo. Paft hope, and in difpaire, that way paft Grace. 85 
Cym. That might’{t haue had 
The fole Sonne of my Queene. 87 
81, 82. Harme...I] Fi, Rowe,-+, 85. difpaire,| despair; Pope et seq. 
Var. ’21, Coll. Sta. Dyce, Sing. Glo. way] way, Theob. Warb. et 
Cam. One line Cap. et cet. seq. 
82. I am] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii, 86. That] Thou Pope,+, Var. 773. 
Huds. 86, 87. One line Rowe et seq. 


on only six or seven more years of life. If, then, owing to Imogen’s selfish and 
reprehensible behaviour, one of those years was heaped on him prematurely, in 
advance, and he was thereby brought nearer to his death by a whole year, he 
may well be vehemently stirred by such a grievous loss.—Ep.] 

80, 81. I beseech ... vexation] This picture, from the pale lips of Imogen, 
of the King’s trembling, uncontrolled, almost frenzied rage gives us, I think, an 
idea of the king’s moral weakness, more vivid than any utterance of his own can 
give. And does it not at the same time reveal the love for Imogen down deep 
in his heart, which, must later, at the close of the drama, be made manifest, without 
violent incongruity? To be sure, he can be justified in the present emotion, al- 
though not for its bitter expression, by Coleridge, who has taught us that ‘to be 
wroth with one we love Doth work like madness in the brain.’—Ep. 

82. a Touch more rare] WARBURTON: More strong, forcible; alluding to the 
stroke of lightning. [Will no one tell me what he means?—Ep.]—Jounson: 
‘Rare’ is often used for eminently good; but I do not remember any passage in 
which it stands for eminently bad. May we read, ‘more near.’ ‘Cura deam pro- 
pior luctusque domesticus angit.’-—Ovid [Met., xiii, 578]. Shall we try again, 
‘more rear.’ Crudum vulnus. But of this I know not any example. There is yet 
another interpretation, which perhaps will remove the difficulty. It may mean a 
nobler passion.—HEATH (p. 471): ‘More rare’ signifies more precious —KNIGHT: 
It means, a higher feeling —Staunton: It rather means, a smart, or throe more 
exquisite. A touch in old language was often used to express a pang, a wound, or 
any acute pain, moral or physical, as in the passage before us—Wvyatr: The 
“sweet pain’ of parting with Posthumus deadens her sensibility to all besides. 
[See ‘Great griefs I see med’cine the less.’—IV, ii, 315.] 

84. Past Grace] Craic: Imogen quibblingly replies (though a heathen), 
‘yes, past divine favour, and in a state of reprobation where there is no hope.’ It 
is curious that this play has these frequent Calvinistic allusions. See Scene iii, 
line 24 of this Act, ‘If it be a sin to make a true election, she’s damn’d,’ where the 
Calvinist doctrine of election is quibblingly alluded to. Compare also vera: 
‘if he should write, And I not haue it, ’twere a Paper lost As offer’d mercy is.’— 
[Grant WuiTE called attention to the Calvinistic ‘election’ at I, iii, 24; I think, 
however, the allusion admits of doubt.—Ep.] 


Re DS Calle CYMBELINE 29 


Imo. O bleffed, that I might not : I chofe an Eagle, 88 
And did auoyd a Puttocke. 

Cym. Thou took’f{t a Begger, would’ft haue made my fee) 
Throne, a Seate for bafenefie. 

fmo. No, I rather added a luftre to it. 

Cym. O thou vilde one! 

Imo. Sir, 
It is your fault that I haue low’d Pofthumus : 95 
You bred him as my Play-fellow, and he is 
A man, worth any woman : Ouer-buyes mee 
Almoft the fumme he payes. 

Cym. What? art thou mad ? 

Imo. Almoft Sir : Heauen reftore me : would I were 100 


88. bleffed] Ff, Rowe i, Sing. Ktly, No; Cap. et cet. 


Cam. blest Rowe ii. et seq. (subs.) 92. No, I rather added] As closing line 
90, ot. Thou...Throne] One line 91 Rowe ii. et seq. 
Rowe et seq. I] Om. Coll. MS. ap. Cam. 
90. Begger, would’ fi] F.. Beggar, 93. vilde] vild F;. vile F, et seq. 
would ft F3F,. beggar; would’st Pope 96. and he is| he is Pope, Han. 
et seq. 99. What?] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 


92. No,] Ff, Rowe,+. Wo. Coll. ii. What, Cap. What! Theob. et cet. 


89. Puttocke] Murray (J. £. D.): A bird of prey; figuratively applied to a 
person as having some attribute of the kite (e. g., ignobleness, greed). 

90. would’st] CoLzier ii. (Wotes, etc., p. 508): The MS. changes ‘would’st’ to 
would, i. e., ‘a beggar who would,’ etc. [In the Cambridge Ed. it is recorded that 
Collier’s MS. omits ‘I’ in Imogen’s rejoinder. This omission has, however, 
escaped me in a search through Collier’s Notes and Emendations, first and 
second editions, through his three editions of the play, and through his 
monovolume.—ED.] 

97, 98. Ouer-buyes ... he payes] CAPELL (Noles, p. 103): Modestly under- 
rating herself, and enhancing the wroth of Posthumus; who, she says, over-buys 
her by almost the whole of the sum he pays for her. But what is it that he pays 
for her? Why, himself, and his sufferings: which if they were rated, and a price 
set upon them, a small part of it might make the purchase of her. 

100. me] Let no real student, who cares alone for Shakespeare’s text and not for 
wide margins and stainless paper, regret the lack of an original First Folio, as 
long as he has a copy of Lionel Booth’s Reprint. I think the world will never see 
a Reprint of any book as bulky as this, more exact than it. It is even more satis- 
factory and useful than a photographic reproduction, wherein there cannot be but 
one version of the text (and we know that copies of that volume vary among 
themselves); whereas Booth’s Reprint is the result of an accurate collation 
of seven copies of the First Folio, and the proof sheets were submitted to 
eight of the best proof-readers in London before they were struck off. In my 
own copy of the First Folio the ‘e’ of ‘me’ in the text before us is defective, or, 
as the printers say, ‘battered.’ I turn to Booth’s Reprint, and lo! it is battered 
there!—Ep. 


30 THE TRAGEDILZ OF [ACT 3, $C. il. 


A Neat-heards Daughter, and my Leonat us IOI 
Our Neighbour-Shepheards Sonne. 
Enter Queene. 

Cym. Thou foolifh thing ; 
They were againe together : you haue done 105 
Not after our command. Away with her, 
And pen her vp. 

Qu. Befeech your patience : Peace 
Deere Lady daughter, peace. Sweet Soueraigne, 
Leaue vs to our felues, and make your felf fome comfort 110 
Out of your beft aduice. 

Cym. Nay, let her languifh 
A drop of blood a day, and being aged 
Dye of this Folly. Exit, 
Enter Pifanio. 115 
Qu. Fye, you muft giue way : 


tor. heards] herds F 5. 
103. Enter Queene] After line 104 


113. a@ day] aday Rowe. 
Pope,+. 


a-day 


Dyce, Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. 
104. thing;| thing. Johns. 
Han. Cap. et seq. 
ros. [To the Queen. Theob. Warb. 
et seq. 
108. your] you: Cap. (Notes, 103). 
109. Lady daughter] Lady-daughter 
Ed. conj. 


thing! 


114. Folly] fully Sprenger. 
Exit.| Exeunt Cymbeline and 
Lords. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. 
115. Enter...] After line 116 Dyce, 
Sta. Glo. Cam. 
116. Fye, you] Ff, Rowe,+. Fiel 
you Var. °73, Dyce, Glo. Cam. Fie!— 
you Cap. et cet. 


110. to our] Vour Pope,+. 


111. best aduice] STEEVENS: That is, consideration, reflection. 

112, 113. languish A drop of blood a day] Craic: I think there certainly 
should be a comma after ‘languish.’ The meaning is ‘let her pine away by degree, 
at the rate of a drop of blood a day.’—-DowpeEn: ‘Languish’ was sometimes causal 
and active. WN. E. D. quotes from Fenton: ‘The displeasures . . . languishe the 
heart,’ and from Florio’s Montaigne: ‘Least (lest)... he might . . . languish 
that burning flame.’ 

114. Dye of this Folly] Grrvinus (ii, 217, ed. 1872): To this curse, she who 
is cursed will willingly respond ‘Amen!’—Hupson: Of course, the King means it 
for a curse; but he has not snap enough to make it such. 

116. Fye, you must giue way] As arule, the majority of editors from CAaPELL 
to the GLope Ep. indicate a change of address by dashes.—Capett conformed 
rigidly to the rule. Indeed, I think, it originated with him. The Globe disre- 
garded it, and the editors since 1864, who have used the Globe’s text to print from, 
likewise omit these dashes; notably R. G. White, who, in his First Ed. 1860, 
scrupulously retained them; in his second Ed., in 1883, discarded them. To use 
these dashes intelligently assuredly adds to editorial problems, as in the present 
instance. To whom is this ‘Fye’ addressed, to Cymbeline or to Imogen? and to 


AGT ¥/SC. 1i.] CYMBELINE 31 


Heere is your Seruant. How now Sir? What newes? 117 
Pifa. My Lord your Sonne, drew on my Mafter. 
Qu. Hah? 

No harme I truft is done ? 120 
Pifa. There might haue beene, 

But that my Mafter rather plaid, then fought, 

And had no helpe of Anger : they were parted 

By Gentlemen, at hand. 


Qu. lam very glad on’t. 125 
119. Hah?] Hah! Rowe,+. Hal! 125. [ am] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. 
Cap. et cet. 


whom ‘you must give way’? ‘Here is your servant’ is, of course, addressed to 
Imogen; Pisanio is her servant. But are any of the preceding words addressed 
to her? or are all of them? No Globe or Cambridge text will avail here. Capell 
is the prince of punctuators; he has influenced, I think, the punctuation of the 
text of Shakespeare more than any other editor. I opine that Dyce, Ed. i, printed 
from him, and that the Globe printed from Dyce. It is thus then, that Capell 
prints those lines: ‘Fie!—you must give way Here is your servant.—How now, 
sir?’ etc. Hereby showing that, according to Capell, the ‘Fie!’ is addressed to the 
king by the queen who has just heard his cruel curse; she then turns to Imogen, 
and it is to her that ‘you must give way’ is spoken, and not, as it probably is in the 
Folio, to the king. And I think rightly. The queen did not wish Cymbeline to 
give way; indeed, she wished him to remain firm; but it was of prime importance to 
her that Imogen should give way, and thereby smooth the road to the marriage 
with Cloten. At the same time it is quite possible to contend that the queen, 
thorough hypocrite as she is, should wish to seem to favour the daughter by coun- 
selling the father to relax his severity.—Again, there is a third interpretation, 
warmly advocated by Eze, that the whole sentence, ‘Fie!’ and all, is addressed to 
Imogen. No one is competent dogmatically to solve the problem with a Q. E. D. 
Every student must decide for himself with what dramatic instinct heaven has 
vouchsafed him.—Eb. 

123. no helpe of Anger] DowbDENn: So Sidney, Arcadia (Qto ed. 1590), p. 315, 
recto: ‘his Courage (vnused to such iniuries) desired helpe of Anger to make him 
this answere.’ So in Lear, III, vii, 79: ‘Nay, then, come on and take the chance 
of anger.’—Craic: If a man loses his temper in sword-play he gives himself away 
to his adversary. Shakespeare makes Mecenas (Ant. & Cleop., IV, i, 9) express 
this truth: ‘Never anger Made good guard for itself.’ Here it means, ‘Cloten’s 
brutal assault did not induce him to strike him in return, he merely stood on his 
guard.’ [Craig’s note seems to imply that anger would not have helped Post- 
humus, and that he parried Cloten’s blows, but gave none. We know, however, 
from the next scene that he drove Cloten back, which could hardly have been ac- 
complished by passive parrying. Pisanio says that Posthumus merely played 
with Cloten, and had not that vindictiveness that anger would have imparted.] 
Thus in Dowden’s excellent illustration, Amphiatus was in a state of passive 
melancholy and needed the ‘help of anger’ to rouse him to answer the challenge he 
had just received. 


32 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[AcT I, SC. il. 


Imo, Your Son’s my Fathers friend, he takes his part 126 


To draw vpon an Exile. 


O braue Sir, 


I would they were in Affricke both together, 
My felfe by with a Néedle, that I might pricke 


The goer backe. 
Pifa. 


To bring him to the Hauen 


Why came you from your Mafter? 130 
On his command : he would not fuffer mee 
: left thefe Notes 


Of what commands I fhould be subiect too, 
When’t pleas’d you to employ me. 


Qu. This hath beene 


135 


Your faithfull Seruant : I dare lay mine Honour 


He will remaine fo. 
Pifa. 
Qu. Pray walke a-while. 


126. friend,| friend; Cap. et seq. 

126, 127. part To...Exile.] part To... 
Exile, Fi. part To...exile; Rowe. part, 
To...exile: Pope, Theob. i, Han. 
part. To...exile: Theob. ii, Warb. 
part, To...exile. Cap. part, To...exilel 
Knt. part.—To...exile! Johns. et cet. 


I humbly thanke your Highneffe. 


FoO, 


Cap. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Wh. ii. 

133. too] to Ff. 

134. When’t pleas’d] when’t pleafe 
F;F,, Rowe, Pope, Han. When it 
pleas’d Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 

139. a-while] F, awhile Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. a while F;F, 


130. goer backe] goer-back Pope,+, ety cet, 


126,127. his part To draw vpon an Exile] The Text. Notes show the almost 
unanimous approval of JOHNSON’s excellent punctuation; converting the infinitive 
phrase ‘To draw upon an exile’ into an exclamation; which is eminently Shake- 
spearian. There are several similar usages in Ant. & Cleop. ‘The way to lose 
him!’—I, iii, 14; ‘To be entangled with those mouth-made vows, which break 
themselves in swearing!’—I, iii, 48; ‘So tart a favour To trumpet such good tid- 
ings!’—II, v, 48. Yet let it not be supposed that the text, as it now stands before 
us, does not bear a good sense. The following paraphrase of it is, I think, not 
unfair: ‘By drawing his sword on one whom my father had exiled, he takes my 
father’s part and shows that he is his friend.’ Yet Johnson’s interpretation seems 
to me far better.—Eb. 

128. Affricke] Forsyru, in a chapter on ‘Parallelisms,’ not of Shakespeare with 
other writers, but with Shakespeare himself, quotes as similar to the present wish 
of Imogen, that of Volumnia in reference to Coriolanus: ‘I would my son 
were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him,’ etc.—Cor., IV, ii, 24; ‘or be alive 
again, And dare me to the desert with thy sword.’—Macb., III, iv, 104; ‘I dare 
meet Surrey in a wilderness, And spit upon him while I say he lies.’—Rich. II: 
IV, i, 74. 

129. Needle] Apzort (§ 465): ‘Needle,’ which in Gammer Gurton rhymes with 
‘feeble,’ is often pronounced as a monosyllable. 


139. walke a-while] That is, withdraw. For similar examples, see ScHMIDT, 
Lex Sa 0s 


ING 3, SEE, 06 || 


Imo. 
Pray you fpeake with me; 


CYMBELINE 33 


About fome halfe houre hence, 140 


You fhall (at leaft) go fee my Lord aboord. 


For this time leaue me. 


Eixeunt. 143 


Scena Tertia. 


Enter Clotten and two Lords. 


1. Sir, I would aduife you to fhift a Shirt; the Vio- 3 
140, 141. One line Rowe,+, Var. 1. Scena Tertia.] Scene continued. 
“rgh. Taksk. “AS, RENT, Rowe, Theob. ScENE Iv. Pope, Han. 
140-143. hence,...me;...aboord....me.] Warb. Johns. ScENE ur. Dyce, Sta. 


hence,...me:...aboard:...me. 
78 et seq. 
141. Pray you] pray Pope, Han. 
I pray you Cap. Steev. Varr. Knut, 
Dyce, Wh. Sta. Ktly, Glo. Cam. 
141-143. Pray...me.] Two lines, end- 
ing: Jea/t)...me. Cap. Mal. Steev. et seq. 
143. For] From Warb. (misprint?). 


Cap. Var. 


Glo. Coll. iii, Cam. et seq. (subs.) 
The same. Cap. A Publick Place. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt. Coll. 


The same. A Public Place. Dyce, 
Sta. Glo. Cam. 

2. Clotten] Ff. Cloten. Rowe et 
seq. 


Beno unt Onan er ene OLR OWES 


143. Exeunt] SHERMAN (p. 19): Evidently Shakespeare is not yet fully at work. 
Neither in this scene nor in the preceding does his hand suggest the cunning that 
it has known in most earlier plays. Particularly this plan of character contrasts, 
which presents first a scene of Imogen, and then of Cloten, and then of Imogen 
again, is unexampled in all his work elsewhere. 

1. Scena Tertia] Eccrrs: Place is the same. The time seems to succeed 
immediately to that of the last; by the shortness of the interval between the de- 
parture of Posthumus in the former scene, and the appearance of Pisanio who 
relates the assault made on him by Cloten, we must suppose it to have happened 
either in the palace, or immediately after Posthumus had set out from thence on 
his way to the harbour, and one of the lords here speaks as if Cloten were still warm 
from the effects of the encounter.—INGLEBY: This scene is introduced to show up 
Cloten in a character which,—to judge of his subsequent conduct,—he hardly 
deserves, that of a conceited coward. The First Lord flatters him too grossly for 
human credulity, and the Second Lord, by ‘asides,’ lampoons him, for the benefit 
of the groundlings. The allusions are obscure, and the quibbles poor. It would 
be a relief to know that Shakespeare was not reponsible for either this scene or the 
first of Act II. Both may be omitted, without loss, in reading the play. [Those 
editors who here mark the Second Scene are, it seems to me, unquestionably right. 
There has been no change of scene until now.—Eb.] 

2. Clotten] Hazxirr (p. 8): The character of Cloten, the conceited, booby 
lord, and rejected lover of Imogen, though not very agreeable in itself, and at 
present obsolete, is drawn with great humour and knowledge of character. The 
description which Imogen gives of his unwelcome addresses to her,—‘ Whose 
lovesuit hath been to me as fearful as a siege,’ [III, iv, 157]—is enough to cure the 
most ridiculous lover of his folly. It is remarkable that though Cloten makes so 
poor a figure in love, he is described as assuming an air of consequence as the 


2 


re) 


34 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 1, SC. Mi, 


lence of Action hath made you reek as a Sacrifice : where 
ayre comes out, ayre comes in: There’s none abroad fo 5 
wholefome as that you vent. 

Clot. If my Shirt were bloody, then to fhift it. 
Haue I hurt him? 

2 No faith : not fo much as his patience. 

1 Hurt him? His bodie’s a paffable Carkaffe if he bee fe) 
not hurt. It is a through-fare for Steele if it be not hurt. 

2 His Steele was in debt, it went o’th’Backe-fide the 
Towne. 

Clot. The Villaine would not ftand me. 


2 No, but he fled forward ftill, toward your face. 15 
5. comes in:] comes in, Johns. 11. a through-fare] F.F,, Rowe i, 
6. wholefome] unwholesome Ingl. i. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. thorough-fare 
7, 8. If...him?] Prose Cap. et seq. Rowe ii. a thorough-fare F; et cet. 
4. to fhift it.) Fi, Knt, Dyce, Sta. 12. o’th’| Rowe,+, Cap. oth Ff. 

Glo. Coll. iii, Cam. to shift ii— Rowe the Steev. o’the Var. ’73 et cet. 

et cet. I'd shift it Lloyd ap. Cam. 12, 13. the Towne] o’ the town Ktly 
(hy uiely Gay, Bach leh PVE Pls en eye el| 2 conj. 

Lord. Rowe. 15. forward] forward Pope,+, Var. 
9, 12, 16. [Aside. Theob. et seq. Hee 


Queen’s son in a council of State, and with all the absurdity of his person and 
manners, is not without shrewdness in his observations. So true is it that folly is 
as often owing to a want of proper sentiments as to a want of understanding! 
The exclamation of the ancient critic, Oh, Menander and Nature, which of you 
copied from the other! would not be misapplied to Shakespeare. [For other 
estimates of Cloten’s character, see Appendix. It suffices, I think, here and now to 
call attention to Cloten’s irreconcilable traits of character: he is at once a despic- 
able lout and a prudent councillor, timid as a hare and bold as a lion —Ep.] 

5,6. so wholesome as that you vent] INGLEBy reads wnwholesome in his text, 
and appends a foot-note. The original text is restored, and the foot-note silently 
omitted by Holcombe Ingleby in the revised edition of his father’s book —DownbEN: 
Ingleby misunderstood the meaning. The speaker advises Cloten to shift a 
shirt,—a common Elizabethan expression, used, for example, in Massinger, The 
Picture, II, i,—in order to cease reeking; otherwise he must take air in to supply 
what he loses, and the outer air is less wholesome than that of his own sweet body. 

10. passable] Scumipt (Lex.): Affording free passage. 

10,11. if he bee not hurt... if it be not hurt] Can any man lay his hand 
on his honest heart and say this needless repetition sounds like Shakespeare?2—Eb. 

12,13. His Steele ... Towne] Detrus: In order to spare him, Posthumus’s 
steel sneaked roundabout Cloten’s body, like a debtor trying to avoid his creditors. 
THISELTON (p. 8): In An Account of James the First’s Visit in 1615 to the Uni- 
versity of Cambridge, given in the Appendix to Hawkins’ edition of J gnoramus, we 
read that certain ‘Jeswits or priests, being to be conveyed from London to Wisbich 
castle, were not suffered to come thorough Cambridge, but by the Sheriff carried 
over the backe side of the town to Cambridge castle.’ 


KOT I5 CSO) Teil CYMBELINE a5 


1 Stand you? you haue Land enough of your owne: 16 
But he added to your hauing, gaue you fome ground. 

2 As many Inches, as you haue Oceans( Puppies.) 

Clot. I would they had not come betweene vs. 

2 So would J, till you had meafur’d how long a Foole 20 
you were vpon the ground. 

Clot. And that fhee fhould loue this Fellow, and re- 
fufe mee. 

2 Ifit bea fin to make a true ele¢tion,ifhe is damn’d. 

I Sir,as I told you alwayes : her Beauty & her Braine 25 
go not together. Shee’s a good figne, but I haue feene 


{mall reflection of her wit. 27 
16, 17. As prose Pope et seq. 23. mee.] me! Rowe. 
18, 20, 24, 28, 32. [Aside. Pope et 24. fhe is] she’s Rowe ii,+. 
seq. 25. alwayes:| always, Rowe et seq. 
18. Oceans(Puppies.)| F.F;. Oceans her Beauty & her Braine] your 
(Puppies) Fy. oceans, Puppies! Rowe, beauty and your brain Anon. ap. Cam. 
+. oceans—Puppies! Coll. Dyce, 26. Shee’s] Shees F>. 
Ktly, Glo. Cam. oceans: Puppies! Signe] sun Sta. conj. (Atheneum, 
Cap. et seq. 14 June, 1873). 


17. But he added .. . ground] WALKER (Cyvit., iii, 316) queries whether the 
stage-direction at the head of this Scene should not be, ‘Enter Cloten and three 
Lords’; and, because he doubts that ‘Puppies’ refers to the First Lord and Cloten, 
he gives this line 17 to the Third Lord. [I cannot see how this addition to the group 
mends matters, or what objection there is to calling Cloten, or the First Lord either, 
a ‘puppy.’—Eb.] 

18. Inches ... Oceans] This antithesis between ‘inches’ and ‘oceans’ teases 
us as a possible allusion which time has hidden. But the words may signify no 
more than their plain meaning; inasmuch as Cloten had no ‘having’ in oceans, so he 
had no addition to his ‘having in ground.’—Eb. 

20, 21. So would 1... ground] Time has evaporated the wit in this sentence 
also,—if it ever had any.—Eb. 

24. election] WHITE (ed.i.): The allusion plainly is to the doctrine of election 
held by the Calvinists. [I think this is doubtful. The Calvinistic ‘election’ is a 
prerogative of God; man cannot ‘make it.’ ‘Election’ is here used, I think, in its 
ordinary sense. See Craig’s note, I, ii, 84.—Ep.] 

25. her Beauty & her Braine] Jounson: I believe the lord means to speak 
a sentence, ‘Sir, as I told you always, beauty and brain go not together.’ [Have 
we not here an illustration of Dr Johnson’s own remark in regard to a whirlpool: 
‘Sir, it is movement without progression.’—Ep.] 

26. signe] WARBURTON: If ‘sign’ be the true reading, the poet means by it, 
constellation, and by ‘reflection’ is meant influence. But I rather think, from the 
answer, that he wrote shine-—EDWARDS (p. 110): So, because shine signifies bright- 
ness, you may call a bright person—a good shine! The expression is monstrous. 
‘Sign’ is the true reading; without signifying constellation, or even a single star. 
The sense is plain as words can make it. She has a fair outside, a specious appear- 


36 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Ise. ne 


2 She fhines not vpon Fooles, leaft the reflection 28 


Should hurt her. 

Clot. Come, Ile to my Chamber: would there had 30 
beene fome hurt done. 

2 I with not fo, vnleffe it had bin the! fall of an Affe, 
which is no great hurt. 

Clot. You’'l go with vs? 


‘y Ile attend your Lordfhip. 35 
Clot. Nay come, let’s go together. 
2 Well my Lord. Exeunt. 37 
28, 29. As prose Rowe ii. et seq. 35. z Ile] 2. L. P’ Cap. Ran. Ecc. 
32. bin] been Fy. Dyce ii, Huds. 


37. 2 Well] 1 Lord. Well Del. conj. 


ance; but no wit. O quanta species, cerebrum non habet!—Phadrus.—HEAtH (p. 
472): ‘Reflection’ here means foken or display, not influence, for light is chiefly 
manifested by being reflected. The sense is: She is undoubtedly a constellation 
of considerable lustre, but it is not displayed in her wit; for I have seen but little 
manifestation of that—STEEVENS: To understand the whole force of Shakespeare’s 
idea, it should be remembered, that anciently almost every sign had a motto, or some 
attempt at a witticism, underneath it—MALoneE refers oppositely to I, vii, 20- 
22. [It is time wasted to spend much thought on this foolish scene, which wain- 
ropes cannot hale me to the belief that Shakespeare ever wrote.—ED.] 

34. You’l go with vs] Capett (Notes, p. 103) believes that this is addressed 
to the Second Lord, ‘and, of consequence, he is the answerer, though editions have 
order’d it otherwise.’ [There is force in what Capell urges. He evidently takes 
‘attend’ in the sense of await, as it is used in ‘the Legions attending you heere,’ 
IV, ii, 415, and in many another place, and as Cloten understands it; it explains his 
request that they should not separate but all ‘go together.’—I think E1ze failed to 
catch this meaning; he leaves the distribution of the speeches unchanged, but ac- 
counts for Cloten’s remonstrance by supposing that the Second Lord offers ‘either 
to stay behind or to leave by a different door.—Vaucua\N, retaining the text of the 
Folio, thus paraphrases: ‘The second lord, in the words “Well, my lord,” plays 
sarcastically on the expression of Cloten, “let’s go together.” Cloten makes use 
of these words in their literal sense, as “let us go like companions, hand in hand, and 
not like princes and attendant, the second after the first”: but the second lord, 
on the other hand, professes to understand “let us go together” in the metaphorical 
sense, in which the first lord has already employed it, by the phrase “her beauty and 
her brain go not together,” that is, “are not a match”; and, accordingly, he adds 
“well, my lord,” that is, “you go together well, my lord; you are an excellent pair 
and match, being both coxcombs and puppies.” He has said the same of them 
before, in his aside exclamation “ puppies.’”’ 


ACT OY, SC. iv, | CYMBELINE 37 


Scena Quarta. 


Enter Imogen,and Pifanio. 
‘mo would thou grew’ft vnto the fhores o’th’Hauen, 
And queftioned’f{t euery Saile : if he fhould write, 
And I not haue it, ’twere a Paper loft 5 
As offer’d mercy is : What was the laft 
That he fpake to thee? 


Pifa. It was his Queene, his Queene. 

fmo, Then wau’d his Handkerchiefe ? 

Pia. And kift it, Madam. fe) 
mo. Senfeleffe Linnen, happier therein then I: 


And that was all? 


1. Scena Quarta.] Scene continued. 
Rowe. SCENE v. Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. ScENE 1m. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Cam. Coll. iii. 

Imogen’s Apartments. 
Room in the Palace. Cap. 

3. oth] Rowe,+. oth’ Ff.  o’the 
Cap. et seq. 

4. questioned’ ft] Fi, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. question’d’st Theob. Warb. 
question’d Var. ’85. question’dst Johns. 
etcet. 


Theob. A 


12 


4. euery| evry Rowe i. 

5, 6. *twere...is:] *twere as a paper 
lost With offer’d mercy in it. Han. 

5. Paper lofi] proper loss Dtn 
conj. 

6. offer’d| deferr’d Sta. conj. 

is] ts... Ktly conj. 

7. to thee] with thee Pope,+. 

8. Ii was] Ff, Rowe, Cap. Knt, Coll. 
Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Twas Pope 
et cet. 

11. Senfeleffe] O senseless Ktly. 


1. Scena Quarta] Eccirs: Between the former and the present scene such an 
interval must be supposed as was sufficient for Pisanio to attend his master to the 
harbour, agreeably to Imogen’s directions, and to return from thence with an 
account of his departure. 

6. As offer’d mercy] WARBURTON refers this to the ‘offer’d mercy of heaven.’— 
Jonnson and Wvyarr agree with him.—Hearza refers it to the pardon of a con- 
demned criminal.—Thus also, CAPELL, STEEVENS (who quotes, ‘Like a remorseful 
pardon slowly carried.’—All’s Well, V, iii, 58); and nearly all subsequent editors, 
with unusual unanimity. 

11, 12, Senselesse ... all] WALKER (Cyitl., iii, 316) proposes to arrange, 
‘Senseless linen, happier’ as closing line 10, and read ‘Therein than I,’ as a broken 
line. Who can discern therein any possible metrical gain, or imagine how the 
change can be pleasurably indicated by the living voice. Line 11 may not be a 
fine filed iambic trimeter, but with its two heavy, long spondees, ‘senselesse linnen,’ 
it is highly felicitous. After the force of these four sombre syllables has spent itself, 
the choriamb, ‘happier therein,’ imparts, as it should, a gayer, brighter air, as 
though over Imogen’s sweet features a thought almost jocund had passed, as she 
remembered her lovers last kiss. Then, lastly, ‘than I,’ with its downward 
inflection, prepares us for the plaintive, ‘And that was all?’ And into this music 


38 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 1, SC. Iv. 


Pifa. No Madam : for fo long 13 
As he could make me with his eye, or eare, 

14. his] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Knt. — 14. his eye] his eyes Fy, Rowe. 
the Coleridge, Ktly. mine Ingl. this either eye Sta. conj. (Atheneum, 14 
Theob. et cet. June, 1873). 


of William Shakespeare rude fingers must be thrust, and the cords wantonly 
snapped. Vaughan is, possibly, the arch-enthusiast for metrical arrangement 
and the supreme domination of metre over pronunciation. The following line is 
of his scansion: ‘Beyond thought’s comp’ss that former fab’lous story.’—(p. 4ol). 
Again, ‘Who knows of one of h’r women being corrupted.’—(p. 411). Again, 
‘And gentl’men of It’ly most willing spirits.—(p. 496). May we not be permitted 
to marvel why these metrical enthusiasts do not urge a return to the intoning of 
Betterton’s days, and the adoption of a drama wherein the lines shall be faultlessly 
metrical, but the words unintelligible and—unpronounceable?-—Eb.] 

14. make me with his eye, or eare] THEOBALD: How could Posthumus make 
himself distinguished by his ear to Pisanio? By his tongue he might, to the 
other’s ear: and this was certainly Shakespeare’s intention. We must, therefore, 
read, as Mr Warburton hinted to me, ‘with this eye.’ The expression is deuxrixds, 
as the Greeks term it. The party speaking points to the part spoken of. [In 
Nichol’s Illustrations, ii, 628, Theobald conjectures ‘with my eye’; but evidently 
withdrew it.|—Jounson: Hanmer alters it to ‘mark me with his eye, or J,’ because 
Pisanio describes no address made to the ear.—BECKET (p. 256) conjectures ‘make 
his eye, or e’er [1]’ and explains that ‘the want of the personal pronoun, which 
should accompany e’er, obscures the expression’; it must be understood.—THISEL- 
TON (p. 9): Becket is, I think, for once in a right way in [his conjecture], but there 
is no misprint: See ‘They shall be parde, who eare do lesse "—Hake’s News out of 
Powles Churchyarde; also ‘Whatear we shew’—Return from Parnassus (Macray), 
Prologue, 64.—COLERIDGE (p. 303): But ‘this eye,’ in spite of the supposition of its 
being detxrix@s, is very awkward. I should think that either or or the was Shake- 
speare’s word.—Hupson: Coleridge’s proposed ‘with the eye,’ I am apt to think 
the better correction. [Unquestionably there are occasions when an actor may, 
and even must, make clear his meaning by ‘pointing,’ as Theobald says, ‘to the 
parts spoken of,’ as where Polonius says ‘Take this from this, if this be otherwise,’ 
pointing to his head and neck. But is the present one of the occasions? Could 
the effect be other than ludicrous (and the ‘absurdity’ struck Ingleby also) to see 
Pisanio gravely raise his hand and point first to his eye and then to his ear?—Ep.]|— 
Wurte (ed. i.): It would be well were there warrant for reading ‘ with or eye or ear.’ 
—DEIcuTon’s text reads ‘with his eye, or mine,’ with the meaning that ‘so long as 
he could make me out, see me at all, and I could distinguish him from the sailors 
on board,’ etc.—StEEvENs: This description, and what follows it, seems imitated 
from Ovid, Met. [463-474]. See Golding’s trans. [142 verso, ed. 1567]. ‘Shee lifting 
vp her watrye eyes behilld her husband stand Vppon the hatches making signes by 
beckening with his hand: And shee made signes to himageine. And after that the 
land Was farre remoued from the shippe, and that the sight began Too bee vnable 
too discerne the face of any man, As long as ere shee could shee lookt vppon the 
rowing keele. And when shee could no longer tyme for distance ken it weele, Shee 
looked still vppon the sayles that flashed with the wynd Vppon the maast. And 
when she coulde the sayles no longer fynd, She gate her too her empty bed with sad 


ACT EIS Ca lV CYMBELINE 39 


Diftinguifh him from others, he did keepe 15 
The Decke, with Gloue, or Hat, or Handkerchife, 
Still wauing, as the fits and ftirres of’s mind 
Could beft expreffe how flow his Soule fayl’d on, 
How fwift his Ship. 

Imo. Thou fhould’{t haue made him, 20 
As little as a Crow, or leffe, ere left 
To after-eye him. 

Pifa. Madame, fo I did. 

Imo. would haue broke mine eye-ftrings ; 
Crack’d them, but to looke vpon him, till the diminution 25 
Of fpace, had pointed him fharpe as my Needle : 


20. him] him ev’n Han. him seem 25. them, but] ’em, but Pope,+. 
Sta. conj. (Atheneum, 14 June, 1873). the balls Huds. 
24-29. Mnemonic Pope, Warb. him,| Fi, Coll. Ktly, Glo. Cam. 
24, 25. I would...Crack’d them, but] him; Rowe et cet. 
One line Pope et seq. 26. Of] From Han: Of’s Warb. 


and sorye hart, And layd her downe.-—DowneN refers to a close parallel in Venus 
& Adonis, lines 817-822, [There is one faint point in favour of Warburton’s emen- 
dation which seems to give it possibility, and this is that the compositor, misled 
by the repetition of the sound, heard from the voice of his reader, or from his mental 
ear, set up, ‘with his,’ when he should have set up ‘with this, —the words of the copy. 
Tf these were really the words of the copy, an emendation is needed, if one be needed 
at all, quite as much as ever. I see no reason, however, why we should assume that 
Posthumus was silent as long as he was within ear-shot. Such is not the use and 
wont now-a-days when the great Ocean Liners leave the dock. If, after all, the 
phrase be unintelligible—be it so. Have we received at Shakespeare’s hand 
‘favours so sweet, they went to the heart’s root,—And shall we not receive one bitter 
fruit.’—Ep.] 

24. broke mine eye-strings] Murray (NV. £. D.): The strings (7. e., muscles, 
nerves, or tendons) of the eye. They were formerly supposed to break or crack 
at death or loss of sight STAUNTON (Atheneum, 14 June, 1873): No one familiar 
with Shakespeare’s style can believe him guilty of this bathos. He might have 
written,—‘I would have crack’d mine eye-strings; broke them,’ etc., though even 
this would be tame for him. It is far more likely that what he really did write 
was—‘I would have crack’d mine eye-strings, broke their balls,’ etc. Iam doubtful 
whether the expression of Pisanio, III, iv.—‘I’ll wake mine eye-balls blind first,’ 
adds anything to the probability of this suggestion, but it may be worth notice. 

25, 26. diminution Of space] WARBURTON: But the increase of distance is 
the augmentative, not the ‘diminution of space’ between the object and the be- 
holder; which augmentation occasions the diminution of the object. We should 
read, therefore, ‘the diminution of’s space,’—4. e., of his space, or of that space which 
his body occupied; and this is the diminution of the object by the augmentation of 
space.—HEAtH (p. 473): All this is certainly true and perfectly right; but then it 
ought to have taught [Warburton] to have recourse to that rule of construction in 
the English language, that the genitive case is frequently used to express the cause, 


40 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acr 1, SC. iv. 


Nay, followed him, till he had melted from 27 
The {malneffe of a Gnat, to ayre : and then 
Haue turn’d mine eye,and wept. But good Pi/anio, 
When fhall we heare from him. 30 
Pifa. Be affur’d Madam, 
With his next vantage. 
Imo. 1 did not take my leaue of him, but had 
Moft pretty things to fay : Ere I could tell him 
How I would thinke on him at certaine houres, 35 
Such thoughts, and fuch : Or I could make him fweare, 
The Shees of Italy fhould not betray 
Mine Intereft, and his Honour : or haue charg’d him 


At the fixt houre of Morne, at Noone, at Midnight, 39 
27. followed] follow’d Pope et seq. 37. Shees] F.. She’s F3F,, Rowe. 
29. wept. But] wept—but Pope, Han. 38. haue charg’d] could charge Han. 
30. him.) him? Rowe. 39. fixt] fixth Fy. 


33-45. Mnemonic Warb. 


as well as the object. Thus, ‘the diminution of space, will be that diminution which 
is caused by space or distance. [The correction of Warburton may be always 
safely left to Heath or Edwards.—Ep.]—Jounson: That is, the diminution of 
which space is the cause. Trees are killed by a blast of lightning, that is, by blast- 
ing, not blasted lightning. 

28. of a Gnat, to ayre] In reading or speaking, the slight pause after ‘Gnat,’ 
indicated by the comma in the Folio, should not be overlooked.—CaPE Lt, I am 
sorry to say, was the first to remove this comma, and he has been almost uniformly 
followed by succeeding editors. Of course, as far as the mere construction of the 
sentence is concerned, the punctuation of the Folio is erroneous.—Eb. 

32. vantage] That is, his next favourable opportunity. 

36-38. Or I could...his Honour] These are to me the only jarring 
words that Imogen ever utters. We all know how common it is, both on and, 
unfortunately, off the stage, for wives to mistrust husbands. This excuse may be 
possibly urged in Imogen’s defence. But I prefer that she should need no defence. 
When she learns the contents of Posthumus’s cruel, brutal letter to Pisanio, her 
suspicions fly at once, not unnaturally, to some ‘jay of Italy!’ But it grates me 
that she should express any such suspicion, however faint, at the very instant that 
her heart was breaking over their separation; and when her every other utterance 
at this moment was that of an ‘enskyed saint.’ Is the harboring of such a thought, 
at such a crisis, in harmony with a character that was almost perversely obtuse when 
Iachimo broadly hinted at Posthumus’s infidelity? These lines are to me so 
repugnant that I would fain believe she never uttered them. Let them be ex- 
cised and the remaining lines will flow with sufficing metrical smoothness: ‘Such 
thoughts, and such; or I could have charg’d him.’—On the other hand, Collier 
(ed. ii.) remarks that the allusion to the ‘shes of Italy’ is ‘an admirable preparation 
for what succeeds in the play.’ I cannot see Tt Ds 

37. The Shees] See ‘Twixt two such She’s.’—I, vii, 47. For other instances 
where ‘he’ and ‘she’ are used for man and woman, see ABBOTT, § 224. 


INGE i, SO. aval CYMBELINE AI 


T’encounter me with Orifons, for then:. 40 
I am in Heauen for him : Or ere I could, 

Giue him that parting kiffe, which I had fet 

Betwixt two charming words, comes in my Father, 

And like the Tyrannous breathing of the North, 

Shakes all our buddes from growing. 45 


40. Tencounter| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. 40. Orifons] Oraisons Rowe. 
Dyce ii, Sing. 41. Heauen] heav’n Han. 


43. two charming words] WarBuRTON: Without question by these two 
charming words she would be understood to mean, ‘Adieu, Posthumus.’ The one 
Religion made so; and the other Love-—Epwarns (p. 191): [According to Mr War- 
burton] Imogen must have understood the etymology of our language very exactly; 
to find out so much religion in the word adieu; which we use commonly without 
fixing any such idea to it; as when we say that such a man has bidden adieu to all 
religion. And, on the other side, she must have understood the language of love 
very little if she could find no tenderer expression of it than the name by which 
everybody else called her husband.—Cottirer: The old meaning of to ‘charm’ was 
to enchant, and in that sense we suppose it to have been used by Imogen in this 
passage; she would have set the kiss betwixt ‘two charming words,’ in order, per- 
haps, to secure it from ‘the shes of Italy.’ [And to the same effect, all subsequent 
editors.|—INGLEBY believes that ‘there is, not improbably, an allusion to some 
custom of Shakespeare’s own day.’—THISELTON finds here ‘an allusion to the 
cross,—which still, I understand, represents a kiss in love letters,—that was placed 
between words in written charms or ‘‘charects.”’—DowbEN: In Scot’s Discovery 
of Witchcraft ‘use charming words’ means use words of incantation DEIGHTON 
suggests that ‘perhaps “‘charming”’ means nothing more than “sweet,” “loving”’’; 
whereto the present editor is inclined to agree. 

45. Shakes... growing] WARBURTON argues that if Cymbeline’s rage had 
occurred when he first discovered the marriage, Imogen would have rightly 
referred to it as shaking ‘all our buds from growing’ ‘because by banishing Post- 
humus, he quite cut off the fruits of their loves and alliances, which were things of 
duration; and in this case the buds of fruit-trees had been meant.’ But Posthumus 
was taking his last farewell of her, which was but of a short and momentary dura- 
tion. ‘In this case, it is plain’ that the ‘buds’ must refer to flowers, which do not 
‘srow’ like fruit buds, but merely open or expand. Therefore, we must read, 
‘Shakes all our buds from blowing.’—HAnmeER is the only editor who was beguiled 
by this hypercritical emendation.—But the Rev. Dr Hurp, a fulsome admirer of 
Warburton in a note on Callida junctura in his edition of Horace’s Art of Poetry 
(p. 56, ed. 1766) adopted ‘blowing’ of the ‘sagacious editor’ and modified the line 
by suggesting: ‘Shuts all our buds from blowing.’ ‘And, on second thoughts, 
changed shuts to checks, as more like both in sound to “Shakes” and in the traces of 
the letters, and lastly because it is easier and better English.’ I owe to EccLEs 
this reference to Hurd. In the emendation checks, Hurd anticipates BAILEy (ii, 
128).—CAPELL (i, 103): Not the fair bud of their adieus only, but all their buds, 
the whole promised crop of their loves is shaken and beat to the ground by this 
‘tyrannous breathing.’ ‘Growing’ is equivalent to ‘blowing,’ for the expansion 
of buds is growth; promoted, as is elsewhere expressed, ‘by summer’s ripening 


42 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT 1) Sci: 


Enter a Lady. 46 


La. The Queene (Madam) 


Defires your Highneffe Company. 


Imo. Thofe things I bid you doJget them difpatch’d, 


I will attend the Queene. 50 
Pifa. Madam, I fhall. Exeunt. 
Scena Quinta. 
Enter Philario, Iachimo : a Frenchman,a Dutch- 
man,and a Spaniard. 3 
1. Scena Quinta] ScENE 11. Rowe. 2. Iachimo:] Iachimo, Ff. Iachimo, 


ScENE VI. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 


ScENE Iv. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Coll. iii, 
Cam. 


and Rowe. 
2, 3. a Frenchman, a Dutchman] 
Frenchman, Dutchman F;F,. 


Rome. Rowe. A Room in Philario’s 
House. Cap. 


a Dutchman, and a Spaniard] 
Om. Rowe,+, Varr. Ran. Knt. 


breath.—Rom. & Jul., Il, ii, 121—JoHnson: A bud, without any distinct idea, 
whether of flower or fruit, is a natural representation of anything incipient or 
immature; and the buds of flowers, if flowers are meant, grow to flowers, as 
the buds of fruits grow to fruits——StTrEEveNs: I think the old reading may be 
sufficiently supported by ‘Rough words to shake the darling buds of May.’— 
Sonn., xviii. Again in ‘Confounds thy fame, as whirlwinds shake fair buds.’— 
Tam. Shr., V, ii, 140. 

1. Scena Quinta] EcctEs (p. 31): Between this scene and the last so much time 
must be imagined to pass as was sufficient for Posthumus to perform his voyage and 
journey to Rome.—Danirt: Here begins the Second Day.—INctEBy: The language 
of this scene presents a notable instance of slipshod writing, with an occasional 
construction of equivocal meaning. Recent publications on the authorship of 
these plays induce the reflexion, how the fastidious taste of so great a master of 
prose as Francis Bacon would have been shocked by such composition as we find 
in this and other prose scenes. 

2, 3. a Dutchman, and a Spaniard] Caprtt (p. 104): Perhaps the Poet 
might have intended to make more of [these two] than only silent co-agents; or, 
when he dropped that intention, let them stand as a mark of Philario’s benevolence 
and his hospitable disposition to strangers——STEEVENS: Shakespeare derived 
[these four characters] from whatever translation of the original novel he made use 
of. [In the Var. ’21 there is this additional remark by Steevens: “Thus, in the 
ancient one described in our Prolegomena to this drama: ‘Howe iiii merchauntes 
met all togyther in on way, whyche were of iiii dyverse landes,” etc.’ This is 
probably a reference to the version of Boccaccio, of which Steevens gives a meagre 
account in his Prolegomena. See Appendix, Source of the Plot—SKoTrowE quotes 
this reference by Steevens, and adds: ‘In the trifling particular of the arrange- 


INCH iy SES Wo] CYMBELINE 43 


lach. Beleeue it Sir, I haue feene him in Britaine; hee 
was then of a Creffent note, expected to proue fo woor- 5 
thy, as fince he hath beene allowed the name of. But I 
could then haue look’d on him, without the help of Ad- 
miration, though the Catalogue of his endowments had 8 


4. Sir,| Fi, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce, crescent note; expected Theob. et cet. 


Glo. Cam. Sir; Cap. et cet. 5, 6. woorthy| wore thy Pope i. 

5. then of a Creffent note, expected] 6. Bui] Om. Han. 
F,. then of a creffent none, expected F;. 7, 8. Admiration,| Ff, Coll. Dyce ii, 
then of a crefcent, none expected F,, Rowe. ili, Sta. Glo. Cam. admiration; Theob. 
than but crescent, none expected him et cet. 


Pope (then ed. ii.), Han. then of a 


ment of his Dram. Pers. in this Scene, therefore, Shakespeare acted under the 
influence of authority, and this is likewise evident from the circumstance that the 
Spaniard and Hollander are mute.—KnicuT opines that Shakespeare no doubt 
intended ‘to show that the foolish wager of Posthumus was made amidst strangers 
who resorted to Rome.’—WauiTtE agrees substantially with Knight, and adds that 
their ‘mere presence had a dramatic effect.’ 

7, 8. without the help of Admiration] Staunton (Atheneum, 14 June, 
1873): What befitting sense can be tortured out of ‘the help of admiration’? 
Does not the context plainly show that ‘help’ is a corruption? I feel certain we 
ought to read, ‘without the yelp of admiration,’ or ‘the whoop of admiration.’ 
Either word tallies with the sense, which obviously is—‘I know how distinguished 
this Briton is accounted, but if I had studied every item of his accomplishments, 
I could still look on him without a vulgar shout of wonderment.’ Compare, ‘two 
yoke-devils . . . working so grossly . . . That admiration did not whoop at them.’ 
—Henry V: II, ii; also ‘most wonderful—wonderful! and yet again—wonderful! 
and, after that, out of all whooping!’—As Vou Like It, II, ii—Incitesy: This 
very difficult passage had been passed over by all critics, with the exception of 
Staunton, who was reduced to the expedient of proposing two emendations for 
‘help,’ one of which has no resemblance to the trace of the letters, and the other is 
simply laughable. It is natural, at first sight, to suppose that Iachimo is the 
person who is said to be ‘without the help of admiration’; but, if the passage be 
closely examined, it will be seen that an atmosphere of prestige would be rather a 
hindrance than a help to a person desirous of critically estimating the hero; and even 
tolerable sense cannot be extracted from the ordinary interpretation. What 
Tachimo intended to say is this: ‘but I could then have looked upon Posthumus, 
whose name had not at that time obtained the glamour which now invests it.’ 
The phrase is slightly elliptical, but not to so great an extent as is to be found 
in other passages of this play. [The papers on ‘Unsuspected Corruptions in Shake- 
speare’s Text,’ which, during 1872, ’73, 74, STAUNTON contributed to The Atheneum, 
were a source of grief to his friends. The nice discrimination, due to wide reading 
and a dramatic temperament, seemed to have wholly deserted him. And the 
emendations he proposed were received in silence, and with the respect to which, 
as the editor of a truly admirable edition of Shakespeare, he was entitled. Mrs 
Mary Cowpren-CLarkE was, I think, the only critic who openly remonstrated 
against some of them. In those far-away days Shakespeare had not, as now, his 


44 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. Vv. 


bin tabled by his fide, and I to perufe him by Items. 
Phil. You fpeake of him when he was leffe furnifh’d, 10 
then now hee is, with that which makes him both with- 
out, and within. . 
French. 1 haue feene him in France : wee had very ma- 
ny there, could behold the Sunne, with as firme eyes as 


hee. 15 
Tach. This matter of marrying his Kings Daughter, 

wherein he muft be weighed rather by her valew, then 17 
9. bin] been F,. 16. Kings] King Fz. 


13. in France] France F2. 


niche in every household as a fireside god, and emendations of his text were not 
then to be resented as personal affronts. In the present instance, Staunton’s 
changes of ‘help’ into yelp or whoop are unhappy, most unhappy; they need no 
comment. In them, the palmiest days are recalled of Beckett, of Zachary Jackson, 
and of Lord Chedworth. As in many others of Staunton’s emendations, the 
difficulty here is of his own creation; it is, as DowpEN, when speaking of Ingleby’s 
assent to Staunton’s difficulty, justly terms, ‘imaginary.’ For, strangely enough, 
Ingleby shared Staunton’s view of the present passage, and pronounced the Folio 
text ‘very difficult.’ ‘An atmosphere of prestige,’ he thinks, ‘would be rather a 
hindrance than a help to a person desirous of critically estimating the hero.’ But 
Tachimo had no desire to estimate Posthumus, either critically or justly, he was 
prejudiced from the start, and it was his irritating manner due to this prejudice 
which exasperated Posthumus. Dr Ingleby’s son, Mr Holcombe Ingleby, who 
edited a second edition of his father’s book, assumed the responsibility of the note in 
the first edition by acknowledging that it was written at his suggestion; and invited 
a discussion of it in the pages of Notes & Queries; and there the student can find it, 
in VII, vii, 124, 384; Ibid., viii, 44, 222, 302, 402; Ibid., ix, 263. In the course of it 
W. W. Ltioyp is the solitary writer, I think, who found any difficulty in the present 
passage, which he amends by reading ‘without the eyes of admiration.’ No editor, 
I think, since Dr Ingleby has detected any difficulty here, and but few have noticed 
Ingleby’s criticism.—Eb.] 

9. peruse] Murray (N. E. D., s.v., 11, 2): To examine (a number of things) one 
by one. 

ir. makes him] Jounson: In the sense in which we say, This will make or mar 
you. 

11,12. both without, and within] DowDeEN refers to ‘All that is out of door 
most rich,’ etc.—I, vii, 20. Possibly an equally apt comparison lies in, ‘So faire an 
Outward, and such stuffe Within Endowes a man, but hee.’—I, i, 32. 

14, 15. as hee] Dowpen: Perhaps this refers to Iachimo, and if so, ‘the sun’ 
must stand ironically for Posthumus; but ‘he’ may be Posthumus, and the mean- 
ing may be, we had as many eagles as true of breed as he. Compare Slew Vile 
ne i, 91,92: ‘Nay, if thou be that princely eagle’s bird, Show thy descent by gazing 
gainst the sun.’ [It seems to me that ‘he’ must refer to ‘I have seen him in 
France,’ and that Dowden’s paraphrase is just.—Ep.] 


NER Uy SEs Wo) CYMBELINE 45 
his owne, words him (I doubt not) a great deale from the 18 
matter. 
French, And then his banifhment. 20 
fach, 1, and the approbation of thofe that weepe this 


lamentable diuorce vnder her colours, are wonderfully 
to extend him, be it but to fortifie her iudgement, which 
elfe an eafie battery might lay flat, for taking a Begger 
without leffe quality.But how comes it, he is to foiourne 25 


20. banifhment.| banishment— Pope, 
+, Knt, Sing. Sta. Ktly. banishment: 
Cap. Mal. Steev. Varr. banishment,— 
Dyce. 

21. I,] Ay, Rowe. 

approbation] approbations Warb. 
Johns. Coll. ii. (MS.). 

22. under her colours] and her dolours 

Coll. MS. 
are] is Ktly. 
22, 23. are wonderfully to] aids won- 


fully do Ecc. are wont wonderfully to 
Coll. ii. (MS.), iii. and are wonderfully 
to Ecc. conj. who wonderfully do Orger. 
23. extend him] extend her Var. ’73 
(misprint?). 
her| here F 2. 


25. without leffe quality] without 
more quality Rowe,+, Ran. Steev. 
Varr. Coll. ii. (MS.), Sing. Ktly. 


without level quality Bailey (ii, 368). 
without less inequality Cartwright (p. 


derfully to Warb. conj. (Nichols ii, 265). 38). without self-quality Bulloch (p. 
are wonderful to Cap. conj. and wonder- 269). without best quality Vaughan. 


.. matter] JoHNson: Makes the description of him very 
[See ‘whose containing Is so from sense in hardness.’— 


18, 19. words him . 
distant from the truth. 
Wo Wm S22) Buea 

20. banishment] When this sentence is assumed to be incomplete, and is 
filled out with what we are assured the Frenchman would have said, as has been 
done, we should bear in mind that it is Pope’s, not Shakespeare’s, words that are 
supplied. Pope is the first to indicate that the sentence is broken, and to put 
words in Pope’s mouth is harmless and allowable, but to put them in Shakespeare’s 
mouth verges on the temerarious. Is there any good reason to be given why the 
Frenchman’s exclamation should be deemed incomplete?-—Eb. 

22. diuorce vnder her colours, are] JoHNSoN: Under her banner; by her 
influence. [If Shakespeare had placed ‘under her colours’ directly after the rela- 
tive pronoun which it qualifies, thus: ‘the approbation of those under her colours 
that weep this lamentable divorce,’ we should then probably have had ‘zs wonder- 
fully to extend him.’ But as the text now stands, immediately after the plural 
‘colours’ follows the plural ‘are,’ which is held by Malone and others as a ‘gram- 
matical inaccuracy.’ It is merely the ordinary plural by attraction; in strictness, 
ungrammatical, but not so far unpardonable in Shakespeare that we need correct 
it. It occurs again in IV, ii, 396.—ED.] 

23. extend] See note on ‘I do extend him.’—I, i, 35. 

23, 24. fortifie ... battery] Did not the use of the military term, ‘fortify, 
suggest ‘battery’?—Eb. 

25. without lesse quality] MALONE (ed. 1790): Whenever less or more is to be 
joined witha verb denoting want, or a preposition of a similar import, Shakespeare 
never fails to be entangled in a grammatical inaccuracy, or, rather, to use words 
that express the very contrary of what he means. [Thus far, Dyce (ed. ii.) quotes 
this note without dissent. Malone then goes on to say that he had proved his 


46 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT I, SC. Vv. 


[25. without lesse quality] 


assertion ‘incontestably’ in a note on Ant. & Cleop., IV, xiv, 72, 73- Unfortunately 
posterity has not confirmed his proof. Again he refers to Wint. Tale, III, ii, 58, 59; 
here, too, JOHNSON wisely pointed out that we must remember that, of aforetime, 
two negatives did not make an affirmative, but strengthened the negation. In- 
deed, there are, in Shakespeare, at least two instances of even triple negatives: 
‘No woman has, nor never none shall mistress be of it,’ etc., Twelfth Night, II, i, 163, 
and ‘nor no further in sport neyther,’ etc., As You Like It, I, ii, 27. Be this fact 
remembered in the discussion, not ‘luminous but voluminous,’ which follows.—EbD.] 
Malone thus ends his foregoing note: Mr Rowe and all the subsequent editors read: 
‘without more quality,’ and so undoubtedly Shakespeare ought to have written. On 
the stage, an actor may rectify such petty errors; but it is the duty of an editor 
to exhibit what his author wrote——STEEVENS: As on this occasion and several 
others, we can only tell what Hemings and Condell printed, instead of knowing with 
any degree of certainty what Shakespeare wrote, I have not disturbed Mr Rowe’s 
emendation, which leaves a clear passage to the reader, if he happens to prefer an 
obvious sense to no sense at all—Kwnicutr: We doubt the propriety of [Rowe’s] 
change. Posthumus is spoken of by all as one of high qualifications,—and he is 
presently introduced as ‘a stranger of his quality.’ He was bred as Imogen’s 
‘playfellow,’ and, therefore, cannot be spoken of as a low man,—‘ without more 
quality.’ . . . We do not feel warranted in altering the text, or we would read: 
‘without his quality,—a beggar who does not follow the occupation of a beggar. 
[Hupson adopted in his text this conjecture of Knight, which seemed to him 
‘just the thing.’ Cor.rer believes that ‘less’ for ‘more’ was a compositor’s error. 
HALLIWELL (Folio ed. 1853, i, 279) repeated the examples supplied by Malone, and, 
having added to them the following: ‘Fortune forbid my outside have not 
charm’d her, —Twelfth Night, I, iii, 20; ‘men must not walke too late who cannot 
want the thought,’—Macb., III, vi, 10; ‘Let his lacke of years be no impediment to 
let him lacke a reverend estimation, —Mer. of Ven., IV, i, 168; ‘You lesse know 
how to value her desert, Than she to scant her duty,’—Lear, II, iv, 135, deduced 
therefrom the following admirable summary: Words of negative import are some- 
times used for words of positive meaning where other words implying negation or 
detraction are placed in connection with them. This apparent solecism is merely 
a subtle variation of the use of the double negative. This exposition is in part 
quoted by INcLEBy.—Dettus (ed. i, 1855): According to Shakespearian usage, 
‘less’ appears in some degree to strengthen a subjoined negation, as here ‘ without.’ 
Posthumus is a beggar without any other quality whatever than just a beggar has. 
[Here follows the quotation from The Winter’s Tale, above referred to by Malone: 
‘I ne’re heard yet, That any of these bolder Vices wanted, Lesse Impudence to 
gaine-say what they did, Then to performe it first.’—III, ii, 57-60. WHITE (ed. i.) 
attributed the ‘obscurity to the poet’s own carelessness.’ Ibid. (ed. ii.): ‘Doubtless 
Shakespeare thought here that what he had written meant, “with so little quality.” 
In passages of this construction he, like many others who are not Shakespeares, was 
apt to fall into confusions.’ In his Shakespeare’s Scholar, 1854, White conjec- 
tures ‘without this quality,’ or ‘with less quality,’ but as he did not repeat these 
emendations in his subsequent editions, they may be regarded as withdrawn. 
ae F oe 

= ar reer with less ee White anticipated Ww. W. Lloyd (N. & Qu., 

» Hi, 162). 1s conjecture “without this quality’ he anticipated A. Hall (N. & 
Qu., VII, ii, 164).— STAUNTON says that ‘without more quality’ was ‘apparently, 


INGE Thy Ch Wa] CYMBELINE 47 


with you? How creepes acquaintance ? 26 


26. creepes| grew Lloyd ap. Cam. 


though by no means certainly, the meaning intended’; and he then quotes Malone’s 
note, so much as refers to Shakespeare’s ‘entanglement’ with negatives. —HERTz- 
BERG (1871) misquotes the Folio: ‘without less qualities,’ wherein there lies a dif- 
ference from the singular, ‘quality,’ and, in deciding in favour of ‘with less qual- 
ities,’ is anticipated in the ‘with’ by White. He thus translates: ‘Wenn sie einen 
Bettler mit geringeren Fahigkeiten sich erwahlt hitte.’ Rev. Joun HunTER 
(1872): Who had no other inferiority lessening his quality. Br. NICHOLSON 
(NV. & Qu., 1886, VII, ii, 23) zealously maintains, and at times with eminent success 
(witness his palmarian explanation of Malvolio’s ‘my—some rich jewel’), that 
many obscurities in the text are to be explained by dramatic action, and on the 
present passage comments as follows: We are obliged to suppose that either Shake- 
speare or the transcriber mistakenly wrote ‘less’ instead of more, or else seek a 
means by which the sentence will give a meaning to this ‘less.’ This latter, if 
possible, would be more in accordance with true criticism than suggesting an 
emendation. A snap of the fingers was and is used to express a contemptuous 
estimate of anything or any one. Twice at least it was so used in plays of the 
period; and though I acknowledge that in these,—so far as my memory goes,— 
there are the words ‘than this,’ or words to that effect, which are wanting in this 
instance, yet I think that there the sentence was equivalent to ‘of less quality 
[snaps his fingers] [than that].’ I have heard, and I think I have said, words 
indifferently to this effect, ‘I do not value it that [snap],’ or ‘I do not value it’ 
and then the snap completed the sentence. DEIGHTON (1894): Even if given only 
in order to confirm her judgment, which otherwise might be impugned for choosing 
a beggar without greater recommendations than belong to him. THISELTON 
(1902, p. 10): ‘For taking a beggar without lesse quality’ practically amounts to 
“if it were not that she has taken a Beggar with such great quality.’ DowpDEN: 
Possibly Shakespeare wrote, ‘with, dowdt less quality,’ a beggar, though, I admit, 
of some merit.—[He who has perused this discussion will come, I think, to the 
conclusion that ‘without less,’ according to our present habits of thought, means 
‘without more,’ and that, according to Shakespearian usage, it means precisely the 
same, and that in all the foregoing examples of regular sentences, there is nothing 
ungrammatical, nor any solecism, nor any confusion in The Master’s mind, but he 
was merely repeating what he met with in reading and heard in talking; and, 
finally, that wherever there be in his text anything which appears enigmatical it is 
wiser to accept it and wait for fuller knowledge of the usage of his times, than to 
propose emendations, which, at this late day, will be approved by no human being 
but by the proposer himself, and prove food for mirth to every one besides.—Ep.] 

26. creepes] Dr1cHToNn: This verb does not here seem to have any notion of 
slowness, still less of secrecy; possibly a misprint for breeds—HERFoRD: How have 
you stolen into acquaintance. ‘Creeps’ hints at the stealthy process implied in the 
unexpected result—DowpeEn: I know no other example of the expression. To 
‘creep in acquaintance’ occurs in Greene, Quip for an Upstart Courtier. [The end 
of all beeing is to knowe God, and not as your worship good masdter Veluet breeches 
wrests, to creep into acquaintance.’—p. 233 ed. Grossart, where it is used in its 
usual acceptation. Circumstances can be imagined where ‘How creeps acquain- 
tance?’ would be intelligible and appropriate; but such circumstances are not 
before us here, and so the phrase remains incomprehensible.—Eb.] 


48 THE TRAGEDIE OF ACTER SCHV 


Phil. Wis Father and I were Souldiers together, to 27 


whom I haue bin often bound for no leffe then my life. 
Enter Pofthumus. 

Heere comes the Britaine. Let him be fo entertained a- 30 
mong’ft you,as fuites with Gentlemen of your knowing, 
to a Stranger of his quality. I befeech you all be better 
knowne to this Gentleman, whom I commend to you, 
as a Noble Friend of mine. How Worthy he is, I will 
leaue to appeare hereafter, rather then ftory him in his 35 
owne hearing. 

French. Sir, we haue knowne togither in Orleance. 

Pojt.Since when, I haue bin debtor to you for courte- 
fies, which I will be euer to pay, and yet pay ftill. 

French. Sir, you o’re-rate my poore kindneffe, I was 40 
glad I did attone my Countryman and you: it had beene 
pitty you fhould haue beene put together, with fo mor- 
tall a purpofe, as then each bore, vpon importance of fo 


flight and triuiall a nature. 44 
28. bin] been Fy. 37. haue knowne] have been known 
29. Enter...] After quality, line 32, Pope,+. 

Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo. Cam. togither] Fy. 

30. Britaine] F.. Britain F;F,, Rowe, Orleance] Orleans Pope. 
Pope, Theob. i, Cap. Briton Theob. 38. bin] been F,. 
ii. et seq. debtor| debter F,, Rowe. 
him] me Johns. ap. Cam. 40. kindneffe,| Fi. kindness. Var. 
35. then] than F,. 71, Coll. kindness; Rowe et cet. 
37. French.] Fren. Ff throughout. 41. attone] atone F;F,. 


beene] bin F;. 


30. the Britaine] See Walker’s note on ‘Britaine reueller. —I, vii, 72. 

31. knowing] Experience, whether social or otherwise—THISELTON: Philario 
means: ‘Beggar though you deem him, he has quality which entitles him to a wel- 
come from those of your condition,’ and, to emphasise the point, introduces him as a 
‘Noble Friend’ of his own. Iachimo was ‘Syenna’s brother’ (IV, ii, 423), and, 
therefore, of high rank. 

37. knowne togither] A somewhat similar ellipsis to ‘When shall we see again?’ 
—I, ii, 65. 

38, 41. bin, beene] Note the lawless spelling of Shakespeare’s compositors. 

39. I will be euer to pay] Asgorrt (§ 405): That is, kindnesses which I intend to 
be always ready to pay you, and yet goon paying. [Malone quotes similar expressions 
in All’s Well, and in the 30th Sonnet. It is superfluous to quote them here, in these 
days of Mrs Cowden-Clarke’s Concordance, of Bartlett’s and of Schmidt’s Lexicon. 

41. I did attone my Countryman and you] Wyart: The Frenchman revives 
the memory of a former quarrel, and thus paves the way for the subsequent dispute 
on a similar ground. 


43. importance] Matone: This is here, as elsewhere in Shakespeare, im- 
d 


ACTS, SCiv.] CYMBELINE 49 


Poft. By your pardon Sir, I was then a young Trauel- 45 
ler, rather fhun’d to go euen with what I heard, then in 


45, 46. Traueller,| Traveller; Rowe et seq. 


portunity, instigation. [Is not this too strong a meaning here, for a ‘slight and 
trivial’ matter? Elsewhere it undoubtedly bears this interpretation. Yet to 
DowDEN it ‘seems satisfactory, and it may be right; yet I rather prefer to accept 
it as meaning simply swbject, occasion, a matter of trivial import.’ CoLLier (ed. ii.) 
in the belief that ‘importance’ is here used in its etymological sense, from the 
French emporter, observes that, it means ‘carrying away,—upon urgency, or 
provocation of so slight and trivial a nature.’ Unquestionably, emporter means to 
carry away, but our word import, which is adapted from it (see V. E. D.), means to 
bring in. All of this conversation, until we come to the death-grip of Iachimo and 
Posthumus, seems pitched in a forced, laboured, and un-Shakespearian key. 
Philario is pompous, and Iachimo hysterical, with such phrases as ‘weep this 
lamentable divorce,’ ‘easy batteries laying flat,’ and ‘creeping acquaintance.’ 
Shakespeare’s unmistakeable hand begins at line 53, and all the preceding may 
have been his, but to me it lacks his creative cunning. At line 53 you see the 
snake, and hear the soft modulations of Mephistopheles.—Ep.] 

46. rather shun’d to go euen with what I heard] JoHNSON: This is ex- 
pressed with a kind of fantastical perplexity. He means, I was then willing to 
take for my direction the experience of others, more than such intelligence as I 
had gathered myself—Moncx Mason (p. 321): This passage cannot bear the 
meaning Johnson contends for. Posthumus is describing a presumptuous young 
man, as he acknowledges himself to have been at that time; and means to say, that 
‘he rather studied to avoid conducting himself by the opinions of other people, 
than to be guided by their experience.’ To take for direction the experience of 
others, would be proof of wisdom, not of presumption—CaPELL (p. 104): ‘To 
go even with what I heard’ is no easy expression, nor the speech it stands in quite 
so clear as it should be: The meaning of the phrase is—to assent to, ‘shun’d to 
assent to what I heard’: this the speaker owns as a fault, and in travellers specially, 
which his youth might draw him into at that time; but notwithstanding, that he 
cannot admit even now that his cause of quarrel was so ‘trivial’ as the other would 
make it out.—STAuNTON: Should we not read sinned? The meaning being, I 
was then a young traveller and wilfully preferred rather to go by what I heard than 
to be guided by the experience of others. [An excellent interpretation if we can 
take ‘shun’d, or even sinned, as meaning preferred—Ep.]—INcLEByY: This is a 
roundabout way of saying that Posthumus preferred disregarding the conventions 
of his time, to being ‘guided by others’ experience. —VAUGHAN (p. 347): That is, 
‘rather than servilely follow the guidance of others, I even avoided independent 
concurrence with their opinions so soon as they were expressed.’ ‘This is the 
contrast between ‘guided by’ and ‘go even with’ what he heard, where Mason 
considers that both are identical in effect; for ‘conducting myself by the opinion 
of others’ and ‘guided by the experience of others’ are much the same. The 
stroke of characteristic delineation is true, although fine—DowpeEn: The words 
may mean: Being a young traveller I liked to assert an independent judgment; 
while I did not refuse in my actions to be guided by the experience of others, I 
asserted that the ground of the quarrel was serious, yet, in fact, I yielded and 
rade it up; now my maturer judgment regards it as serious. [Modern inter- 


4 


50 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 1, SC. V- 


my euery action to be guided by others experiences: but 47 
ypon my mended iudgement (if I offend to fay it is men- 
ded) my Quarrell was not altogether flight. 

French. Faith yes, to be put to the arbiterment of 50 
Swords, and by fuch two,that would by all likelyhood 
haue confounded one the other, or haue falne both. 

Tach. Can we with manners, aske what was the dif- 
ference ? 

French, Safely, I thinke, ’twas a contention in pub- 
licke, which may (without contradiction) fuffer the re- 55 
port. It was much like an argument that fell out laft 
night, where each of vs fell in praife of our Country- 
Misftreffes. This Gentleman,at that time vouching (and 58 


47. euery] very F3F,. 54. thinke,] think; Pope et seq. 
48. offend] Ff. not offend Coll. 56. like] alike F;3F,. 
(MS.) ii, iii. offend not Rowe et cet. 57. each] earch F3. 
51. Swords,| Swords; Rowe et seq. 57, 58. Country-Miftreff[es] country 
52. or haue] and have Ktly conj. mistresses Theob. et seq. 


pretations have not, I think, much improved upon Capell’s: ‘rather than appear 
to be guided by other’s experience I avoided giving assent to what I heard.’—Ep.] 

51. by such two] VAUGHAN (p. 348): This again is at variance with modern 
idiom. ‘Two that would have confounded one the other’ means ‘two that would 
have killed each other.’ Shakespeare means by it ‘two, one of whom would have 
killed the other.” It might be amended by a mere transposition of the words, 
thus: ‘by such two, that one would by all likelihood have confounded the other, 
or both have fallen.’ It is not impossible that ‘one’ might slip from one line to 
the other. It is also possible that Shakespeare may have written as he is repre- 
sented. [Apparently, CApELL detected this same difficulty; he conjectures, with- 
out comment, ‘by such, too,’ which sets all right. Of this conjecture Vaughan 
was probably unaware.—EbD.] 

55. (without contradiction)] Jounson: Which, undoubtedly, may be publicly 
told.—CaPELt (p. 104): This means,—without danger of drawing on another dis- 
pute like that which happened before; in which the truth of the matter disputed 
was maintained by one party,—‘ upon warrant of bloody affirmation,’ meaning that 
he was ready to shed his blood in maintaining it. [Capell’s interpretation is more 
subtle than Johnson’s; possibly, a little too subtle. It is also possible that Capell 
interpreted the phrase as without dispute, and on this founded his comment. 
‘Without contradiction’ does not always mean undoubtedly. ScHMIDT gives an 
instance in Ant. & Cleop. (II, vii, 40), as having this meaning, and I think he is 
wrong. Lepidus says ‘the Ptolemies’ pyramises are very goodly things; without 
contradiction, I have heard that,’ where the sense is not, I think, that Lepidus had 
undoubtedly heard it, but that he had heard it when the assertion was not contra- 
dicted —Ep.] 


56, 57. fell out... fell in] This repetition is certainly not Shakespeare at his 
best.—Ep. 


57, 58. Country-Mistresses] No one who has read the first ten lines of ABBOTT’S 


ACT AI, SCuv. | CYMBELINE 51 


vpon warrant of bloody affirmation) his to be more 
Faire, Vertuous, Wife, Chafte, Conftant, Qualified, and 60 
leffe attemptible then any, the rareft of our Ladies in 
Fraunce. 
Tach, That Lady is not now liuing; or this Gentle- 
mans opinion by this, worne out. 
Poft. She holds her Vertue ftill,and I my mind. 65 
Tach. You mutt not fo farre preferre her, ’fore ours of 
Italy. 
Fofth. Being fo farre prouok’d as I was in France:I 68 


60. Confiant, Qualified] constant 61. rarefi| rateft F;. 
qualified Cap. constant-qualified Cap. 63. or] Om. F;F,. 
(Errata), Var. ’78, Mal. Ran. Steev. 66. owrs] our’s Coll. ii. 
Varr. Knt, Dyce, Glo. Cam. 68. France: I] France, I Rowe ii. et 


61. attemptible] attemptable Rowe ii, seq. 
-++, Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 


Introduction to his admirable Grammar need here be told that in Elizabethan 
English ‘almost any part of speech can be used as any other part of speech,’ or 
that here ‘Country’ is an adjective. In the chapter on ‘Compound Words,’ in 
that same Grammar (§§ 428-435) a variety of instances in great number of these 
compounds may be found. What is possibly noteworthy in the present instance 
(Ingleby calls attention to it) is the conscientious hyphen of the compositor.—Ep. 

60. Constant, Qualified] CAPELL (p. 104): That is, gifted with constancy, en- 
dow’d with it; but what idea has ‘qualified’ singly, when separated, as it has been, 
from ‘constant’? [To this question the NV. E. D. supplies an answer: ‘qualified’ 
when used attributively, as here, Murray defines as ‘possessed of good qualities, 
accomplished, perfect,’ and quotes Nashe, Pierce Penilesse (1592, ed. 2. 25, b): 
‘The fine qualified Gentleman . . . should carie it clean away from the lazie 
clownish droane.’? Also from R. Bernard, trans. of Terence (1598, 286): ‘Such a 
qualified yong gentleman.’ Under an authority as august as Nashe and Bernard, 
I think Shakespeare may be permitted to use the word. Detius, INcLEBy, and 
THISELTON deny the propriety of this hyphen. DE.rus ingeniously explains 
‘qualified’ (here meaning endowed, geartet) as referring to all the previous quali- 
ties, not alone to ‘constant.’ The hyphen first appeared in the text of the Var. 
of 1778, and has been retained ever since by a majority of the editors. And all who 
have remarked on the passage at all have attributed this hyphen to Capell, wherein 
they were misled by the Text. Notes of the Cambridge edition, through wrongly 
interpreting them. Capell, as we have seen, intimated in his Note the necessity 
for the hyphen, but it was an afterthought; in his text there was none, so he put 
it in his Errata. The Var. wherein the hyphen is first found was published in 1778; 
Capell’s Notes and Errata in 1779. Suwm cwique is our Roman justice; and to the 
Variorum of 1778 belongs the honour or the obloquy of the hyphen. Moreover, by 
that same justice, it is, I think, hardly fair to attribute the text of this Variorum 
to Steevens, and to Steevens alone. He was associated with Dr Johnson on the 
title-pages of all the early editions of the Variorum, and each was specified as the 
Second, Third, and Fourth edition, even the Third and Fourth, which were published 


52 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. Vv. 


would abate her nothing, though I profeffe my felfe her 
Adorer ,not her Friend. 70 


after Dr Johnson’s death; the Fourth, 1793, is generally called ‘Steevens’s own’; 
it would hardly be correct, nine years after Dr Johnson’s death, to consider him as 
a fellow-editor. In the Text. Notes of the present edition these Variorums are 
cited according to their dates, except that of Steevens’s Own, which is cited as 
‘Steev.’—Ep.] 

69. though I professe myself, etc.] Jounson: Though I have not the com- 
mon obligations of a lover to his mistress, and regard her not with the fondness of a 
friend, but the reverence of an adorer.—M. Mason: The sense seems to require a 
transposition of these words and that we should read, ‘Though I profess myself 
her friend not her adorer.’ Meaning thereby the praises he bestowed on her arose 
from his knowledge of her virtues, not from a superstitious reverence only. If 
Posthumus wished to be believed, as he surely did, the declaring that his praises 
proceeded from adoration would lessen the credit of them, and counteract his 
purpose. In confirmation of this conjecture, we find that afterwards he ac- 
knowledges her to be his wife. Iachimo says in the same scene, ‘You are a friend, 
and therein the wiser.’ Which would also serve to confirm my amendment if 
it were the true reading; but I do not think it is——CAPELL (p. 104): Why is this 
qualified by ‘Though’? Is it not meant to insinuate—that his praises were the 
dictates of truth, not of partial and extravagant passion?>—STEEVENS prefers 
to consider ‘friend’ as a euphemism for a coarser relationship, which it is un- 
doubtedly elsewhere, possibly by Iachimo afterward, but in Posthumus’s mouth 
here it is, to me, revolting. White, ed. i, reading in his text, ‘and her friend,’ 
‘That is, and her accepted lover.’ By here referring to a note of his, in Rom. & 
Jul., 111, v, White intimates that ‘friend’ is here used in the tainted sense upheld 
by Steevens. ‘The Folio,’ says White, ‘has “not her friend’’; but since Posthumus 
does profess himself the accepted lover of Imogen, the passage is surely corrupt. 
As the nature of the declaration limits the signification of “friend” to that above 
mentioned, we cannot suppose it to be used in its general sense. With either read- 
ing it is equally difficult to account for the presence of ‘“‘though.”’—In his Second 
ed. WuiTE adhered to his interpretation of ‘friend’ and pronounced the clause 
‘very unsatisfactory.’ ‘We naturally expect,’ he remarks, ‘for or as instead of 
“though”; and so and instead of “not.” Various attempts have been made to 
bring the text into coherence; but all in vain. —SraunTon: Posthumus, we appre- 
hend, does not mean,—I avow myself, not simply her admirer, but her worshipper; 
but stung by the scornful tone of Iachimo’s remark, he answers,—Proyoked as I 
was in France, I would abate her nothing, though the declaration of my opinion 
proclaimed me her idolater rather than her lover—INcLEBY: What Posthumus 
ought to say is: ‘I would abate her nothing, though I profess’d myself her adorer’: 
7. e., one who looks up to her, as to a superior being, with the worship of a votary, 
rather than with the jealous affection of a lover. He means, in fact, to assert for 
her a real objective excellence, apart from her private relation to him.— VAUGHAN, 
whose Vew Readings was published in the same year with Ingleby’s edition, makes 
the same emendation: profess’d, with the following note: ‘This rather admits 
than denies his real relation to her, while it denies the necessity of such a relation 
to justify his championship, if he were so provoked as he had been. Delius; I 
find, interprets “although I profess myself her adorer” as meaning, ‘“‘although by 
such refusal to abate her I make myself liable to be considered her adorer.” iE 


INE iy Seb, Wal] CYMBELINE 53 


fach. As faire, and as good :a kind of hand in hand yas 
comparifon, had beene fomething too faire, and too 
good for any Lady in Britanie; if fhe went before others. 
I haue feene as that Diamond of yours out-lufters many 
I haue beheld, I could not beleeue fhe excelled many : 75 


fies Gf good: a...comparifon,| good; 73, 74. others. I| others, I Rowe. 
a...comparison Pope. good, a...compari- others you Vaughan. others I Pope 
son, Theob. et seq. et seq. 

71. hand in  hand| hand-in-hand 75. beheld, I| beheld. I Ff. beheld; 
Pope et seq. I Rowe. 

ie Britanie| Britain Johns. Var. 73, could not\| Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Glo. Wh. il. Britany Ff. Cam. et cet. Theob. Varr. Ran. could Warb. Han. 
Britaine Walker (Crit., ii, 41). Johns. Cap. could not but Mal. et cet. 


cannot concur.’—The CowpENn-CLArKES: The peculiar mode in which Shakespeare 
uses the word ‘though’ should be borne in mind when interpreting this speech; 
and it appears to us that here ‘though’ in all probability bears the sense of inas- 
much as, since. [This Shakespearian use of ‘though,’ just noted, in the sense of 
since, inasmuch as, because, occurred independently to the late JosrpH Crospy, 
who under the name of ‘Senior’ contributed to Skakesperiana (vol. i, p. 285, 1883- 
84) a valuable article on it, and showed how, by its application to many passages, 
even to those supposed to be hopelessly corrupt, it largely removed the difficulties. 
We have seen above how the use of ‘though,’ when taken in its ordinary concessive 
meaning, puzzled Capell and White. For ‘though’ substitute because in the 
present passage, and I think the obscurity is dissipated, ‘I would abate her nothing, 
because I profess myself her adorer, not her friend.’—Eb.] 

75. I could not beleeue] WARBURTON: What? if she did really excel others, 
could he not believe she really did excel them? Nonsense. We must strike out 
the negative—HEATH (p. 474): The common reading, not being sense, readily 
leads us to the true one, ‘I could but believe’; that is, the most I could reasonably 
believe would be, that she excelled many. ‘Not’ is frequently substituted by 
mistake for but by our poet’s transcribers or printers.—THEOBALD (Nichols, ii, 265) 
made the same conjecture. It was, however, in his private correspondence with 
Warburton. STAUNTON and KEIGHTLy adopted it, and DowpeEn thinks it ‘not 
unlikely to be right. —JoHNSoN (Var., ’73, 778, ’85): I should explain the sentence 
thus: ‘Though your lady excelled as much as your diamond, I could not believe 
she excelled many; that is, J too could yet believe that there are many whom she 
did not excel.’ But yet I think Dr Warburton right. [In the same Variorums 
above given STEEVENS has the following note: “The old reading may very well 
stand. “If,” says Iachimo, “your mistress went before some others I have seen, 
only in the same degree your diamond outlustres many I have likewise seen, I 
should not admit on that account that she excelled many: but I ought not to make 
myself the judge of who is the fairest lady, or which is the brightest diamond, till 
T have beheld the finest of either kind which nature has hitherto produced.” The 
passage is not nonsense. It was the business of Iachimo to appear on this occasion 
as an infidel to beauty, in order to spirit Posthumus to lay the wager, and, therefore, 
will not admit her excellence in any comparison.’ This note and Dr Johnson’s 
were dropped in the Var. ’93, ‘Steevens’s own,’ because in the meantime MALONE, 
in his ed. 1790, completely and severely refutes Steevens’s paraphrase, and so far 


54 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACY I, 8C. v. 


but I haue not feene the moft pretious Diamond that is, 76 


nor you the Lady, 
Poft. I prais’d her,as I rated her : fo do I my Stone. 


Tach. What do you efteeme it at? 79 


vindicates his own emendation that it has been ever since adopted by a majority of 
the editors. It is rare in Steevens’s literary career that e’en though vanquish’d he 
could not argue still, but, in the present instance, his discomfiture was complete, 
and it may have been one of the causes which broke up his friendship with Malone. 
The latter’s refutation is as follows: In the first place Mr Steevens understands the 
word as to mean only as or as little as; and assumes that Iachimo means, not merely 
to deny the supereminent and unparallel’d value of the diamond of Posthumus, but 
greatly to depreciate it; though both the context and the words—went before, 
most precious, and out-lustres—must present to every reader a meaning directly 
opposite. Secondly, according to this interpretation, the adversative particle 
but is used without any propriety; as will appear at once by shortening Mr Steevens’s 
paraphrase, and adding a few words that are requisite to make the deduction con- 
sequential: ‘If your mistress went before others I have seen, only in the same 
degree your diamond out-lustres many I have likewise seen, I should not admit on 
that account that she excelled many, [for your diamond is an ordinary stone, and 
does not excel many:] But I have not seen the most precious diamond in the world, 
nor you the most beautiful lady: and therefore I cannot admit she excells all.’ Here, 
after asserting that ‘he could not admit she excelled many,’ he is made to add, by 
way of qualification, and in opposition to what he had already said, that ‘inasmuch 
as he has not seen all the fine women and the fine diamonds in the world, he cannot 
admit that she excells all.’ If he had admitted that she excelled many, this con- 
clusion would be consistent and intelligible; but mot admitting that position, as he 
is thus made to do, it is inconsequential, if not absurd—Malone’s note was so long 
that, in the Var. of ’21, it was relegated to the end of the volume, and also because 
Steevens had withdrawn his note. It is largely taken up with vindicating his 
emendment, ‘TI could not but believe,’ already proposed by him in the Var. ’8s5. 
Omitting the numerous parallel passages whereby he proves his position, it suffices 
to give his conclusion: ‘I am persuaded that either the word but was omitted after 
“not” by the carelessness of the compositor, or, that “not” was printed instead of 
but. . . . Thus the reasoning is clear, exact, and consequential. “If,” says Iachimo, 
“she surpassed other women that I have seen in the same proportion that your 
diamond out-lustres many diamonds that I have beheld, I could not but acknowledge 
that she excelled many women; but I have not seen the most valuable diamond in the 
world, nor you the most beautiful woman: and therefore I cannot admit she excells 
ALL.”’—Inctesy follows the Folio, because, ‘First, it is plain that [Iachimo] 
entirely disallows even her equality with the ladies of Italy; and secondly, the 
comparison is between the lady’s personal charms and the diamond’s visible lustre. 
“Tf she went before others I have seen as that diamond out-lustres many I have 
beheld” points to Imogen’s beauty rather than her goodness; and if it be said, that 
to restrict the allusion to her beauty is somewhat to strain the language, the reply 
is, that a slight strain is to be preferred to a violent alteration of the text. (Which 
is true enough. But there are strains and strains, and a slight alteration may be 
preferred to a violent strain. DowpENn says that ‘Ingleby strains the Folio text to 
get a poor meaning.’ If that text has received no interpretations of it better than 


ACTS SCave | CYMBELINE 55 


Poft. More then the world enioyes. 80 
fach, Either your vnparagon’d Miftirs is dead, or 
fhe’s out-priz’d by a trifle. 
Poft. You are miftaken: the one may be folde or gi- 
uen, or if there were wealth enough for the purchafes, or 
merite for the guift. The other is not a thing for fale, 85 
and onely the guift of the Gods. 


81. unparagon’d] paragon’d Rowe ii, 84. purchafes] purchaces Fy. pur- 
Pope. chase Rowe et seq. 
84. or if] Ff, Coll. i, ii, Del. Sta. af 85, 86. guift] Fx. 


Rowe et cet. 


those here given, I think we may all desert it and creep acquaintance with Malone’s 
emendation.—Ep.] 

80. More ... enioyes] Eccirs: That is more than the world enjoys that the 
world could give him in exchange for it, agreeably to the distinction afterwards 
made by himself; where the reasoning, however, seems not to be of the most clear 
and satisfactory kind, since his wife, while she remains in the world, may very 
naturally be considered as a part of what ‘the world enjoys,’ Iachimo’s remark, 
therefore, is urged not without foundation—VAUGHAN (p. 352) also notices the 
inconsistency in the words of Posthumus, who, when he says that ‘he esteems 
[the stone] at more than the world enjoys, he means to include the value which it 
has as the gift of Imogen, in addition to its intrinsic or exchangeable value. When 
he describes it as inferior in value to Imogen, he alludes to its exchangeable value 
only, for this value is the only valwe which Iachimo knows, when he speaks of it as a 
trifle.’ [As we gradually approach the awful crisis of the wager, we must not forget, 
in judging Posthumus, that he has a right to demand of us a full consideration of 
every prick and stab that goaded him on. Here is one of them. I can imagine 
him as courteously smiling up till now. His words had not been chosen, for he 
supposed he was talking among friends; all of a sudden he becomes conscious that 
there is malice a-foot, and he feels a sting, which makes him answer rudely, ‘you 
are mistaken!’—Eb.] 

84. or if] Matone: The compositor inadvertently repeated ‘or.’—CoLLiEr: 
‘Or’ is here obviously to be taken in the sense of either,—‘ either if there were,’ etc. 
The use of ‘or’ in this sense is scriptural, and it is also countenanced by some of our 
best writers of the time.—Dvyce (ed. ii.): There can be no doubt that [Malone is 
right] VauGHAN (p. 351): The rejection of ‘or’ is unwarrantable. To be per- 
fectly accurate here Shakespeare should have placed it thus: ‘If there were or 
wealth enough,’ etc., and if any emendation were permissible, it is but the transpo- 
sition of ‘or.’ [I think Collier and Vaughan are right. Both Malone and Dyce 
apparently overlooked the second ‘or’ at the end of the line.—Ep.] 

84. purchases] For a long and valuable Article on the ‘final s frequently interpo- 
lated and frequently omitted in the Folio,’ see WALKER (C7if., i, 233-268). Were 
it not that this frequency varies throughout the volume, being comparatively rare 
in the Comedies, more frequent in the Histories, and quite common in the Trage- 
dies, Walker would be inclined to attribute it to some peculiarity in Shakespeare’s 
handwriting. See ‘thousands,’ line 129, below; ‘desires,’ I, vii, 9; ‘Musickes,’ 
JU, abi, Ants 


56 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Sin SGnvic 


Tach. Which the Gods haue giuen you ? 87 
Poft. Which by their Graces I will keepe. 
Tach. You may weare her in title yours : but you 
know ftrange Fowle light vpon neighbouring Ponds. gO 
Your Ring may be ftolne too,fo your brace of vnprizea- 
ble Eftimations, the one is but fraile, and the other Cafu- 
all; A cunning Thiefe, or a (that way) accomplifh’d 
Courtier, would hazzard the winning both of firft and 
laft. 95 
Poft. Your Italy ,containes nene fo accomplifh’d a 
Courtier to conuince the Honour of my Miftris : if in the 
holding or loffe of that, you terme her fraile, I do no- 
thing doubt you haue ftore of Theeues, notwithftanding 
I feare not my Ring. 100 
Phil. Vet vs leaue heere, Gentlemen ? 
Poft. Sir, with all my heart. This worthy Signior I 
thanke him, makes no ftranger of me, we are familiar at 
firft. 
Tach. With fiue times fo much conuerfation,I fhould 105 
87. you?] you:— Theob. Warb. Pope. a, that way, accomplish’'d Rowe. 
you.— Johns. a that-way accomplish’d Johns. Var.’73, 


80, 90. but you know] Fi, Knt. but, Sing. @ that way accomplish’d Coll. 
know: Var. ’85. but, you know, Rowe Ktly, Glo. Cam. a that-way-accom- 


et cet: plish’d Theob. et cet. 
ot. fo your] so of your Theob. i, Han. 98. fraile, I] Ff, Rowe, Theob. ii, 
so, of your Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. Warb. frail; I Pope, Theob. i, Han. 
Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. frail. I Johns. et cet. 
2, 93. Cafuall;.] Fy. too. fe are] Fy. 
93- or a] and a Vaughan. tor. Gentlemen? Fy. 
a (that way) accomplifh’d| Fi, 103. of me,| of me; Theob. et seq. 


92, 93. Casuall;.] Scammpt (Lex.): That is, accidental—IncteBy: Liable to 
mischance. [A similar instance of redundant punctuation occurs in III, v, 51.—Ep.] 

93. a (that way) accomplish’d] DricHron: That is, ‘framed to make 
women false.’—Oi?h., I, ili, 404. 

96, 97. none so accomplish’d a Courtier] Compare ‘none a stranger . . . so 
merry.’ —I, vii, 70. 

97. conuince] WARBURTON: That is, overcome-——Joun Hunter: In Oth., IV, 
i, HeEe refers to knaves ‘having by their own importunate suit, convinced a mis- 
tress. 

103, Io4. at first] Apport (§ 90): Here ‘at first’ is not opposed to afterwards 
(as it is with us), but means ‘at the first,’ or rather, ‘from the first,’ ‘at once.’ 
[May it not be a case of absorption of the in a final t.2—i. e., ‘at first.’2>—Ep.]— 
Detcuton: ‘We are familiar at first,’ is a sarcastic way of saying, ‘He has quickly 
become “better known” to me, as you requested him, and has shown his friendli- 
ness by questioning the virtue of my mistress, even at our first meeting.’ 


ACT T, SC. v.| CYMBELINE 


37 


get ground of your faire Miftris; make her go backe,e- 106 
uen to the yeilding, had I admittance, and opportunitie 
to friend. . 

Poft. No,no. 

fach, 1 dare thereupon pawne the moytie of my E- 110 
ftate, to your Ring, which in my opinion o’re-values it 
fomething : but I make my wager rather againft your 
Confidence, then her Reputation. And to barre your of- 
fence heerein to, I durft attempt it againft any Lady in 
the world. LPs 

Poft. You area great deale abus’d in too bold a‘per- 
fwafion,and I doubt not you fuftaine what y’are worthy 
of,by your Attempt. 

Lach, What’s rhat? 

Pofih. A Repulfe though your Attempt (as you call 120 
it) deferue more;a punifhment too. 

Pi. Gentlemen enough of this, it came in too fo- 
dainely, let it dye as it was borne,and I pray you be bet- 
ter acquainted. 

Lach. ‘Would I had put my Eftate,and my Neighbors 125 
on th’approbation of what I haue fpoke, 


106. Mifiris;| mistress, Glo. Cam. Ran. yowll Coll. (MS.), Ingl. you 
107. yeilding,| Ff. yielding, Johns. wil Coll. iii. 


yielding; Pope et cet. 

109. no.) no— Var. ’73. 

113. Reputation.) Fi, Rowe, Pope. 
reputation, Johns. reputation: Theob. 
et cet. 

114. heerein to,| herein-to, White i. 
hereunto, Anon. ap. Cam. herein, so 
Vaughan. herein too, F;F, et seq. 

116, 117. perfwafion,| persuasion; 
Rowe et seq. 

117. you] you'd Rowe,+, Var. 773, 


117. y’are] you're Rowe et seq. 

120. Repulfe] Repulfe, F,. repulse; 
Rowe et seq. 

t21. deferue] deferves F,, Rowe,+, 
Cap. 

122, 123. fodainely,] suddenly; Cap. 
et seq. 

125. Neighbors] Neighbours F3F,, 
Rowe. neighbour's Pope et seq. 

126. th approbation] the approbation 
Cap. et seq. 


106. get ground] A simile taken, I think, from fencing. 


In that charlatan’s 


book, Vincentio Saviolo his Practise (sig. H2, 1595) the phrase occurs: ‘follow 
you well in this warde, and getting sufficient grounde of him, you maie giue him a 


stoccata.’—Eb. 


108. to friend] For instances of a similar use of to, see ABBOTT, § 189. 
116. a great deale abus’d] Jonnson: Deceived. 
117. you sustaine] Apgott (§ 368): The subjunctive is here used, where we 


should use the future. 


[See Text. Notes.] 


125. Neighbors] Drtrus: From the absence of any apostrophe, it is uncertain 
whether we should have read, neighbour’s or neighbours’. 


126. approbation] JoHNSON: Proof. 


58 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. Vv. 


Poft. What Lady would you chufe to affaile ? 127 
Tach. Yours, whom in conftancie you thinke ftands 
fo fafe. I will lay you ten thoufand Duckets tu your 
Ring, that commend me to the Court where your La- ~ .130 
dy is, with no more aduantage then the opportunitie of a 
fecond conference, and I will bring from thence, that 
Honor of hers, which you imagine fo referu’d. 
Pofthmus. 1 will wage againft your Gold, Gold to 
it: My Ring I holde deere as my finger, ’tis part of 135 
it. 
Tach. Youare a Friend, and there in the wifer: if you 137 


127. chufe] F., Rowe,+, Var. ’73, 135. 2¢| Ey. 

85, Ran. choofe F3;F, et cet. finger,] finger; Cap. Var. ’78 et 
128. whom] who Pope,+, Cap. Varr. CéE: 

Ran. Ktly. 137. a Friend] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 

Stands] stand Vaun. Johns. Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, 

129. thoufands] thoufand F3F,. Coll. i, Del. afraid Theob. Han. 
129, 153- Duckets| ducats Pope et seq. Warb. Cap. Sing. Dyce, Ktly, Coll. 
132. and I| f Pope,--, Var. 73- iii. Glo. Sta. Cam. afeard Coll. ii. 
134. wage] wager Cap. Ran. wage, (MS.). her friend Ingl. 

Vaughan. there in] therein Ff et seq. 


129. thousands] Another instance of an interpolated final s. See note on 
‘purchases,’ line 84, above. 

132. and I will bring] IncteBy: ‘And’ has no grammatical standing here. 
[A remark, to me, incomprehensible. It does not appear in the ed. by Ingleby’s 
son.—Ebp.] 

137. You are a Friend] THEoBAtp: I correct with certainty: afraid. What 
Iachimo says, in the close of his speech, determines this to have been the poet’s 
reading. ‘You have some religion in you, that you fear.’ [WARBURTON in his 
edition (after Theobald’s death) adopted this reading and this note without 
credit to Theobald. Its authorship has been given, erroneously as I believe, to 
Warburton.—Ep.]|—Jounson: ‘You are a friend’ to the lady, ‘and therein the 
wiser,’ as you will not expose her to hazard; and that you fear is a proof of your 
religious fidelity—Macone: A ‘friend’ often signified a lover. Iachimo might 
mean that Posthumus was wise in being only the lover of Imogen, and not having 
bound himself to her by the indissoluble ties of marriage. But unluckily Post- 
humus has already said he is not her friend, but her adorer: this therefore could 
not have been Iachimo’s meaning. . . . It would have been more ‘germane to the 
matter’ to have said, in allusion to the former words of Posthumus—you are nof 
a friend, 7. e., a lover, and therein the wiser; for all women are corruptible.— 
STEEVENS, by referring to his previous slimy interpretation of ‘friend,’ shows that 
he still retains his mind on it, and adds, ‘Though the reply of Iachimo may not 
have been warranted by the preceding words of Posthumus, it was certainly meant 
by the speaker as a provoking circumstance, a circumstance of incitation to the 
wager.’ [Whatever its interpretation, it led to his concluding word, ‘fear,’—a 
word no soldier like Posthumus can hear, when applied to himself, without growing 


INGA Th, BES Wall CYMBELINE 59 


buy Ladies flefh at a Million a Dram, you cannot pre- 138 
feure it from tainting; but I fee you haue fome Religion 


in you, that you feare. 140 
Pofthu. This is but a cuftome in your tongue : you 
beare a grauer purpofe I hope. 142 


138, 139. prefeure] Fy. 


white to the lips.|—Boswe.t asks, ‘Does it not mean—‘‘you show yourself a 
friend to your ring, which you have described as being so dear to you, by not risking 
it”’?’ etc., etc., etc.-—Dycr (Remarks, etc., p. 252): After carefully comparing it 
with the context, I feel perfectly satisfied that Warburton’s [?] correction, afraid, 
is the genuine reading. In the attempts to explain, ‘a friend,’ there is nothing but 
weakness.—WHITE (Shakespeare's Scholar, p. 456): ‘You are a friend’ has no 
meaning consistent with the context, . . . and besides, Iachimo would have said 
‘her friend.’ [In suggesting ‘her friend’ White anticipated Drtrus, who also con- 
jectured it, and INcLEBy, who adopted it in his text: his son followed Theobald. — 
Ep.]—Dyce, in his edition, repeats what he says in his Remarks; after the assertion 
that ‘a Friend’ has been very unsuccessfully defended, he adds ‘especially by 
Boswell. Staunton: We are not altogether satisfied with the emendation, 
afraid, but are unable to suggest any word more likely —TuisELtton: Iachimo 
means: ‘You are not so sure of your wife’s divinity after all; you are her protector; 
she is human, and you are the wiser not to risk losing your unprizeable diamond as 
well as your wife’s honour by relying on her divinity.’ The initial Capital [‘a 
Friend’] absolutely excludes the tenability of reading afraid—DowpeENn: If 
‘friend’ (z. e., lover) be right, Iachimo may mean: ‘After all you are a lover, not, as 
you professed, an ‘‘adorer’”’; you know that your goddess is human and you are 
therein the wiser.’ Iachimo’s words, ‘but I see you have some religion,’ would 
then refer sneeringly to the only part of adoration possessed by Posthumus— 
fear; he is wise, and the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. Or ‘you are a 
friend’ may mean ‘you have the advantage of me in being her intimate, and being 
so far the wiser, you will not risk your ring.’ [I am afraid that Theobald’s ‘afraid’ 
is too strong at this stage of the conversation. It is enough that Iachimo ends his 
sentence with the dread word ‘fear’; it is not necessary that he should begin with it. 
Nor is it necessary that he should say ‘You are a friend,’ sneeringly. He is too 
polished a gentleman for that. He might utter the words almost jocularly,— 
certainly assentingly,—and then follow them with the bitter sentence, as though 
he were interpreting Posthumus’s own conclusion, and putting his own sentiments 
into Posthumus’s mouth, ‘if you buy Ladies flesh at a Million the Dram,’ etc. 
Herein lies the sharp sting which demands all of Posthumus’s fast-waning self- 
control. It is almost more than he can bear, but as a last barrier of protection, he 
offers to Iachimo the excuse that Iachimo has spoken in jest, as his manner might 
indicate; but when Iachimo swears he is in earnest (possibly, his manner changes, 
the mask is discarded, and he shows his teeth), then the hot blood boils in Posthu- 
mus’s brain, and in a paroxysm of fury at Imogen’s being spoken of as ‘Ladies 
flesh’ he closes the wager instantly, almost exultingly, as though repelling an insult 
to Imogen’s unsullied purity. I hope this interpretation of the Folio and adher- 
ence to the time-honoured durior lectio is not too far-fetched.—Eb.] 


60 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. Vv. 


Tach. Jam the Mafter of my fpeeches,and would vn- 143 
der-go what’s fpoken,I fweare. 
Pofthu. WNill you? I fhall but lend my Diamond till 145 
your returne: let there be Couenants drawne between’s. 
My Miftris exceedes in goodneffe,the hugeneffe of your 
vnworthy thinking. I dare you to this match : heere’s my 
Ring. 
Phil. Iwill haue it no lay. 150 
Tach. By the Gods it is one: if I bring you no fuffi- 
cient teftimony that I haue enioy’d the deereft bodily 
part of your Miftris:my ten thoufand Duckets are yours, 
fo is your Diamond too: if I come off, and leaue her in 
fuch honour as you haue truft in; Shee your Iewell, this 155 
your Tewell, and my Gold are ;yours: prouided, I haue 


143, 144. wnder-go] undergo Fy. T51. one:] one. Pope,+, Coll. Dyce, 
146. between’s] Fi, Rowe, Dyce, Glo. Sta. Cam. 
Glo. Cam. between us Pope et cet. : no| not Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
148. thinking] things F3F,. thoughts 153. Mifiris:| mistress, Pope et seq. 
Pope, Han. 153,156. yours] your’s Coll. ii. 
match:| match. Coll. 155: -truft in;] trust in, Theob. et seq. 


143. I am the Master of my speeches] STEEVENS: That is, I know what I have 
_ said; I said no more than I meant. 

151-156. if I bring you no sufficient...and my Gold are yours] 
WARBURTON: This was a wager between two speakers. JIachimo declares the 
conditions of it; and Posthumus ‘embraces’ them; as well he might; for Iachimo 
mentions only that of the two conditions, which was favourable to Posthumus, 
namely, that if his wife preserved her honour he should win; concerning the other 
(in case she preserved it not) Iachimo, the accurate expounder of the wager, is silent. 
To make him talk more in character, for we find him sharp enough in the prosecution 
of his bet, we should strike out the negative and read the rest thus: ‘If I bring 
you sufficient testimony that, etc., my ten thousand ducats are MINE; so is your 
diamond too. If I come off, and leave her in such honour, etc., she, your jewel, 
etc., and my gold are yours.’ [Of course, WARBURTON’S text conformed to this 
emendation. HANMER adopted it, and so also did the cautious and conservative 
CaPELL.|—Jounson: I once thought this emendation right, but am now of opinion 
that Shakespeare intended that Iachimo, having gained his purpose, should 
designedly drop the invidious and offensive part of the wager, and, to flatter Post- 
humus, dwell long upon the more pleasing part of the representation. One condi- 
tion of the wager implies the other, and there is no need to mention both.—DycE 
(ed. ii.): In opposition to Johnson’s defence of the old text we surely may urge: 
Allowing that ‘one condition of a wager implies the other, there is no need to 
mention’ that one condition twice over in different words —V AUGHAN (p. 356) urges 
that the wager had been already substantially stated piecemeal, except with 
regard to the ring. ‘Besides,’ he says, shrewdly, ‘the formal statement of the 
wager is to be in a writing drawn up by counsel.’ But his shrewdness deserts him, I- 


INGER “Is WES Wn] CYMBELINE 61 


your commendation, for my more free entertainment. LS, 
Poft. J embrace thefe Conditions, let us haue Articles 

betwixt vs: onely thus farre you fhall anfwere, if you 

make your voyage vpon her, and giue me direétly to vn- _-160 

derftand, you haue preuayl’d, I am no further your Ene- 

my, fhee is not worth our debate. If fhee remaine vnfe- 

duc’d, you not making it appeare otherwife : for your ill 

opinion, and th’affault you haue made to her chaftity ,you 

fhall anfwer me with your Sword. 165 
Tach. Your hand, a Couenant: wee will haue thefe 

things fet downe by lawfull Counfell, and ftraight away 

for Britaine, leaft the Bargaine fhould catch colde, and 

fterue : I will fetch my Gold, and haue our two Wagers 


recorded. 170 
157. free] Om. Ff, Rowe, Pope. your vauntage Coll. (MS.). 
158. Conditions,| conditions; Pope. 164. th’affault] Ff, Rowe, +. 
159. anfwere,| Ff. answer. Johns. 166. hand,| Ff, Rowe,+. hand,— 
answer; Rowe et seq. Dyce. hand; Cap. et cet. 
160. make your voyage] make good 169. fterwe] F2, Sing. fiarve F;F, et cet. 


fear, when he goes on to say: ‘Posthumus has said to Iachimo, ‘‘ Here’s my ring,” 
and must accordingly have delivered the ring to him. Iachimo says here, again, 
“This your jewel,’ which implies that he had it on his hand.’ Had Vaughan 
looked ahead he would have found in II, iv, 137 that Posthumus says to Iachimo 
‘Here, take this too,’ meaning the ring in addition to the bracelet; and Philario says 
to him ‘take your Ring again,’ whereupon Posthumus exclaims to Iachimo ‘backe 
my Ring!’ etc., with other references which prove that Iachimo then received the 
ring for the first time.—CaPrLt discerned the meaning of the present exclamation, 
‘Here’s my ring,’ better than Vaughan; he represents Philario as the one who 
accepts the ring from Posthumus by inserting a stage-direction (which Vaughan 
might have seen duly recorded in the Cam. Ed.): ‘Putting it into Philario’s hand.’ 
—EbD. 

160. make your voyage vpon her] Dyce (Strictures, etc., p. 211), in 
criticising Collier’s MS. emendation (See Text. Notes), adduces ‘the following 
passage, which proves beyond all doubt that the old text is what the author wrote: 
“Tf he should intend this voyage towards my wife, I would turn her loose to him.”’’ 
—Mer. Wives, I, i, 108. 

166. a Couenant] RusuTon (Sk. a Lawyer, p. 23): The Covenant Shakespeare 
refers to is, according to the quaint description of Thomas Wood (Inst. of the Laws 
of England, ed. ii, p. 228), ‘agreements made by deed in writing, by the consent of 
two or more, to do, or not to do,’ and not the covenants (conventiones) which are 
clauses of agreement contained in a deed. 

169. sterue] SINGER: This has been inconsiderately changed to starve in all 
modern editions. [See Text. Notes.—Dycr: I do not agree with Mr Singer. 
They are one and the same word, whether it be used (as in the present passage) 
simply in the sense of perish, or in that of dying with hunger. The Folio in Cor., 
IV, i, has ‘Angers my Meate: I suppe upon myselfe, And so shall sterue with 


62 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act I, SC. vi. 


Poft. Agreed. 171 
French. Will this hold, thinke you. 
Phil. Signior Zachimo will not from it. 

Pray let vs follow ’em. Exeunt 174 


Scena Sexta. 


Enter Queene, Ladies,and Cornelius. 2 

171. Poft.] Host. Pope i. Scene vu. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 

[Exeunt Posth. and Iachimo. Scene v. Dyce, Glo. Coll. iii, Cam. 

Theob. Scene vi. Eccles. 

172. you.] you? Rowe et seq. Cymbeline’s Palace. Rowe...in Brit- 
173, 174. As prose Cap. et seq. ain. Pope 

174. em] Ff. et seq. 2. Cornelius] Cornelius with a Viol. 

1. Scena Sexta] Scene m. Rowe. Rowe. (Vial. Han. Phial. Johns.) 


Feeding’; in which passage Mr Singer prints ‘starve with feeding.’—INGLEBY 
takes ‘sterve’ in the sense of perishing through cold (which Dowden pronounces 
a common meaning), and in accordance with it excellently paraphrases the present 
passage: ‘lest the wager which was laid in the heat of the dispute should be de- 
clared off, when the disputants have had time for cool reflection. Compare Macb., 
IV, i, 134: “This deed Pll do before this purpose cool.’’’ 

171. Agreed] Mrs JAMESON (ii, 73): ‘The baseness and the folly of [Posthumus] 
have been justly censured; but Shakespeare, feeling that Posthumus needed every 
excuse, has managed the quarrelling scene between him and Iachimo with the 
most admirable skill. The manner in which his high spirit is gradually worked 
up by the taunts of this Italian fiend is contrived with far more probability and 
much less coarseness than in the original tale. In the end he is not the challenger, 
but the challenged; and could hardly (except on a moral principle, too much refined 
for those rude times) have declined the wager without compromising his own 
courage and his faith in the honour of Imogen.—BopEnstept (Sh.’s Frauen- 
charaktere, p. 38): In spite of every argument which may be adduced to exculpate 
Posthumus, we cannot blink the revolting character of the wager, and of a surety 
Shakespeare would not have it otherwise. He lets his hero commit a grievous error, 
and grievously does he let him expiate it. 

1. Ecctes: The period at which this Scene passes must be within that space of 
time which elapses between the arrival of Posthumus in Rome and the coming of 
Tachimo to the Court of Cymbeline in Britain.—Dantet (Sh. Soc. Trans., 1877-70, 
p. 241): An interval. Iachimo’s journey to Britain. With the present scene 
begins Day 3. Another possible arrangement in time would be to make it con- 
current with Day 2; or again, it might have a separate day assigned to it, to be 
placed in the interval marked for Iachimo’s journey to Britain. As Eccles has 
suggested. Its position as the early morning of Day 3, ‘whiles yet the dew’s on 
the ground’ is, however, quite consistent with [this present] scheme of time — 
[I suppose, in any analysis of the time, that the chief purpose is to calculate the 
number of days consumed by the action, and that the sequence of the days is of 
secondary importance. If, while Iachimo is on his journey, the time is filled up 


INCH 1, SEL Nps] CYMBELINE 63 
Qu. Whiles yet the dewe’s on ground, 3 

Gather thofe Flowers, 

Make hafte. Who ha’s the note of them ? 5 
Lady, 1 Madam. 
Queen. Difpatch. Exit Ladies. 


Now Mafter Doctor, haue you brought thofe drugges? 
Cor. Pleafeth your Highnes, I : here they are, Madam: 
But I befeech your Grace, without offence 10 


3, 4. One line Rowe et seq. 

3. Whiles] While Rowe,+. 

4. Flowers,| flowers. Rowe, Pope, 
Han. (flowers: Theob. Johns. et 
seq. 

5. hafte] haft F;. 

ha’s| F,. 

6. Lady.] Lad. Ff. Ladies. Rowe, 
Pope. 1 Lady. Theob. First Lady. 
Dyce. 

I\ I, Rowe et seq. 
7. Exit] Exeunt Ff. 
8. Now] Now, Theob. et seq. 


F3F,. 
9. I:] Ay; Rowe et seq. 
[Giving her some Papers. Cap. 
Presenting a small box. Theob. 

10. But I...offence] But, (I...offence,) 
Vaun. 

10, 11. without...aske] Ff. In paren- 
theses Cap. Varr. Mal. Rann, Steev. 
Varr. Knt, Sing. without...My...ask, 
Rowe. without...(my conscience bids 
me ask) Pope et cet. (subs.) 

10. offence] offence, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Coll. offence; Cap. Varr. Steev. 


drugges?| drugges: F.. drugs: Varr. 


with these scenes at Cymbeline’s court, the number of days of action is not less- 
ened. And, in fact, the very object of these scenes intervening between the wager 
in Rome and Iachimo’s interview with Imogen is to give an idea of the lapse of 
time. So that Eccles’s suggestion is good and does not clash with Daniel’s cal- 
culation that we are now entering on the third day. Daniel refers to Eccles’s 
computation.—Eb.] 

3. Whiles yet the dewe’s on ground] In Arderne’s Treatises (circa 1376, 
E. E. T. Soc., p. 92, 1910): A receipt is given for making ‘oile of violettes,’ which 
is to be made in the same manner as ‘Oile of roses,’ as follows: ‘Recipe roses that 
bene ful spred, and gredre hem erly whiles the dew lasteth.’—Eb. 

4. Flowers] ELLACOMBE (Season of Sh.’s Plays, New Sh. Soc., Trans., 1880-86, 
p. 74): The Queen and her ladies gather flowers, which at the end of the Scene we 
are tcld are violets, cowslips, and primroses, the flowers of Spring. In the fourth 
Act, Lucius gives orders to ‘find out the prettiest daisied plot we can,’ to make a 
grave for Cloten; but daisies are too long in flower to let us attempt to fix a date 
by them. ... [P. 76.] Even in such common matters as the names of the 
most familiar every-day plants Shakespeare does not write in a careless, haphazard 
way, naming the plant that comes uppermost in his thoughts, but they are all 
named in the most careful and correct manner, exactly fitting into the scenes in 
which they are placed, and so giving to each passage a brightness and a reality 
which would be entirely wanting if the plants were set down in the ignorance of 
guesswork. Shakespeare knew the plants well; and though his knowledge is 
never paraded, by its very thoroughness it cannot be hid. 

5. Who ha’s] I suppose that the apostrophe marks the omission of an imaginary 
e.—ED. 


64 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. vi. 


(My Confcience bids me aske ) wherefore you haue II 
Commanded of me thefe moft poyfonous Compounds, 
Which are the moouers of a languifhing death : 
But though flow, deadly. 
Qu. 1 wonder, Doctor, 15 
Thou ask’{t me fuch a Queftion: Haue I not bene 
Thy Pupill long? Haft thou not learn’d me how 
To make Perfumes? Diftill? Preferue ? Yea, fo, 
That our great King himfelfe doth woo me oft 
For my Confections ? Hauing thus farre proceeded, 20 
(Vnleffe thou think’{t me diuellith) is’t not meete 
That I did amplifie my iudgement in 


Other Conclufions? I will try the forces 23 
11. aske) wherefore] ask wherefore 14. But though| But, though Theob. 

Vaun. et seq. And, though or Though but 
12. poyfonous] pois’nous Pope,+, Anon. ap. Cam. 

Cap. 15. I wonder] I do wonder Theob. 
12-14. Compounds,...death:...deadly.] Han. Warb. Cap. Steev. 

Ff, Rowe. compounds?...death;. deadly. Doctor| doctor, that Ktly conj. 

Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. compounds 2r. diuellifh| dev lish Pope,+, Cap. 

...death;...deadly. Johns. compounds, * is’t] ist F2. 1s it F3F,, Rowe. 

...death,...deadly. Cam. compounds,... _ 23. try] prove Vaun. 


death;...deadly? Cap. et cet. 


13. languishing] For the sake of scansion WALKER (Vers., p. 66), and ABBOTT 
(§ 467) after him, would pronounce this word as a disyllable, /ang’shing. Can any 
lover of Shakespeare’s musical language hear this without ang’sh?—Ep. 

14,15. But... Doctor] VAUGHAN (p. 358) presents us with the following al- 
ternative ‘articulation and scansion’ of this line: ‘But though slow, dea daly. 
I won der, doctor’; or this: ‘But though slow dead ly I ooun der, doctor.’ 
If, hereafter, from these pages all references to Vaughan’s ‘articulation and scan- 
sion,’ be omitted, I think it will be pardoned; but if not, I will bare my back for 
punishment without flinching.—Eb. 

15. I wonder] It is hardly conceivable that StrEvENS should have been ig- 
norant that four editions before his own, beginning with THEoBaxp, had printed 
‘I do wonder’; and yet he deliberately said, ‘I have supplied the verb do for the 
sake of the measure.—WALKER (Vers., p. 24) also suggested do; but for him there 
is some excuse; his library is known to have been scanty.—Ep. 

17. learn’d me] Examples of ‘learn’ thus used, in the sense of teach, are given 
in V. E. D. (s. v., I. 4. c.) in every century from 1200 to Shakespeare’s time. 
This venerable usage is still happily preserved in this country.—Ep. 

20. Confections] DowbEN: That is, compounded drugs, as in V, v, 289. 

21, 22. is’t not meete That I did] ApsBotr (§ 370): Here, as in ‘It is 
time he came,’ the action is regarded as one ‘meet’ in time past, as well as 
in the future. . 

23. Other Conclusions] JoHNson: Other experiments. ‘I commend,’ says 
Walton, ‘an angler that trieth conclusions, and improves his art.’ 


ACT I, SC. vi.] CYMBELINE 65 


Of thefe thy Compounds, on fuch Creatures as 
We count not worth the hanging (but none humane) 25 
To try the vigour of them, and apply 
Allayments to their A&, and by them gather 
Their feuerall vertues, and effects. 
Cor. Your Highneffe 
Shall from this praétife, but make hard your heart: 30 
Befides, the feeing thefe effects will be 
Both noyfome, and infectious. 
Qu. O content thee. 


Enter Pifanio. 34 
25. humane] human Rowe et seq. 28. feuerall] sev’ral Pope,+. 
26. try] test Walker (Crit., i, 288), 29. Your] you Var. ’85 (misprint). 
Huds. 34. Enter...] In line 27 Dyce. 


27. by them] Ecctres: These words evidently refer to ‘allayments,’ but it is 
by no means clear whether the ‘virtues’ and ‘effects,’ in the next line, bear a 
reference to the ‘compounds’ or to the ‘allayments’; if to the latter, the 
sense would be improved by substituting from for ‘by. —Cratc: Perhaps Shake- 
speare wrote Allayment, ‘then’ in the same line referring to ‘acts.—DOWDEN: 
Does not this mean by the creatures experimented on? For ‘act’ meaning 
action, compare Oth., III, iii, 328. [It seems to me that ‘by them’ refers to 
her ‘conclusions,’ her experiments; not to the details as to the strength of her 
confections, or their antidotes, or the corpus vile on which the poison was tried— 
only by these ‘conclusions’ can she gather the several virtues and effects of her 
drugs.—Ep.] 

30. Shall... but make hard your heart] JoHnson: There is in this passage 
nothing that much requires a note, yet I cannot forbear to push it forward into 
observation. The thought would probably have been more amplified, had our 
author lived to be shocked with such experiments as have been published in later 
times by a race of men who have practised tortures without pity, and related them 
without shame, and are yet suffered to erect their heads among human beings. 
Cape saxa manu, cape robora, pastor. [Virgil, Georg., iii, 420.|—Knicut: We 
are by no means sure that Shakespeare meant to apply a sweeping denun- 
ciation to such experiments upon the power of particular medicines. There can 
be no doubt that the medical art, being wholly tentative, it becomes in some 
cases a positive duty of a scientific experimenter to inflict pain upon an inferior 
animal for the ultimate purpose of assuaging pain or curing disease. It is the 
useless repetition of such experiments in the lecture-room which is ‘noisome and 
infectious.’ 

32. noysome and infectious] VAUGHAN (p. 361): ‘Noisome’ may apply only 
to the direct effect upon her own person of the poisons themselves employed by her; 
while ‘infectious’ applies only to the indirect effects resulting to her person in the 
way of contagion by close communication with the creatures suffering directly from 
them. 


66 THE TRAGEDIEROL [ACT I, SC. vi. 


Heere comes a flattering Rafcall, vpon him 35 


Will I firft worke : Hee’s for his Mafter, 
And enemy to my Sonne. How now /i/anio? 
Doétor, your feruice for this time is ended, 
Take your owne way. 
Cor. I do fufpeét you, Madam, 40 
But you fhall do no harme. 
Qu. Hearke thee,a word. 


Cor. J do not like her. She doth thinke fhe ha’s 43 
35. [Aside. Rowe et seq. An enemy Anon. (ap. Cam. i.), Ingl. 
36, 37. Will...And] One line Ktly. Vaun. 

36. worke] let them work Cap. Ecc. 4o. [Aside. Rowe. 
for] factor for Walker, Huds. 42. [To Pisanio. Rowe. to Pis, draw- 
36, 37. Mafter, And enemy] Master, ing him aside. Cap. 
An enemy Rowe ii. Master’s sake An thee, a] thee a Ff. 
enemy Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 43. Cor. I do] Cor. [Solus.] I do 


master, and Enemy Ktly. master, and Johns. Cor. Aside. Cap. 


35, 36. vpon him Will I first worke: Hee’s for his Master] CAPELL (p. 105) 
is severe on his four predecessors, and asserts that their addition of a solitary letter 
and a solitary word is a ‘patch-work that does them no credit,’ and then proceeds 
to insert two words of his own: ‘upon him Will I first let them work’; whereof I 
cannot comprehend the special need, albeit Capell himself says that they ‘are as 
necessary to the sense as the measure,’ because, ‘though this queen does after- 
wards tamper with Pisanio, she knew him too well to think she should do any good 
on him; determines as first to get rid of him by the drugs which she has now in her 
hand, and is only intent on the method, without thinking at all about working on 
him in their sense of the word.’ Simple-hearted Ecctes adopted Capell’s emenda- 
tion in his text, and at the same time confessed in a note that he could not perceive 
its superiority in meaning, over the emendation of the four preceding editors, or 
even over the original text.—WALKER (Crit., ii, 256) proposes to read, ‘He’s 
factor for his Master,’ and justifies the use of factor by quoting the Queen’s words 
later on, line 89, where she speaks of Pisanio as ‘the agent for his master.’ And 
he might have quoted Iachimo in the next scene, line 219, where he says 
that he ‘is Factor for the rest.’ Walker adds that ‘Factor in this sense 
is common in Shakespeare’; it occurs, according to Bartlett’s Concordance, six 
times, but if it occurred sixty times, its interpolation here is temerarious, to 
say the mildest.—DanreL (p. 84) ingeniously modifies the punctuation, and 
turns ‘And’ into An,’ a very venial change: ‘He’s, for his master, An enemy 
to my son.’—Ep. 

43-54. I do not like her, etc.] Jounson: This soliloquy is very inartificial. 
The speaker is under no strong pressure of thought; he is neither resolving, repent- 
ing, suspecting, nor deliberating, and yet makes a long speech to tell himself what 
himself knows. [But the audience does not. I think it not unlikely that, in- 
fluenced by this note of Dr Johnson, Garrick omitted this soliloquy in the stage 
performance. For which he is thus criticised by REED (Biog. Dram., iii, 149) in 


speaking of Garrick’s Version: ‘A material fault occurs in it, By omitting the 


ACT I, SC. vi. ] CYMBELINE 67 


Strange ling’ring poyfons: I do know her {pirit, 

And will not truft one of her malice, with 45 
A drugge of fuch damn’d Nature. Thofe the ha’s, 

Will ftupefie and dull the Senfe a-while, 

Which firft (perchance) fhee’l proue on Cats and Dogs, 

Then afterward vp higher : but there is 


No danger in what fhew of death it makes, 50 
More then the locking vp the Spirits a time, 
To be more frefh, reuiuing. She is fool’d 52 
44. ling’ring] lingering Var. ’21 et Cap. Var. ’73, 78. Ran. Steev. awhile 
seq. ; Var. ’85 et seq. 
45. malice, with] malice with Pope et 48. (perchance)| perchance Rowe. 
seq. 49. afterward] afterwards Theob. 
46. Thofe] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, Warb. Johns. 
Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. That 51. locking vp] locking-up Dyce, Glo. 
Han. Those, Theob. et cet. Huds. 


47. a-while] a while Ff, Rowe,+, 


physician’s soliloquy, we are utterly unprepared for the recovery of Imogen after 
she had swallowed the potion prepared by her stepmother. To save appearances, 
this speech was inserted in the printed copy, but was never uttered on the stage. 
Useless as it might be to those who are intimately acquainted with the piece, it is 
still necessary toward the information of a common audience’—Ep.]|—STEEVENS: 
This soliloquy is yet necessary to prevent that uneasiness which would naturally 
arise in the mind of an audience on recollection that the Queen had mischievous 
ingredients in her possession, unless they were undeceived as to the quality of them; 
and it is no less useful to prepare us for the return of Imogen to life—Hupson 
(p. 68): This speech might be cited as proving that Shakespeare preferred expec- 
tation to surprise as an element of dramatic interest. The speech seems fairly open 
to some such reproof [as Johnson’s]. But it prepares, and was doubtless meant to 
prepare, us for the seeming death and revival of Imogen; and without some such 
preparation those incidents would be open to much graver censure of clap-trap. 
The expectancy thus started is at all events better than attempting to spring a 
vulgar sensation on the audience.—Wvyatr: If Shakespeare had not felt some- 
thing akin to contempt for vulgar melodramatic effects, he would not have 
given us this premonition of the result of Imogen’s swallowing the Queen’s ‘con- 
fection.’ [An observation which DowbDrEN pronounces ‘just.’ See note on line 
ror, below.] 

50. what shew of death it makes] VAUGHAN (p. 362): Shakespeare intends 
“it? to refer to the act of ‘dulling and stupefying the sense,’ and not any object 
mentioned [This last clause, I think, is not quite clear—DELIus says that ‘it,’ by 
an inexact construction, refers to ‘those she has.’ This reference Vaughan pro- 
nounces ‘if natural, still wrong.’ I cannot so see it; ‘show of death’ is only a 
paraphrase of ‘stupefying and dulling the sense,’ and is the object of ‘makes.’ 
To me, the interpretation of Delius is just.—Ep.] 

sr. a time] Matone: All the modern editions, ‘for a time.’ [I can find no 
edition wherein ‘for a time’ is to be found. Apparently the Cam. Ed. were equally 
unsuccessful; they record it as ‘quoted by Malone.’—Ep.] 


68 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 4, S€. 31. 


With a moft falfe effect : and I, the truer, 53 
So to be falfe with her. 

Qu. No further feruice, Doctor, 55 
Vntill I fend for thee. 

Cor. I humbly take my leaue. Exit 


Qu. Weepes fhe ftill(faift thou?) 
Doft thou thinke in time 
She will not quench, and let inftructions enter 60 
Where Folly now poffeffes? Do thou worke : 
When thou fhalt bring me word fhe loues my Sonne, 
Ile tell thee on the inftant, thou art then 
As great as is thy Mafter : Greater, for 
His Fortunes all lye fpeechleffe, and his name 65 
Is at laft gaspe. Returne he cannot, nor 
Continue where he is : To fhift his being, 
Is-to exchange one mifery with another, 
And euery day that comes, comes to decay 


A dayes worke in him. What fhalt thou expect 70 
53. I, the] I the Rowe et seq. 60. inftructions| instruction Coll. (Mo- 
54. with her] Om. Steev. conj. novol.) 

55. further] farther Coll. “64. Greater] Ff, Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
55, 56. Doctor...for thee] One line greater; Rowe et cet. 

Han. (omitting for thee). 67. he is] is Cap. (corrected in 
57. humbly] Om. Han. Errata). 

58, 59. One line Rowe et seq. 68. another,| Ff, Rowe, Coll. Glo. 
58. faift] sayest Rowe, Pope. Cam. another; Pope et cet. 
60. quench,| quench; Cap. Varr. Mal. 70. expect] expect, Theob. Warb. et 


Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt. quench Cam. seq. 
quinch? Vaun. 


53. a most false effect] As to the nature of this drug, see notes on IV, 
ii, 40. 

54. to be] That is, for being. For many other examples of the ‘infinitive, 
indefinitely used,’ see, if need be, ABBort, § 356. 

60. quench] Crarcie (NV. E. D., s. v., I. intr. | c. of a person): To cool down. 
[The solitary example. It occurs ‘with a personal object’ where Iachimo (V, v, 
230) says, ‘Being thus quench’d Of hope, not longing,’ and is noted by Craigie 
under 3 transf. } c. 

66. at last] Possibly a case of the absorption of the, ‘at’ last —Ep. 

67. shift his being] Jounson: To change his abode. [Posthumus’s grief 
lay deeper than the care for his lodging; coelwm non animum, etc.; although, possibly, 
the Queen did not suppose such to be the case. Johnson, therefore, may be right. 
INGLEBy, however, thinks that ‘being’ can hardly be abode here.—Ep.] 

69, 70. comes to decay A dayes worke in him] Eccies: The most natural 


construction is that of making ‘decay’ a noun, and ‘a day’s work’ the nominative 
to the verb ‘comes.’ 


ACT 1, SC. Vi. CYMBELINE 


To be depender on a thing that leanes ? 71 
Who cannot be new built, nor ha’s no Friends 

So much, as but to prop him ? Thou tak’ft vp 

Thou know’ft not what : But take it for thy labour, 

It is a thing I made, which hath the King 75 
Fiue times redeem’d from death. I do not know 

What is more Cordiall. Nay, I prythee take it, 

It is an earneft of a farther good 

That I meane to thee. Tell thy Miftris how 


The cafe ftands with her : doo’t, as from thy felfe; 80 
Thinke what a chance thou changeft on, but thinke 
Thou haft thy Miftris ftill, to boote,my Sonne, 82 


71. depender on| depender of FyF,. 
71-73. leanes?...prop him?) leans,... 


prop him? Han. Knt, Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. (subs.) Jleans?...him. Coll. 
Ktly. 


72. new built] new-built Coll. 

nor| and Pope,+. 

72, 73. Friends So much,] friends, So 
much Rowe et seq. 

73. [Pisanio looking on the Viol. 
Rowe. ...takes up the phiai. Pope. 
Dropping some of the Papers. Cap. 
The Queen drops a phial, Pisanio takes 
it up. Var. 778. The Queen drops a 
box... Mal. 

tak’ ft] takest Rowe. 

75. made] make F;F,, Rowe,+, Cap. 

Varr. Rann. 


76. death.| death; Rowe et seq. 
77. Nay,| Nay Rowe, Pope. 
prythee| prethee Ff, Rowe. pr’y- 
thee or prithee Pope et cet. 

78. farther] Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. Coll. 
Sing. further Varr. et cet. 

81. chance thou changeft on,| chance 
thou chancest on, Rowe,+, Cap. Coll. 
thou chancest on; Theob. Han. Johns. 
Wh. i, Ktly. 

81, 82. thinke Thou] think;—Thou 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. think— 
Thou Var. 73. think!—Thou Dowden 
conj. ; 

82. full,| Ff, Knt, Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
still; Rowe et cet. 

to] too FF. 


71. a thing that leanes] JoHNSoN: That inclines towards its fall. [Or may it not 
mean one who leans on another for support, ‘To be a depender on one who is 
himself a depender on others’?—Eb.] 

78. It is an earnest of a farther good] Eccies finds probability grossly 
violated in this scene, and that a purposeful person would not have taken such a 
roundabout method of effecting her object; while Pisanio was in health, he needed 
no such medicine, and in sickness her description was too vague to lead him to use 
it. Besides he might administer it to others, and thereby cause a disaster more 
widely spread than even the queen could composedly contemplate. “This is one 
of the passages,’ he concludes, ‘wherein Shakespeare appears to have been least 
attentive to verisimilitude.’ 

81. what a chance thou changest on] THEOBALD: I imagine the Poet 
wrote, ‘what a change then chancest on,’ i. e., if you will fall into my measures, do 
but think how you will chance to change your fortunes for the better, in the con- 
sequences that will attend your compliance-—HeEatu (p. 475): The sense is, 
Think on what a chance, on how promising a prospect of advancing thy fortunes, 
thou changest thy present attachment. [To the same effect, STEEVENS. |— 


70 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. vi. 


Who fhall take notice of thee. Ile moue the King 83 
To any fhape of thy Preferment, fuch 
As thouw'lt defire : and then my felfe, I cheefely, 85 


That fet thee on to this defert, am bound 

To loade thy merit richly. Call my women. xt Pia. 
Thinke on my words. A flye, and conftant knaue, 

Not to be fhak’d : the Agent for his Mafter, 


And the Remembrancer of her, to hold gO 
The hand-faft to her Lord. I haue giuen him that, 
Which if he take, fhall quite vnpeople her 92 
83. thee.] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. thee, Cap. ; 
Cap. thee: Mal. et cet. 88. lye] shy Cap. conj. 
Ile moue] move Cap. Ran. gt. hand-fafi] Var. ’21, Dyce, Glo. 
85. defire] deserve Theob. conj. (Nich- Huds. Cam. handfast Coll. i, Sta. 
oll’s Illust., ii, 629.) Ktly. hand fast Ff, Rowe et cet. 
I cheefely,| I chiefly Rowe, Pope, I haue| I’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii, 
Theob. Warb. aye, chiefly, Vaun. Huds. 
87. Exit...] After words. line 88, giuen] giv’n Pope,+. 


CAPELL adopted Rowe’s chancest, and justified it by urging that ‘the very first 
thing Pisanio is to consider of is no change.—Matone: A line in the Rape of 
Lucrece adds some [Dyce, in quoting Malone, here, after ‘some,’ interpolates 
‘{great]’ in brackets] support to the reading, ‘thou chancest on,’ which is much in 
Shakespeare’s manner: ‘Let there bechance him pitiful mis-chances.’—[r. 976. 
Yet Malone printed ‘changest’ in his text.|—STAUNTON: We should prefer reading, 
“Think what a chance! thou changest one; but think,’ etc. You only change the 
service of your master for mine; retain your old mistress, and have my son for 
friend beside. Chance, it must be remembered, in old language meant fortune, 
luck, etc. Staunton (Atheneum, 14 June, 1873) suggested still another emenda- 
tion: ‘The allusion, I apprehend, is to hunting. In the language of our old books 
on field sports, when a hound hunts backward the way the chase has come, he 
hunts counter; when he hunts any other chase than that he first undertook, he 
hunts change. We should read, “Think what a chase thou changest on,” etc., or, 
Think what a chase thou changest: oh, but think!’ Here Staunton gives several 
examples where chase is used.—DaniEt (p. 84): The queen is urging Pisanio to 
abandon the cause of Posthumus, and to serve that of her son Cloten. She has 
already asked him what he can expect by being a ‘depender on a thing that leans.’ 
Read, ‘Think what a chance thou hangest on.’ 

90. Remembrancer] IncLeBy: A law-term. ‘There used to be three officers of 
State, so-called. The word occurs in only one other place in Shakespeare: Macb., 
III, iv, 37 [where it is applied to Lady Macbeth]. 

99, 91. to hold The hand-fast to her Lord] Dyce (Remarks, p. 252): [Collier 
and Knight read hand fast] and most erroneously. Read handfast, z. e., the 
contract. Compare Beau. & Fletcher: ‘Should leave the handfast that he had of 
grace,’ —The Woman Hater, III, i. ‘I knit this holy handfast.’—Wit at Several 
Weapons, v, i. (where the modern editors give wrongly, with the old Eds., ‘hand 
fast.’)—WuiTE: That is, the betrothal, the marriage to her lord. 


ACTA IESG RVAc)| CYMBELINE 71 


Of Leidgers for her Sweete : and which, fhe after 93 
Except fhe bend her humor, fhall be affur’d 
To tafte of too. 95 


Enter Pifanio,and Ladies. 
So, fo : Well done, well done: 


The Violets, Cowflippes, and the Prime-Rofes 98 
03. Leidgers| leigers Han. Johns. which, she after, Theob. et cet. 

Varr. Mal. Steev. ledgers Cap. 98. Prime-Rofes] Prim-Roses Rowe, 

liegers Var. ’03 et seq. Pope, Theob. Han. (subs.) primroses 


which, fhe after| which fhe after, Warb. 
Ff, Rowe, Pope, Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 


93. Of Leidgers for her Sweete] Coriier (ed. i.): The meaning is, that it 
will deprive Imogen of the ‘lieger’ or ambassador, residing with her, to represent 
and maintain the interest of his master. Possibly ‘sweet,’ as the Rev. Mr Barry 
proposes, ought to be swite—Dycr (Remarks, p. 252), after quoting this last 
sentence of Collier’s note, observes: ‘Surely, though such a villainous conjecture 
as this might be sent to Mr Collier, he was not bound to record it.—CoLLier, in 
his ed. ii, undismayed by Dyce’s stigmatising swite as a ‘villainous conjecture,’ 
tells us that site is the reading of his MS. Corrector, ‘but the old text may be 
received without any change. —StTauntTon: This apparently signifies ambassadors 
to her lover.—Scumipt (Levw., s. v., sweet, adj.) gives a long array of examples where 
‘sweet’ is used substantively, as here, and for a lover or mistress. 

93. Leidgers] Jounson: A /zeger ambassador is one that resides in a foreign court 
to promote his master’s interest. 

98. Violets] ELLAcoMBE (p. 246): In all the passages in which Shakespeare names 
the Violet, he alludes to the purple sweet-scented violet, of which he was evidently 
very fond, and which is said to be very abundant in the neighborhood of Stratford- 
on-Avon. For all the eighteen passages [which Ellacombe quotes] tell of some 
point of beauty or sweetness that attracted him. And so it is with all the poets 
from Chaucer downwards. . . . Violets, like Primroses, must always have had 
their joyful associations as coming to tell that winter is passing away and brighter 
days are near. Yet it is curious to note how, like Primroses also, they have been 
ever associated with death, especially with the death of the young. 

98. Cowslippes] See II, ii, 45. 

98. Prime-Roses] The etymological history of the name of this plant, coupled 
with the various plants to which it has been applied, is hardly germane to a com- 
mentary in Shakespeare, and is, moreover, too voluminous for these pages. See 
the New English Dictionary or Ellacombe, p. 175. The latter, albeit that his 
book is devoted to the Plant-Love of Shakespeare, acknowledges that the ‘full 
history of the name is too long’ to be given by him. An extract from Dr Prior 
will, I think, amply supply all present needs: ‘Primrose from Pryme rolles is the 
name it bears in old books and MSS. The Grete Herball, ch. cccl, says, “It is 
called Pryme Rolles of pryme tyme, because it beareth the first floure in pryme 
tyme.” This little common plant affords a most extraordinary example of blunder- 
ing. Primerole is an abbreviation of French primeverole, Italian primaverola, dim. 
of prima vera, from flor di prima vera, the first spring flower. Primerole, as an 


72 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT I, SC. vi. 


Beare to my Cloffet : Fare thee well, //anio. 

Thinke on my words. Exit Qu. and Ladies. 100 
Pifa. And fhall do: 

But when to my good Lord, I proue vntrue, 

Ile choake my felfe : there’s all Ie do for you. Exit. 103 


ror. And fall do] I shall do so Han. And so shall do Ktly. [Aside.] Madam, I 
have and shall do. Ingl. conj. Marry, and shall do; or Marry, and shall do so. Vaun. 


outlandish, unintelligible word was soon familiarised into prime rolles, and this into 
primrose. This is explained in popular works as meaning the first rose of Spring, a 
name that would never have been given to a plant that in form and colour is so 
unlike a rose. But the rightful claimant of it, strange to say, is the daisy, which 
in the south of Europe is a common and conspicuous flower in early Spring, while 
the primrose is an extremely rare one, and it is the daisy that bears the name in all 
the old books.’ —The CowpEN-CLARKES: Shakespeare makes the miscreant queen 
use these beauteous and innocent products of the earth as mere cloaks to her 
wickedness; she concocts ‘perfumes’ and ‘confections’ from them, as a veil to the 
drugs’ and ‘poisonous compounds’ which she collects for the fellest purposes. 
It enhances the effect of her guilt, in thus forcing these sweet blossoms to become 
accomplices in her vile schemes; and we loathe her the more for her surrounding her 
unhallowed self with their loveliness. [Thus far these observations are, I think, 
eminently ingenious and enlightening, but when the editors proceed to contrast 
the queen and Friar Laurence in Rom. & Jul., me, at least, they do not take with 
them. Knight called attention to the same contrast; I did not insert his note 
because I could not perceive any ground for a comparison; too deep is the im- 
pression made by the profound truth expressed by— that ‘you cannot compare a 
pound of butter and four o’clock.’—Eb.] 

tor. And shall do] DowpEn: I conjecture that the Queen’s speech ended 
with ‘Think on my words, Pisanio,’ and that the printer finding ‘Pisanio’ above 
the speech that followed, took this for the speech-heading, which he found 
repeated before the word ‘And,’ whence it was omitted after ‘words.’ Com- 
pare the often repeated ‘Hubert’ in the temptation by King John (II, iii). 
Note that Pisanio has not uttered a word to the temptress. [None that we 
hear—but he talks with her while Cornelius is holding his soliloquy, for when 
the latter goes out, the Queen addresses Pisanio with ‘Weeps she still (saist 
thou?).’ In the PorTER-CLaRKE edition is the following keen-witted remark: 
‘This “saist thou” is an intimation that Pisanio had given in action, at a part 
of the stage removed from the Doctor’s place of standing, a semblance of a 
report at some length as to Imogen. This stage-business went on while the 
Doctor, ruminating, speaks the lines that “are needed to show the audience the 
real nature of the drugges he has just given the malicious Queen.”’ This then is the 
reason for Cornelius’s long speech (lines 43 to 54). We must see Imogen herself 
and hear her sorrow from her own lips, we must not have it from report, and yet it 
is necessary that the Queen should be embittered by the knowledge that she has 
not yet broken Imogen to her will. This knowledge is conveyed to her aside, while 
we are listening to Cornelius and while Dr Johnson is wondering why Cornelius is 
talking.—Ep.] 


102, 103. But when... for you] Did William Shakespeare write this dog- 
gerelP—Eb. 


ACD Ty SC avis 


CYMBELINE 73 


Scena Septima. 


Linter Imogen alone. 
fmo. A Father cruell, and a Stepdame falfe, 
A Foolifh Suitor to a Wedded-Lady, 
That hath her Husband banifh’d : O, that Husband, 5 
My fupreame Crowne of griefe, and thofe repeated 


1. Scena] Scene continued. Rowe. 
Scene vit. Pope,+. Act II, sc. 1. 
Eccles. Scene vi. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
Wh. ii. 

Scene changes to Imogen’s Apart- 


3. falfe,] Ff, Rowe,+, Ktly. false; 
Cap. et cet. 

4. Wedded-Lady| Wedded Lady Ff 
et cet. 

5. banifl’d:] banish’d— Rowe,+. 


ments. Theob Another Room in the Husband,| Fi, Cap. husband! 
same. Cap. Rowe et cet. 

2. alone.] Om. Cap. et seq. (except 6. griefe,| Fi, Rowe,+. grief; Cap. 
Cam.). Coll. ii. grief! Var. ’73 et cet. 


1. Scena Septima] Eccres: The space of time between this scene and the pre- 
ceding is undetermined; between the fifth, however, and the present, such a period 
must be supposed wherein Iachimo might pass from Rome to Britain. The time 
seems to be evening; in the next scene one of the lords asks Cloten: ‘Did you hear 
of a stranger that’s come to court tonight?’ 

3-11. A Father cruell...comfort] IncrEBy: These are either rough 
notes for a speech, or the remains of a speech cut down for representation. If 
the former, we must regard this soliloquy as the reflection of Imogen’s thoughts, 
rather than their articulate expression. The abrupt transition to the splendour of 
Tachimo’s speeches is exceedingly striking. [It is not easy to comprehend why 
‘rough notes for a speech’ should be set down in faultless rhythm, nor why 
those lines are the remnant of a speech. To have expatiated on any of these 
topics would have been needless repetition, a mere rehearsal of what already we 
fully know. It is enough dramatically befitting here to recall to us Imogen’s 
utterly woe-begone and friendless state, and thereby frame our minds to elevate 
her to a yet higher station in our admiring love, when, in the approaching trial of 
her faith in Posthumus, we see her grandly true, and that this abysmal desolation of 
hers, which might well enough lead her to even lower depths of despair, serves only 
to quicken her love for her wedded husband into a stronger life—Ep.] 

6. My supreame Crowne of griefe] Matone: Thus in King Lear, “This 
would have seem’d a period To such as love not sorrow; but another, To amplify 
too much, would make much more, And top extremity.’ [V, ili, 206.]—Coriolanus, 
‘the spire and top of praises’ [I, ix, 24]. Again, more appositely, in Tro. & Cress. 
‘Make Cressid’s name the very crown of falsehood.’ [IV, ii, 106.]—Again, in 
Wint. Tale, ‘The crown and comfort of my life, your favour, I do give lost.’ 
[III, ii, 95.}--Inctesy: That is, the greatest and crowning sorrow of that grief, 
whose lesser tributaries are the three just mentioned: cruelty, falsity, and folly, 
equivalent to ‘those repeated vexations of it.’ 


74 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acr 1, Sc. vil. 


Vexations of it. Had I bin Theefe-ftolne, 7 
As my two Brothers, happy : but moft miferable 

Is the defires that’s glorious. Bleffed be thofe 

How meane fo ere, that haue their honeft wills, 10 
Which feafons comfort. Who may this be? Fye. 


7. of it.] Ff, Coll. ii. of it— Rowe,+. Pi eticet: 


to it. Herr. of it! Cap. et cet. 9. Bleffed] Bless’d or blest Pope,+, 
bin] F.F;. Var. ’73, Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
8. happy:] Fi, Rowe, Cap. happy! 11. feafons comfort] comfort seasons 
Pope et cet. Kinnear. 
g. defires] Ktly. degree Han. defire Fye.] Fie! Rowe et seq. 


6, 7. and those repeated Vexations of it.] STAUNTON’S text reads: ‘and 
those, repeated Vexations of it,’ with an enigmatical comma after ‘those.’ How 
Staunton caught it, found it, or came by it, or whereof it is born I am yet to learn. 
It is certainly found nowhere else. But with it before him, it is no wonder that 
he says plaintively: ‘Something must be wrong in this place,’ and instead of 
detecting the perfidious comma he finds fault with the rhythm which, though it 
is none of the smoothest, is good enough. ‘No one,’ he goes on to say, ‘with an ear 
for Shakespeare’s rhythm can ever believe he wrote the passage as it stands.’ 
As long as Staunton’s text remains unchanged, Peace will not her wheaten garland 
wear nor stand that comma.—Ep.—VAUGHAN (p. 366): ‘Repeated’ in Shake- 
speare commonly does not, as with us now, mean ‘recurring again and again,’ 
but ‘recited’ or ‘mentioned aloud.’ The phrase here signifies, therefore, ‘those 
accessory aggravations of that supreme misery which I have now enumerated, that 
is, the step-dame, the cruel father, the absurd and importunate suitor.’ 

7. Theefe-stolne] This forcible-feeble, tautological expression does not sound 
like Shakespeare at his best.—Eb. 

8, 9. most miserable Is the desires that’s glorious] WARBURTON: She 
had been happy had she been stolen as her brothers were, but now she is miserable, 
as all those are who have a sense of worth and honour superior to the vulgar, which 
occasions them infinite vexations from the envious and worthless part of mankind. 
Had she not so refined a taste as to be content only with the superior merit of 
Posthumus, but could have taken up with Cloten, she might have escaped these 
persecutions. This elegance of taste, which always discovers an excellence and 
chooses it, she calls with great sublimity of expression, ‘The desire that’s glorious.’ 
—VAUGHAN (p. 367) defines ‘the desire that’s glorious’ as ‘the ungratified want and 
longing of a person in a most exalted position. The abstract for the concrete. 
“Desire” means “a wish balked” and “ unsatisfied.” We have below “the cloy’d 
will, that satiate but unsatisfied desire,” as we have here contrasted “honest wills,” 
&c. and “desire that’s glorious.”’ [Vaughan must have been betrayed into this 
extraordinary meaning of ‘desire’ by his memory of the ‘Quis desiderio sit pudor 
aut modus Tam cari capitis’ of Horace, where ‘desiderio’ does mean a desire, a 
yearning for that which is lost. But there is a world-wide difference between this 
‘desire’ and the ‘desire’ in Iachimo’s speech where it means the lowest lust.—Ep.] 
—Br. Nicuotson (ap. Ingleby, ed. ii.): ‘Glorious’ is equivalent to gloriosus, 7. e., 
full of vain-glory. 

g. desires] For this interpolated s, see ‘purchases,’ I, v, 84. 

11. Which seasons comfort] WaRBuRTON: These words are equivocal, 


ACTAI, SCs Viln| CYMBELINE 75 


[11. Which seasons comfort] 


but the meaning is this, Who are beholden only to the seasons for their support and 
nourishment; so that, if these be kindly, such have no more to care for or desire. 
—Jounson: I am willing to comply with any meaning that can be extorted from 
the present text rather than change it, yet will propose, but with great diffidence, a 
slight alteration: ‘With reason’s comfort.’ Who gratify their innocent wishes 
with reasonable enjoyments.—STEEVENS: I shall venture on another explanation: 
“To be able to refine on calamity (says she) is the miserable privilege of those who 
are educated with aspiring thoughts and elegant desires. Blessed are they, how- 
ever mean their condition, who have the power of gratifying their honest inclina- 
tions, which circumstance bestows an additional relish on comfort itself.— MALONE: 
In my apprehension, Imogen’s meaning is simply this: ‘Had I been stolen by thieves 
in my infancy (or, as she says in another place, “ born a neat-herd’s daughter”’) 
I had been happy. But instead of that, I am in a high, and, what is called, a 
glorious station; and most miserable in such a situation! Pregnant with calamity 
are those desires, which aspire to glory; to splendid titles, or elevation of rank! 
Happier far are those, how low soever their rank in life, who have it in their power 
to gratify their virtuous inclinations: a circumstance that gives an additional zest 
to comfort itself, and renders it something more.—Monck Mason (p. 323): 
Imogen’s reflection is merely this: ‘That those are happy who have their honest 
wills, which gives a relish to comfort; but that those are miserable who set their 
affections on objects of superior excellence, which are, of course, difficult to obtain.’ 
‘Honest’ means plain or humble, and is opposed to glorious —STAUNTON: It is 
probable that the obscure clause—‘but most miserable is the desire that’s glorious’ 
—was accidentally transposed, and the true reading is, ‘Had I been thief-stolen, 
As my two brothers, happy! Blessed be those, How mean soe’er, that have their 
honest wills, Which seasons comfort; but most miserable Is the desire that’s 
glorious.’ Happy are those, however lowly, who enjoy the moderate wishes that 
preserve comfort, but most wretched they whose inclinations are set in grandeur.— 
[KEIGHTLEY (Exp., 375) pronounces this arrangement as ‘most certainly an im- 
provement’; and regrets that he did not recollect it when printing his Edition, as 
he should ‘probably have adopted it.—Hunpson did adopt it, as a ‘most important 
transportation.’]}—NIcHOLs (ii, 15) finds that the difficulty lies ‘in giving a right 
antecedent to ‘‘Which”; it has been sought for amongst words, when it consisted 
of the whole sentence,’—‘ Blessed be those, How mean soe’er, that have their 
honest wills.’ [To the same effect, Rotre.]J—VAUGHAN (p. 366) gives a fair ab- 
stract of the notes of Warburton, Johnson, Steevens, Malone, and Mason, and then 
‘ventures to say’ that ‘all are wrong if the text be right, and all but Mason grossly 
so in some one particular or more.’ He then gives his own version: ‘A cruel 
father, and a false stepmother, and a foolish man who urges his suit upon me 
although I am married, as I have my husband banished. Alas for that husband, 
who is my chief misery! and alas for those conditions, which I have just mentioned, 
which are its aggravations! If I had been stolen by thieves, like my brothers, I 
should have been happy, but most miserable is my vain longing in an exalted 
sphere; and blessed are those in stations however mean, who have their honourable 
and moderate wishes satisfied by timely gratification.’ [Hereupon he quotes the 
present text, ‘Is the desires,’ and remarks, ‘It is not quite impossible, therefore, 
that the right reading would have been: ‘Most miserable Is she, desires, that’s 
glorious.” But this would give exactly the same meaning as I have ascribed to 


76 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT 1, SC. vil. 


Enter Pifanio, and Tachimo. 12 


Pifa. Madam, a Noble Gentleman of Rome: 
Comes from my Lord with Letters. 

Tach. Change you, Madam : 15 
The Worthy Zeonatus is in fafety, 


14. Comes] come Cap. conj. 15. Madam:] Ktly, Ingl. Madam! 
Ff. Madam? Rowe et cet. 


the traditional text.’ I think he does himself injustice. His paraphrase of the 
text is, at least, readily comprehensible, but a phrase as elliptical and contorted as 
‘is she, desires, that’s glorious’ would be hard to parallel either in or out of Shake- 
speare.—DowDEN says Vaughan means, ‘is she who is of exalted station, and has 
desires,’ and we may gladly take his word for it—Crarc: I suggested ‘Is she de- 
sires’ or ‘she-desires that’s glorious,’ 7. e., but miserable is the woman of high rank 
who falls in love. ‘She’ is used for a woman in this play (see line 47 of this scene, 
and I, iv, 37). . I find that Vaughan has made pretty much the same suggestion.— 
INGLEBY: ‘that have their honest wills,’ that is, ‘who have godliness with content- 
ment’ (i. e., the gratifications of their virtuous desires), which is said to be ‘great 
gain,’ and which both sweetens and keeps sweet their simple comforts. It is scarcely 
possible to fix, with exactness, the meaning of ‘seasons’ in this passage.—CAPELL 
and Knicut are reserved for the last; they give in the simplest and most direct 
way, I think, the meaning, which every one graSps.—CAPELL: Then follow some 
wishes, that she had not been placed in so exalted a station, whose constant lot is 
unhappiness, whereas, those of a lower, only in ‘having their honest wills,’ find 
the seasoning of every comfort that nature bestows on them.—Knicut: The mean 
have their honest, homely wills (opposed to the desire that’s glorious), and that 
circumstance gives a relish to comfort.—Ep.] 

11. Fye.] CAPELL: There is much expression in ‘Fie!"—RANN: On such intru- 
sion.—Derricuton: An exclamation of surprise—Wyatr: Imogen is sorry to have 
her solitude broken in upon.—PorTER and CLARKE: Does she exclaim at herself 
for hoping for newsPp—DowbeEN: An outbreak of impatience at the interruption 
of her solitary thoughts. [Hence, it is clear that, where our betters disagree, we 
are all at liberty to give to this ‘Fie!’ whatever intonation or interpretation our 
mood suggests.—ED.] 

15. Change you] The CowpENn-CLarkes: How by these little words the dram- 
atist lets us behold the sudden pallor, and as sudden flush of crimson that be- 
spread the wife’s face at this instant—IncteBy: A very abrupt and even in- 
delicate mode of greeting any lady, seen for the first time, and here a princess of the 
blood. We should have expected Iachimo to say, with a low reverence, ‘Save you, 
madam.’ [Of course, he should have brought his heels together with a click. I doubt 
that there were any ‘flushes of crimson’—every drop of her blood had been sum- 
moned to the heart; it was her deathlike pallor that frighted Iachimo out of his 
propriety. When Henry the Fifth presented to the conspirators sundry docu- 
ments containing the full exposure of their treason, ‘Why, how now, Gentlemen!’ 
he exclaimed a moment after, ‘What see you in those papers that you lose So much 
complexion? Look ye, how they change? Their cheeks are paper! Why, what 


read you there, That hath so cowarded and chased your blood out of appearance.’— 
II, ii, 71.—Ep.] 


ACT I, SC. vil, ] CYMBELINE a7 


And greetes your Highneffe deerely. 17 
Lmo. Thanks good Sir, 
You’re kindly welcome. 
lach, Al of her, that is out of doore, moft rich : 20 
If fhe be furnifh’d with a mind fo rare 
She is alone th’Arabian-Bird; and I 
Haue loft the wager. Boldneffe be my Friend : 
Arme me Audacitie from head to foote, 
Orlike the Parthian I fhall flying fight, 25 
Rather direétly fly. 


17. [Gives a letter. Johns. 23, 24. Friend:...foote,| Ff. friend; 
20. [Aside. Pope et seq. ... foot. Rowe.  friend!...foot. Pope. 
rich:| rich! Pope et seq. friend!...foot: Theob. Han. Warb. 
22. th] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce ii, iii. Johns. friend!...foot, Ran. Coll. friend! 
the Cap. et cet. ...foot! Cap. et cet. 
Arabian-Bird] Arabian bird 24. me Audacitie] me, Audacity, 
Rowe. Theob. et seq. 


25. fight,| fight; Cap. et seq. 


20. that is out of doore] Compare ‘so faire an outward and such stuffe With- 
Way Ih, il, BA, 

22. She is alone th’Arabian.bird] It has been supposed by some editors 
that ‘alone’ is here used because there was never but one Pheenix at a time. Is it 
not better to interpret it as meaning above all things or beyond all others (for which, 
see ABBortT, § 18)? In this case a comma is properly put after it, as suggested by 
Crarc; Dowden adopted the suggestion in his text. The earliest account of the 
Pheenix is obtained from Herodotus: ‘There is another sacred bird, called the 
phoenix, which I myself have seen only in a picture; for, as the citizens of Helios 
say, it visits them only periodically, every five hundred years; they state that it 
always comes on the death of its sire. If it at all resembles its picture, it is thus 
and so; some of its feathers are golden-hued, and some are red; in shape and 
figure it most resembles the eagle, and in size also. They say, but I cannot credit it, 
that this bird contrives to bring from Arabia to the temple of Helios the body of its 
father plastered up in myrrh, and there buries it. The mode of carrying it is as 
follows: first, he plasters together an egg of myrrh as large as he is able to carry, 
after he has tested his strength by carrying it; this trial having been made, he 
hollows out the egg sufficiently to place his father within, then with fresh myrrh 
he fills up the space unoccupied by his father’s body; the egg thereby becomes of the 
same weight as before, and thus plastered up he transports it to Egypt to the 
temple of Helios. Such things, they say, this bird can accomplish.’—Herodotus, 
Lib., ii, cap. 73. See also Pliny’s account, given in Temp., III, iii, 33, also As 
You Like It, 1V, iii, 17, of this edition. 

22. Arabian-Bird] According to Cam. Ed., there is no hyphen in Fy. In my 
three copies of that edition there is a hyphen, faint to be sure, but still discernible-— 
Rowe first omitted it, followed by all editors. 

25. Orlike the Parthian, I shall flying fight] Knicur: Every one will 
remember the noble passage in Paradise Regained: ‘He saw them in their forms 
of battle ranged, How quick they wheel’d, and flying behind them shot Sharp sleet 


78 THE TRAGEDIES OE [act I, SC. vii. 


Imogen reads. P| 
He is one of the Nobleft note, to whofe kindneffes | am moft in- 
finitely tied. Reflect upon ham accordingly, as you value your 


trufi. Leonatus. 30 
28. He] * * * * He Cap. Sta. Sing. Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), White, Ktly, 
29, 30. your truft] our trust Or- Dycé*ii, ii. truft— Var: ’21, Kat, 

ger Coll. i, Del. Sta. Glo. Cam. John 


ae truft] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Hunter, Huds. Dtn, Ingl. Herford, 
Johns. Cap. Mal. Varr. truest. Han. Wyatt, Dowden. trusty Thirlby (Nich- 
truest, Ran. truest Steev. Var. ’03, 13, ols, Ilust., ii, 229). 


of arrowy showers against the face Of their pursuers, and overcame by flight.’— 
[Bk III, l. 322.] The editors of Milton refer to parallel passages in Virgil and 
Horace as amongst the images with which our great epic poet was familiar. The 
commentators of Shakespeare suffer his line to pass without a single observation. 

29. Reflect vpon him] Inctesy: That is cast upon him some of the radiance 
of your favour. See I, iii, 28—Scumupr (Lex.) gives ‘Reflect,’ in this passage, 
as nearly equivalent to look—DowDEN says that the word does not here mean, as 
Ingleby interprets it, but as simply regard him. 

30. trust.] Mason, not knowing that he had been anticipated by Hanmer’s text, 
observed (p. 323): ‘Were Leonatus writing to his steward, this style might be 
proper; but it is so strange a conclusion of a letter to a princess, and a beloved wife, 
that it cannot be right. I have no doubt, therefore, that we ought to read: 
“your truest.”’—MALoNnE: This conjecture would have more weight if it were 
certain that these were intended as the concluding words of the letter. It is more 
probably that what ‘warmed the very middle of the heart’ of Imogen, proved the 
conclusion of Posthumus’s letter; and the words—‘so far’ and ‘by the rest’ support 
that supposition. Though Imogen reads the name of her husband, she might 
suppress somewhat that intervened.—STEEVENS: It is certain, I think, from the 
break, ‘He is one,’ etc., that the omitted part of the letter was at the beginning 
of it, and that what follows (all indeed that was necessary for the audience to hear) 
was its regular and decided termination.—Kwicut: The signature is separated 
from the word, which has been changed to truest, by the passage which Imogen 
glances at in thankful silence—WauutTe (ed. i.): ‘Trust’ has been defended, but 
most ineffectually. Imogen had no special trust from Posthumus, and what she 
reads is certainly the end, not the beginning, of the letter; the first word that she 
reads, ‘he,’ necessarily implying a previous mention and introduction of Iachimo. 
In courtesy Imogen reads aloud her husband’s commendation of her guest. ‘So 
far’ may very properly be taken in the sense of ‘so much,’ and ‘the rest,’ of which 
Imogen speaks, may refer as well to an unmentioned part that goes before as to one 
that comes after. [Dyce (ed. ii, reading ‘trust’) quotes in full this note of White, 
as his only comment on the interpretation of the phrase.]|—INcLEBy (who retains 
‘trust.’): That is, the ‘trust’ she has accepted by her marriage-bond. [Thus also, 
DetcuTon.] For confirmation of this view, see lines 185-187—The CowpENn- 
CLARKES (who adhere to the Folio): We take the sentence, as it stands, to be a frag- 
mentary one; one that occurs in the midst of the letter, and selected by Imogen 
as that which she will ‘read aloud,’ since it contains complimentary mention of the 
bystander and bearer of the letter, and serves for his credential of introduction to 
her. There has probably been some previous mention of Iachimo by name, since 


ACT eI, SCi Vil, | CYMBELINE 79 


So farre I reade aloud. 31 
But euen the very middle of my heart 
Is warm’d by’th’reft, and take it thankefully. 


You are as welcome( worthy Sir) as I 34 
31. aloud.) Ff, Rowe, Pope. aloud; 33. by th] F.. by th’ F;F,, Rowe,+. 
Ran. Col. Wh. aloud: Theob. et cet. by the Han. et cet. mS 
aloud, Vaun. take] takes Pope et seq. 
33. warm’d] warmed Rowe, Pope, thankefully.| thankfully— Rowe, 
Han. Sta. Pope, Han. 


the sentence commences with ‘He’; and we think it more likely that ‘the rest’ 
comes between this sentence and the signature than that this sentence forms the 
closing one. . . . Shakespeare, in many passages, uses ‘trust’ with the exalted 
and even sacred meaning which this word, in its fullest sense, includes; and he 
may most assuredly have thus used it in a letter from husband to wife—Mrs Latt- 
MER (p. 407): I think the act I can least forgive in Posthumus is the writing of 
this letter, recommending such a scoundrel as Iachimo, as ‘one of noblest note, to 
whose kindnesses I am most infinitely tied.—Hunpson: This is, ‘my trust in you,’ 
or ‘the trust I repose in you.’ Observe Imogen reads aloud only the first two 
sentences, and then skips all the rest till she comes to the signature, which she also 
pronounces aloud.—Rotre: Truest seems preferable. Imogen has been reading 
the letter to herself during the preceding speech (aside) of Iachimo. Having come 
to the end of it, she now turns to him and reads aloud the closing lines with their 
reference to himself.—TuiIsELtTon: The whole sentence is: ‘Let your welcome to 
him correspond to these kindnesses in such measure as you value your belief in, or 
truth to, me.’ The ambiguity seems designed to give a hint of possible danger, 
if such a hint should be necessary.—DOwDEN: That is, value the charge entrusted 
to you as my wife and representative. [Is not this essentially the same as Ingle- 
by’s? This fragment of the letter is not, I think, intended to raise Posthumus 
greatly in our esteem. Where he speaks of being ‘infinitely knit’ to Iachimo, 
is it not gross exaggeration? and when of Iachimo’s ‘kindnesses,’ is it not flagrantly 
untrue? Posthumus may have believed that in promising his ‘commendation’ 
to Iachimo, he was, in these expressions, only making good his promise and vindi- 
cating his honour. But in his soul he must have known that his honour toward 
Imogen was on a ground far higher than that toward an Italian stranger, and I 
cannot but believe that in telling Imogen that she must be guided by the value she 
placed on her ‘trust’ in her treatment of Iachimo, he was (as intimated by Thisel- 
ton) sounding a note of warning, as explicitly expressed as he dared.—Ep.] 

31-33. aloud. But... th’rest, and take it thankefully] VAUGHAN (p. 369) 
substitutes a comma for the full stop after ‘aloud.’; then includes in a paren- 
thesis ‘But euen the very middle of my heart Is warm’d by th’rest,’ and 
retains ‘take’ of the Folio. ‘The meaning is,’ he observes, ‘I read aloud so far, 
and take what I read aloud thankfully’; that is, ‘I take the intelligence of your 
kindness to Leonatus with gratitude, and offer you the best welcome words can 
give. But what I do not read aloud warms the very core of my heart.’ The 
universally accepted alteration [i. e., takes] deteriorates the passage. It destroys 
the intended contrast between the pleasure intense and sweet and the open satis- 
faction claiming the expression of gratitude. [It is heart-easing to have the Folio 
thus excellently vindicated. O si sic omnia, at Vaughan’s hands!—Ep.] 


— 


80 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. vii. 


Haue words to bid you, and fhall finde it fo 35 
In all that I can do. 
Tach. Thankes faireft Lady : 
What are men mad? Hath Nature giuen them eyes 
To fee this vaulted Arch, and the rich Crop 


Of Sea and Land, which can diftinguith ’twixt 40 
The firie Orbes aboue, and the twinn’d Stones 
Vpon the number"d Beach, and can we not 42 


38. [Aside. Johns. Half-Aside. Ktly. (N. & Q., V, vi, 185, 1876), Huds. 
What are] Fi. What, are Rowe, Herr. Kinnear. 


Pope, Han. Cap. Dyce. What! are 41. and the] and as Pope ii. 
Theob. et cet. twinn’d| twin Han.  spurn’d 
mad?] Vernor & Hood, Booth. Heath. whiten’d Bulloch. 
mad. F;, ap. Cam. 42. the numberfd| th’ unnumber’d 
39. vaulted] valuted F.F;. Theob. Han. Ran. Sing. Coll. ii, iii. 
30, 40. Crop Of] cope Of Watrb. (MS.), Ktly. the humble Eccl. conj. 
Johns. cope O’er Coll. ii, iii. (MS.). Beach,| Ff. beach; Coll. beach? 


prop of Bailey (i, 114). scope of Crosby Rowe et cet. 


38. What are men mad] CAPELL (p. 105): It has been thought [I wish 
I knew where. Probably, however, in Capell’s own mind, and he quieted the ob- 
jection by the argument he proceeds to give—Ep.] that this artificial preparative 
to what the speaker is meditating breaks out too soon, and that Pisanio should not 
have been present at it; as for the latter objection, it is likely the Poet intended 
to shew us a picture of villany thrown off its guard, as is sometimes the case, 
and the speaker’s clumsy expedient to get rid of him afterwards confirms this 
opinion. 

39, 40. the rich Crop Of Sea and Land] Warsurton: He is here speaking of 
the covering of sea and land. Shakespeare, therefore, wrote: ‘the rich cope’ [Cole- 
ridge (p. 303), and Collier’s MS., also suggested ‘cope’]|.—STEEVENS: Surely no 
emendation is necessary. The ‘vaulted arch’ is alike the cope or covering ‘of sea 
and land.’ When the poet had spoken of it once, could he have thought this 
second introduction of it necessary? ‘The crop of sea and land’ means only 
the productions of either element.—FurnIvatt (NV. & Q., V, vi, 226, 1876): ‘Crop’ 
has the metaphorical meaning of fulness (cf. ‘crop-sick,’ sick with repletion) or 
wealth here. ‘The rich fulness, the wealth, of sea and land’ is not ‘exceedingly 
harsh’ [as Crosby had termed it, in proposing scope], I think. The use of ‘crop’ 
also gives you another image, that of the long, calm-sea level of standing crops of 
corn, to contrast with ‘this vaulted arch’ of the bent heaven above, the string of 
land and sea beneath the bow of sky.—INctEBy: That is, the vast prospect, etc. 
The crop, or out-crop, is that which strikes the eye. It might, however, be con- 
tended with some shew of probability, that ‘the rich crop’ is that vast treasury of 
pebbles which belongs almost as much to the sea as to the land. All other inter- 
pretations may be safely discountenanced.—VAUGHAN: If the text be right, it 
means the rich harvest which the eye gathers in, consisting of sea and land. [Which, 
I think, expresses the idea as tersely as may be.—Ep.] 

40. distinguish] DowpENn: Distinguish not, I think, orbs from stones, but orb 
from orb, and stone from stone. [Unquestionably.— Eb. ] 

41, 42. the twinn’d Stones Vpon the numberfd Beach] THEozsatp: I 


ACEI SC. Vil. | CYMBELINE 81 


[41, 42. the twinn’d Stones Vpon the number'd Beach] 


have no idea in what sense the Beach or Shore should be called ‘number’d.’ 
I have ventured, against all copies, to substitute th’ wnnwmbered Beach,’ 4. €., 
the infinite, extensive beach. We are to understand the passage thus: ‘and the 
infinite number of twinn’d stones upon the beach.’ The poet has given them the 
same epithet before, in his Lear: ‘The murmuring surge, That on th’ unnumber’d 
idle pebble chafes.’—[IV, vi, 20..—Warsurton: Sense and the antithesis oblige 
us to read this nonsense thus: ‘upon the humbl’d beach,’ i. ¢., because daily 
insulted with the flow of the tide—Jounson: I know not well how to regulate this 
passage. ‘Number’d’ is perhaps numerous. ‘Twinn’d stones’ I do not under- 
stand. Twinn’d shells, or pairs of shells, are very common. For ‘twinn’d,’ we 
might read twin’d, that is, twisted, convolved; but this sense is more applicable to 
shells than to stones. [It is almost inconceivable that anyone could have adopted 
Warburton’s humbl’d. Yet the clear-sighted and conservative CaPELL not only 
followed it in his text, but justified it in his notes, as follows: ‘the epithet is just 
and poetical; near in trace of letters to “number’d”’; and not liable to an objection 
unnumber'd is open to,—namely, that of presenting to the fancy nearly the same 
idea that is conveyed in “twinn’d stones”; which epithet “‘twin’d,” is characteristic 
of beach stones; multitudes of them having a more perfect sameness than can be 
found in anything else.’ This last remark proves that Capell’s spelling twin’d 
is not the same as Johnson’s conjecture—Ep.]|—Heratu (p. 475) [The emendation 
unnumber’d is] no other than a synecdoche, frequently used by the best writers, 
by which the whole, the ‘beach,’ is put for its component parts, the pebbles. 
The poet might possibly have written ‘the spurn’d stones. —STEEVENS: The peb- 
bles on the seashore are so much of the same size and shape that ‘twinn’d’ may 
mean as like as twins—FArmeER: I think we may read the wmber’d, the shaded 
beach.—Matone: Th’ unnumber’d and ‘the humbered,’ if hastily pronounced, 
might have been easily confounded by the ear. If ‘number’d’ be right, it surely 
means, as Johnson has explained it, abownding in numbers of stones, numerous. 
[This note of Malone is quoted by Dyce, ii, without dissent, and yet he follows the 
Folio in his text.|—CoLERMGE (p. 303): As to ‘twinn’d stones,’ may it not be a 
bold catachresis for muscles, cockles, and other empty shells with hinges, which are 
truly twinned? I would take Farmer’s umber’d, which I had proposed before I 
ever heard of its having been already offered by him; but I do not adopt his inter- 
pretation of thé word, which, I think, is not derived from wmbra, a shade, but from 
umber, a dingy yellow-brown soil, which most commonly forms the mass of the 
sludge on the seashore, and on the banks of tide-rivers at low water. One other 
possible interpretation of this sentence has occurred to me, just barely worth 
mentioning: that the ‘twinn’d stones’ are the augrim [i. e., algorism—Ep.] stones 
upon the number’d beech, that is, the astronomical tables of beech-wood. [Cole- 
ridge in his Table-Talk (p. 80, ed. Morley) modified his extremely recondite augrim, 
and has then (in 1830) ‘no doubt’ that the passage should read: ‘the grimed 
stones Upon the wmber’d beach.’—Ep.]—WALKER (Crit., iii, p. 316): Warburton’s 
humbled is absurd enough; but may not Shakespeare have written humble in 
antithesis to the stars? [Herein Eccles has anticipated Walker.]—STAUNTON: 
Might we not read, ‘the cwmber’d beach’? taking cwmber’d in the sense either of 
rough, strewed, &c., or, perhaps, troubled?—VAUGHAN (p. 371) conjectured ‘en- 
cumbered beach,’ but concludes that, ‘in consideration of the here quoted uses of 
“number” and “numerous,” the “numbered beach” should stand.’-—Assorrt (§375) 


6 


82 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT I, SC. vii. 


Partition make with Spectales fo pretious 43 
Twixt faire, and foule ? 


43. Spectales] F,. Spectacles F3F,. 


has a section devoted to examples of where ‘the Passive Participle is used to signify 
not that which was and is, but that which was, and, therefore, can be hereafter. In 
other words, -ed is used for -able.’ Among his examples is the passage from Lear, 
first quoted by Theobald, of ‘the wnnumber'd idle pebbles,’ where -ed is certainly 
used for -able. But, unfortunately, in the present passage, unless we adopt Theo- 
bald’s emendation, numbered cannot be equivalent to numberable. Abbott, 
therefore, concludes that Theobald was right in reading ‘th’wnumber’d beach.’— 
Dowpen: Is the fancy too far-fetched that the beach is ‘number’d’ because 
sung in ‘numbers’ (numerous verse) by the waves? Craig thinks hungred possible, 
comparing the ‘hungry beach,’ of Cor., V, iii, 58. [The very plausibility of Theo- 
bald’s unnumber’d is against it. Whether or not the pebbles can be counted or 
have not been counted has nothing to do with the trending of Iachimo’s thought, 
which is that between pebbles as like as twins Nature hath given us such eyes, such 
precious spectacles, that we can distinguish one from another as they lie on the 
beach covered with numbers of them. Just as ‘delighted spirit’ in Meas. for Meas. 
means the spirit abounding in delights, and the ‘guiled shore’ in the Mer. of Ven. 
means the shore replete with guiles, so here the ‘number’d beach’ means the 
beach covered with many a number, or, in the words which Malone has attributed 
to Johnson, ‘abounding in numbers.’—Ep.] 

43. Spectales] DowpEN: Does this mean ‘with organs of vision’ (as perhaps in 
2 Hen. VI: III, ii, 112), or having shows (of earth or sky) which instruct the eyes 
in making distinctions? The meaning ‘shows’ is common in Shakespeare. [Dow- 
den’s alternative interpretation is, I think, excellent, and would be the only one, 
were not the reference to the ‘eyes, which Nature hath given us,’ so pointed. 
See the next Note by ‘Anon.’—Eb.] 

44. Twixt faire, and foule ?] ANon. (qu. Lettsom?—Blackwood’s Maga., 
Oct., 1853, p. 469): Let us consider the bearing of the whole speech. It has a sin- 
ister reference to Posthumus, the husband of Imogen, the lady in whose presence 
the speech is uttered. ‘How can Posthumus,’ says Iachimo, ‘with such a wife as 
this—this Imogen—take up with the vile slut who now holds him in her clutches? 
Are men mad—with senses so fine that they can distinguish, or separate from each 
other, the fiery orbs above; and also so acute that they can distinguish between 
the twinned” (or closely resembling) stones which can be counted upon the beach; 

with spectacles” —that is, with eyes—so precious, are they yet unable (as Posthu- 
mus seems to be) to make partition “twixt a fair wife and a foul mistress?” The 
words, “which can distinguish “twixt the fiery orbs above and the twinned stones,” 
do not mean that we have senses so fine that we can distinguish between stars and 
stones, but senses so fine that we can count, or distinguish from one another, the 
stars themselves; and can also perceive a difference in the pebbles on the beach, 
though these be as like to one another as so many peas. This interpretation brings 
out clearly the sense of the expression, ‘‘numbered beach”; it means the beach on 
which the pebbles can be numbered; indeed, are numerically separated by us from 
each other, in spite of their homogeneousness, so delicate is our organ of vision by 
which they are apprehended; “yet,” concludes Iachimo, as the moral of his reflec- 
tions, with organs thus discriminating, my friend Posthumus has, nevertheless, 


eww iy, Sieh vali] 


Imo. 


CYMBELINE 83 


What makes your admiration ? 45 


fach. It cannot be i’th’eye : for Apes, and Monkeys 
’Twixt two fuch She’s, would chatter this way, and 


Contemne with mowes the other. 


Nor i’th’iudgment : 


For Idiots in this cafe of fauour, would 

Be wifely definit : Nor i’th’ Appetite. 50 
Sluttery to fuch neate Excellence, oppos’d 

Should make defire vomit emptinefie, 


Not fo allurd to feed. 


46. [Half-Aside. Ktly. 
Vth] Fy, Rowe,+, Sing. Dyce ii, 
iil, Ktly. ith’ F.F;. «the Cap. et cet. 
48. vth’] F,, Rowe,+, Sing. Ktly. 
tth F,. th’ F;. 7i’the Cap. et cet. 
49. Idiots] Ideots Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. 


53 


Rowe, Pope, Han. ithe Cap. et 
cet. 

50. Appetite.] appetite, Rowe, Pope. 
appetite: Theob. et cet. 

51. Sluttery| Slutt’ry Pope,+. 

52. vomit] vomit ev’n Pope, Han. 
Covet Bailey (1, 262). vomit from Huds. 


50. definit:] definit, 
Han. 

vth’| Theob. Warb. Johns. Sing. 

Dyce ii, iii, Ktly. ith F.. in the FF, 


Rowe, Pope, vomit emptineffe,| vomit, empti- 
ness Kinnear (p. 468). very daintiness 
Anon. ap. Cam. 


53- allur,d] Fy. allure ’t Han. 


) 


gone most lamentably astray.”’ This explanation renders the substitution of 
unnumbered not only unnecessary, but contradictory. We cannot be too cautious 
how we tamper with the received text of Shakespeare. Even though a passage 
may continue unintelligible to us for years, the chances are a hundred to one that 
the original lection contains a more pregnant meaning than any that we can pro- 
pose in its place. 

46. It cannot be i’th’eye] CaPELL (p. 106): What cannot be i’the eye? Why, 
the fault of making such perverse choices as some men are seen to. After exculpat- 
ing the ‘eye’ and the ‘judgment,’ he comes to the ‘appetite.’ 

47. She’s] See ‘The Shees of Italy.’—I, iv, 37. 

47, 48. would chatter this way, and Contemme with mowes the other] 
Tachimo intentionally pays no attention to Imogen’s question, neither here nor at 
line 54; he appears to be, as Johnson says, ‘in a counterfeited rapture.’ Where- 
fore we must connect this present passage with what is just gone before. His last 
words were about making a distinction between fair and foul. He now says that 
between two ‘such shees,’ one fair and the other foul, even apes and monkeys would 
chatter with approval of the fair and make faces at the foul. Of course, his hands 
were not hanging at his side, and when he said ‘to the fair,’ he intimated to Imogen 
plainly enough that he referred to her.—Ep. 

49. inthis case of fauour] DowpEN: That is, in this question respecting beauty. 

52, 53. make desire vomit emptinesse, Not so allur,d to feed] War- 
BURTON: That is, that appetite, which is not allured to feed on such excellence, 
can have no stomach at all, but, though empty, must nauseate everything.— 
Jounson (1765): I explain this passage in a sense almost contrary. Iachimo, in 
this counterfeited rapture, has shewn how the ‘eyes’ and the ‘judgement’ would 
determine in favour of Imogen, comparing her with the present mistress of Posthu- 
mus, and proceeds to say, that appetite too would give the same suffrage. ‘De- 


84 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. vil. 


Imo. What is the matter trow ? 


Tach. The Cloyed will : 5S 
That fatiate yet vnfatisfi’d defire, that Tub 
Both fill’d and running : Rauening firft the Lambe, 57 
54. matter trow] matter, trow Theob. 56-60. That...well?] Lines end: will: 
et seq. ..desire,...first...what, Johns. Var. 773. 
55. Cloyed] cloyéd Dyce. Lines end: will: ... desire, ... first ... Sir, 
will:| will, F;F, et seq. Var. 78. 85, Steev. Vars 703, 733, 
56, 57. That...running:| In parenthe- Sing. Coll. i, il. 
ses Cap. Varr. Mal. Rann, Steev. Varr. 57. Rauening] rav’ning Cap. 


Knt, Sing. Coll. Ktly. 


sire,’ says he, when it approached ‘sluttery,’ and considered it in comparison with 
‘such neat excellence,’ would not only be ‘not so allured to feed,’ but, seized with a 
fit of loathing, ‘would vomit emptiness,’ would feel the convulsions of disgust, 
though, being unfed, it had nothing to eject.—Tyrwauirt (p. 8, 1766): I am 
still unable to comprehend how ‘desire,’ or any other thing, can be made to ‘vomit 
emptiness,’ I rather believe the passage should be read thus: ‘Should make 
desire vomit, emptiness Not so allure to feed.’ That is, Should not so (in such 
circumstances) allure (even) emptiness to feed.—JOHNSON (1773): This [Tyrwhitt’s 
emendation] is not ill conceived, but I think my own explanation right. ‘To 
vomit emptiness’ is, in the language of poetry, ‘to feel the convulsions of eructation 
without plenitude.’ [Any difficulty, in any passdge, is cheaply bought at the price 
of such pure Johnsonese!—CaPpeLt, considering ‘desire’ a disyllable, as he had a 
right to do, remarked (p. 106) that the verse was lame both in measure and sense, 
‘till fo came to its aid’; accordingly his text reads ‘vomit to emptiness.’ This 
emendation was adopted by Wuitre (ed. i.) and Cortier (ed. ii.), who, however, 
followed therein his MS.—Ep.]—Matone: No one who has been ever sick at sea, 
can be at a loss to understand by what is meant vomiting emptiness.—BUCKNILL 
(p. 224): The meaning of this passage would be plain enough but for the word 
‘emptiness’; but as it is more difficult to vomit on an empty than on a full stomach, 
this word seems used merely to augment the expression—STAUNTON: Certainly if 
‘emptiness’ is Shakespeare’s word, fo must be understood. [The simile is not only 
repulsive, but unworthy, I think of Shakespeare. No appeal to the coarseness 
of Elizabethan times can palliate it. Discussion makes it only more repulsive; 
the less it is discussed the better—as I think. It is for me quite enough to ap- 
prehend that, in Iachimo’s opinion, sluttery, in comparison with Imogen’s refine- 
ment, would prove nauseating to the last degree. May we not discern herein that 
this play was written late in life. Old men are not as squeamish in matters of re- 
finement as are younger men. Would Shakespeare have used such a simile in the 
days of Romeo and Juliet?-—Ep.] 

54. trow] Lerrson (Foot-note to Walker, Crit., i, 79): This apparently answers 
to the modern I wonder. [See ‘What meanes the foole trow?’—Much Ado, III, iv, 
55 (of this ed.), where ‘trow’ has the same meaning as in the present passage, which 
is there referred to.] 

55-57. The Cloyed will:...running: Rauening] Caprtt (p. 106): 
The word ‘desire’ has crept in no one knows how, to the utter perversion of sense 
and metre: by discarding it, and placing the parenthesis properly, this speech is 
perfected now, for the supplial of thing after ‘that’ is obvious to every one. [L 


ACT 1, SC. V1. | CYMBELINE 85 


Longs after for the Garbage. 58 
Imo. What, deere Sir, 
Thus rap’s you? Are you well? 60 


fach. hanks Madam, well : Befeech you Sir, 
Defire my Man’s abode, where I did leaue him: 


He’s ftrange and peeuith. 63 
58. Garbage.] garbage— Rowe, Pope, Glo. 

Theob. Warb. Johns. 61. Befeech you Sir,| One line Cam. 
60. rap’s] raps Rowe. 63. He’s| he is Han. he Is Steey. 
61-63. Two lines, ending: abode... Varr. Knt, Sing. Coll. Dyce, Glo. 

peevifh Han. Ktly. Ending: Defire... peeutfh| sheepish Han. 

He Steev. Varr. Knt, Sing. Coll. Dyce, [To Pisanio. Rowe. 


suppose Capell means, ‘That [thing] satiate, yet,’ etc. ‘Desire’ is omitted in his 
text, and ‘That satiate . . . running’ included in a parenthesis —STEEVENS 
remarks that the irregularity of the metre ‘almost persuaded’ him ‘that the passage 
originally stood thus: ““The cloyed will (That’s satiate, yet unsatisfied, that tub 
Both fill’d and running) ravening,” etc. The want in the original MS. of the 
letter I have supplied perhaps occasioned the interpolation of the word ‘“‘desire.”’’ 
I have but little doubt that this emendation was suggested to Steevens by Capell’s 
note.—VAUGHAN (p. 373) points out that the demonstrative ‘that’ before ‘tub’ 
shows that the same pronoun before ‘satiate’ is also demonstrative and not relative, 
as Steevens assumes; and Vaughan further opines that the metre may be mended, in 
lines 58, 59, either by omitting ‘deere’ before ‘Sir,’ or by ‘compressing’ ‘deere’ 
into d’r. Had Dyce lived to quote this d’r, with what a feast of exclamation marks 
after it, we should have been regaled.—Eb.] 

60. Thus rap’s you] Waite (ed. i, reading wraps): That is, wraps you in con- 
templation, of course. The Folio, ‘raps you,’ which ridiculous reading has been 
hitherto preserved. [And continues to be preserved in White’s ed. ii. According 
to Bartlett’s Concordance this is the only instance of its use in the present tense in 
Shakespeare; as a past participle, ‘rapt,’ he uses it several times. I can find no 
reference to its present use in the NV. £. D. Possibly when the letter W. is reached 
it may appear as a variant of wraps.—En.] 

62. Desire my Man’s abode] RANN was the first to notice any obscurity in this 
phrase, which he interpreted as meaning search out my man’s abode, and herein, 
of those editors who have noticed it at all, he was followed by Kricutiy (who 
substituted Inquire in his text), by Hupson, by Wyatr and by Miss Porter, and 
by Dettus in his ed. iii. On the other hand, Detrus, in his ed. i, in 1855, gives, 
for the first time, what is, I think, the true meaning: ‘Iachimo’s servant,’ says 
Delius, ‘must abide where he had been left, and must there await his master.’— 
Rey. Joun Hunter gives the same interpretation: ‘Desire my man to abide.’— 
Deicuron: ‘Bid him stay where I left him.—Rotre: ‘That is, ask him to re- 
main.’ (Rolfe also calls attention to the use of ‘abode’ in connection with time, 
as in ‘Your patience for my long abode.’—Mer. of Ven., II, vi, 21.)—HERrorn: 
‘Bid my servant stay.’ And, finally, Dowpen: ‘Desire my man to settle himself 
where I left him.’ In an unhappy hour Dettus, in his last edition, says that 
Pisanio must ‘seek out, Iachimo’s servant.’ 

63. He’s strange and peeuish] Jonson: He is a foreigner and easily fretted. 
—LItTLEDALE (Dyce’s Gloss.): ‘Peevish’ appears to have generally signified, 


86 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. Vii. 


Pifa. Iwas going Sir, 
To giue him welcome. Exit. 65 
Imo. Continues well my Lord? 
His health befeech you ? 
Tach. Well, Madam. 
Imo. Is he difpos’d to mirth ? I hope he is, 
Tach. Exceeding pleasant : none a ftranger there, 70 
So merry, and fo gamefome : he is call’d 
The Britaine Reueller. 
Imo. When he was heere 
He did incline to fadneffe, and oft times 
Not knowiug why. a 
Tach. neuer faw him fad. 


64, 65. One line Han. 70. none] not Han. ne’er Anon ap. 
64. going] just going Han. a going Cam. 

Ktly. 72. Britaine] Britain F,F, Briton 
65. Exit.] Om. Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Varr. et seq. 

Theob. Warb. Johns. Varr. Ran. 74. oft times] oft-times Cap. Var. ’78 
66, 67. One line Han. Cap. et seq. et seq. ofttimes Sta. 


during Shakespeare’s days, silly, foolish, trifling, etc., and such would seem to be its 
import in the greater number of instances, though, no doubt, the word was formerly 
used to signify, as now, pettish, perverse, etc. [The present passage is quoted.] 

66, 67. Continues ... you?] STAUNTON reads, ‘Continues well my lord his 
health, beseech you?’ and asks, ‘Does not “continues” here import preserve, as in 
Meas. for Meas. “And how shall we continue Claudio,” IV, iii, 88?’ [If the pas- 
sage were obscure we might well be grateful for the interpretation, but I cannot see 
that it needs any assistance whatever.—Ep.] 

70,71. none a stranger ...So merry] Cf. ‘none so accomplish’d a courtier.’ 
—I, v, 96. 

72. Britaine] Hanmer changed this to Briton, but none of his successors, WAR- 
BURTON, JOHNSON, CAPELL, or the Var. ’73 adopted it, until the Var. ’78 which 
accepted Hanmer’s reading, and Briton it has remained ever since.—WALKER, 
however (Crit., ii, 40), quotes ‘Was Caius Lucius at the Britaine Court’ (II, iv, 46): 
‘the Britaine Army’ (V, ii, 3), ‘a Britaine Lord’ (V, iii, 2), and then remarks: 
‘In these three places, however, I rather believe that “Britaine” is an adjective, 
Britannus. The word which we now spell Briton was in old times uniformly 
written Britain; so far, at least, as I have observed. Like the Latin Britannus, 
which (in poetry at least) was used either as a substantive or an adjective, Britain, 
might be employed in both ways.’ An instance which corroborates this last 
remark occurs in ‘Heere comes the Britaine,’—I, v, 30. Walker adduces examples 
of the use of Britain for Briton, in other writers, even down to Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s 
Progress, enough to prove, as I think, that if we are to retain Shakespeare’s own 
language we should retain ‘Britain.’ —Ep. 


74. sadnesse] That is, seriousness. Rosalind says to Celia, ‘ speake sadde brow, 
and true maid.’—As You Like It, III, ii, 209. 


ACT 1, SC. vii. ] 


CYMBELINE 87 


There is a Frenchman his Companion, one V7 
An eminent Monfieur, that it feemes much loues 


A. Gallian-Girle at home. 


He furnaces 


The thicke fighes from him; whiles the iolly Britaine, 80 
(Your Lord I meane) laughes from’s free lungs :cries oh, 

Can my fides hold, to think that man who knowes 

By Hiftory, Report,or his owne proofe 

What woman is, yea what fhe cannot choofe 

But muft be-will’s free houres languith : 85 


For affured bondage ? — 


79. Gallian-Girle| Gallian girl Pope 
et seq. 
home.\ home, Johns. home: Han. 
Cap. et seq. 
80. fighes| fides Ff, Rowe, Pope i. 


Britaine| Britain ¥,¥,. Briton 
Theob. ii. et seq. 
81. from’s| from his Ktly. 
oh,) oh! Rowe,-+. O, Cap. 


Dyce. Oh! Coll. ii. O/ Var.’78 et seq. 
82. lo think that man| to think, that 
man Rowe, Pope, Han. to think that 
man, Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. to think, 
that man, Theob. et cet. 
85. But mut be:| But must be, Rowe 


85. will’s] FF, Rowe i, Johns. 
wills F,. will his Rowe ii. et cet. 

85, 86. But...For] One line Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. ii, Dyce, Sta. 
Ktly, Glo. Cam. 

will’s...bondage?| One line 
Johns. Var. ’73. 

languifh: For| languifh, For 
Ff, Rowe. languish out For Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. languish for 
Johns. Var. ’73, Steev. Varr. Knut, 
Dyce, Coll. ti, Glo. Cam. languish 
For Var. ’78 et cet. 

86. affured| assur’d Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Varr. Mal. 


Ran. Coll. i. 


79, 80. He furnaces The thicke sighes] According to Bartlett’s Concordance, 
this is the only instance where Shakespeare uses the verb ‘furnaces’; albeit Steevens 
and others have found here and there examples in other authors. Of course, evry 
one will recall ‘the lover. Sighing like furnace,’ in Jaques’s ‘Seven Ages.’ 

80. The thicke sighes] That is, where the sighs follow thick after each other. 
Imogen, full of eager impatience, tells Pisanio to ‘speake thicke’ (III, ii, 58). 
‘Thick’ refers to quantity not quality.—Eb. 

80. whiles| Anporr (137): ‘Whiles,’ the genitive of while, means of, or during, 
the time. 

81. laughes from’s free lungs] That is, laughs unrestrainedly; see ‘free houres,’ 
in the fourth line below.—Eb. 

82. that man] Possibly, there is an absorption of the in the final ¢ of ‘that,’ 
‘that ’ man,’—EDp. 

85. will’s free houres languish] The Text. Notes show how the earlier Edd. 
dealt with the neuter verb, ‘languish. —Detrus thus paraphrases: ‘In the hours 
of his freedom he languishes for a more assured bondage.—The CowDEN-CLARKES, 
in support of the same interpretation, ‘think it not improbable, that “will’s” 
may be a misprint for “will in’s free hours,” etc. In’s would be accordant with 
several similar elisional contractions in this play. Nevertheless, it is true that 
“languish” was sometimes used in Shakespeare’s time as a verb active; and, 
therefore, we leave the text undisturbed.’—IncLEBy adopted this emendation, 
in’s (with credit to the Clarkes); VAUGHAN says that the phrase was probably thus 


et seq. Separate line Johns. Var. ’73. 


88 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT I, SC. vil. 


Imo. Will my Lord fay fo ? 87 
Tach. J Madam, with his eyes in flood: with laughter, 
It is a Recreation to be by | 
And heare him mocke the Frenchman : gO 
But Heauen’s know fome men are much too blame. 
Imo. Not he I hope. 
Tach. Not he: 


But yet Heauen’s bounty towards him, might 94 
88. Madam,] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. ot. But Heauen’s know] but heav’n 
Dyce. madam; Cap. et cet. knows Pope,+. But heauens know Ff. 
laughter,| laughter. or laughter: (heav ns F,) et cet. 
Rowe ii. et seq. too] Ff. to Rowe. 
go, 91. And...know] One line Pope 93, 94. Not...might] One line Rowe et 
et seq. seq. 


written (without credit to the Clarkes). Moreover, Vaughan asserts that ‘as 
“Janguish” is not transitive in Shakespeare, “languish his hours” must mean 
“languish during his hours.”’ In dogmatic assertion, Vaughan, at times, appears 
to be a belated Warburton. Because Shakespeare has not elsewhere used ‘lan- 
guish’ as a transitive verb ‘must’ he be for ever debarred the privilege?—a privi- 
lege accorded to other writers? In the NV. £. D, (s. v. ‘languish,’ 4. a.) BRADLEY 
gives as ‘quasi-trans. (usually with out): To pass-(a period of time) in languishing.’ 
Hereupon follows as the first example the present passage from Cym. Under the 
next heading ‘ft b. causal. To make to languish,’ an example is quoted from 
Florio’s Montaigne: ‘Least by that jouissance he might or quench, or satisfie, or 
languish that burning flame and restlesse heat wherewith he gloryed.’—III, v, p. 
495, 3d. ed. This causal force is sufficient to justify us, I think, in applying it to 
the interpretation of the present passage. But this is not all. There is another 
sentence, not given by Bradley, on p. 498 of the same volume of Montaigne, 
where this verb is used, unmistakably I think, in a transitive sense: ‘The innumer- 
able multitude of so manifold duties stifling, languishing, and dispersing our care.’ 
Emboldened by this transitive use, several years before the date of Cymbeline, by 
one who was in all likelihood Shakespeare’s personal friend, I think Shakespeare 
may be allowed, just this once, to make ‘free hours’ the object of ‘languish.’—Ep. 

86. For assured bondage] In two passages, according to Dyce (Gloss.) 
‘assures’ bears the meaning of affianced: ‘this drudge . . . swore I was assured 
to her.’—Com. of Err., III, ii, 145; ‘King Philip. Young princes close your hands. 
Austria And your lips too; for I am well assured That I did so when I was first 
assured.’—King John, Il, i, 534. I think it more than probable that here also 
‘assured’ bears this meaning; it would bring to Imogen an especial pang, if it re- 
minded her that she was herself merely affianced or ‘hand fasted’ to Posthumus, 
which I think was the case.—VAUGHAN asserts without qualification: ‘“To be as- 
sured” in Shakespeare is to be betrothed.’ What a flood of new light Vaughan thus 
throws on Shylock’s character! It has been always supposed that he still mourned 
for his Leah, but in the first scene he says, ‘that I may be assured, I will bethink 


me.’ Evidently ’twas the fear of a step-mother that drove Jessica from home.— 
Ep. 


92, 93. Not he I hope. Iach. Not he] Porter and CrarKe: The dra- 


ACDEIESG a Vite] CYMBELINE 89 
Be vs’d more thankfully. In himfelfe ’tis much; 95 
In you, which I account his beyond all Talents. 

96. which I account his| whom I count Ktly. 
his Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. whom 96. Talents.) F.. talents; Theob. 


I account his Johns. Var. 773. 
I account Coll ii. (MS.), Ktly. 
his beyond all] beyond all his 


which 


Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. Talents, F,F,, 
Rowe et cet. Taillenis. F: (Capell’s 
copy, ap. Cam.). ¢elling. Kinnear. 


matic skill of this repetition is a marvel. 
are much to blame, assenting to Imogen’s hope that he is not. 


thing; she, quite another. 


Jachimo says he is not one of those who 
But he means one 


He means to blame as his fictitious sighing Frenchman 
is. She, the opposite, that he is not to blame as a loose liver. 


Thus, without di- 
rectly impeaching Posthumus’s fidelity, he has struck desolation to Imogen’s 
heart by indirectly telling her that this ‘Frenchman’s’ silly fault of constancy is 
not his, while seeming to echo her hope that he is not unfaithful. [If Iachimo 
were narrating facts, and anxious to keep within the bounds of truth, lest he be 
hereafter called upon to make good his words, it might well serve his purpose to 
prevaricate to Imogen and deceive her under a semblance of truth and allow her 
to misunderstand his assent. His whole story is, however, pure fiction, and it is of 
the utmost importance to him, step by step, to gain her credence; this he can gain 
by assent; assenting to whatever she says, not by opposing; just as sometimes an 
opponent will say, ‘Precisely,’ therefore, it is, I think, that he immediately re- 
afairms her timid hope, whatever it be, it matters not to him, and then, as imme- 
diately, allays the good precedence with a ‘But yet.’—Ep.] 

95, 96. In himselfe ’tis much;... Talents.] CAPELL: That is, this beha- 
viour is much, even in himself, considered only as coming from himself, a man of 
his qualities; but when I further consider it as used towards ‘you’-—whom I 
count a part of himself, and that an invaluable one, beyond all price—Whilst I 
am,’ etc. [Capell’s text (where it differs from the Folio) reads: ‘In you,—which 
T count his, beyond all talents,—Whilst,’ etc., and is followed by STEEVENS ’93; 
extraordinary, when considered only as proceeding from a man of his rare qualities, 
but when viewed as used towards you, his mate inestimable, as piteous as ’tis 
strange. [This appears to be a mere paraphrase of Capell. Rann’s text reads, 
‘In you,—which I account his, beyond all talents,—Whilst,’ etc. Followed by 
Matong, Varr.’78, ’85,’21; KNicuT, CoLuer, ed. i. (omitting comma after ‘his’); 
Deis, Dyce i; WuiteE i, Globe (omitting comma after ‘his’), Cam. (ditto), 
Herrorp (ditto), Rotre (ditto), Wyatr (ditto).}—Matone: If he merely re- 
garded his own character, without any consideration of his wife, his conduct would 
be unpardonable. [A note which Singer adopts, without acknowledgment.]— 
Coxuier (ed. ii.): The MS. Corrector has put his pen through the pronoun ‘his,’ 
to the improvement of the verse and also of the sense. Jachimo clearly means to 
express his own admiration of Imogen. [Collier followed the MS. in his text, but 
deserted it in his ed. iii..—STAUNTON, whose text reads, ‘In you,—which I account 
his,—beyond all talents., ‘remarks, ‘“‘all talents,” or we mistake, means here 
incalculable riches. "The bounty of heaven towards him is great in his own endow- 
ments; in its gift to you it is beyond all estimation. By the ordinary pointing 
[which differs from Staunton’s by a comma after “talents”] the word “talents” 
is made to signify accomplishments, and the whole sense of the passage miserably 
enfeebled.’ It is not readily apparent how the presence of a comma can work 


go THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. vil. 


[95, 96. In himselfe ’tis much;.. . Talents. | 
such a change in the meaning of a single word. [Staunton’s text is followed by 
Joun Hunter; Waite (ed. ii.), Hupson, INcLEBy, DowveEn.]—Hupson: That is, 
‘Heaven’s bounty towards him in his own person is great; but in you,—for I regard 
you as his treasure,—it is beyond all estimate of riches.’ [This appears to be 
an excellent paraphrase.—HERrForp’s, which Rolfe commends, is certainly more 
terse, as follows:] ‘That he is not grateful for his own gifts, is much; that he is not 
grateful for you, his gift beyond price, fills me with wonder and pity.’ [Wherein 
this interpretation falls a little short, as I think, is that the main thought is repre- 
sented as gratitude; should it not be ‘Heaven’s bounty’?—Ep.]—Scumt (Lex., 
ed. ii, 1886) conjectures that ‘account his’ should be printed accownt’s, 7. e., account 
is, on the supposition that in the MS. the words stood thus and the compositors 
mistook the abbreviation for fis —|HERTZBERG at once adopted this conjecture, 
wherein, I think, he will find no follower.—Ep.]—DerrcuHTon: Heaven’s bounty 
to him is abundant in regard to what is inherent in himself (e. g., noble descent, 
heroic character, manifold accomplishments), while in regard to you, whom I look 
upon as belonging to him, it is beyond all limit; but while I am on this account com- 
pelled to wonder, I am also compelled to pity.—Wvatr: ‘As regards himself alone 
he is greatly to blame; as regards you, whom I must suppose to be irredeemably 
his, his conduct amazes me and fills me with pity.’ That is, I believe, the meaning 
of this difficult sentence. Most recent editors punctuate the line: ‘In you, which 
T account his, beyond all talents.’ This makes the passage yield a totally different 
meaning, as in Deighton’s paraphrase—DownbEN: I change the full stop of the 
Folio after ‘thankfully’ to a colon, and insert a comma after ‘his.’ . . . The 
meaning I believe to be: In his own peculiar gifts heaven’s bounty is much; in you— 
who are his—heaven’s bounty to him is beyond all gifts (or endowments). ‘Talent’ 
is used for ‘gift’ by Shakespeare. Mr Craig, however, noticing, what is certainly 
the fact, that ‘talent’ was used by Elizabethan and earlier writers for ‘inclination,’ 
‘desire,’ would let the sense run to line 97, and explain: ‘With respect to you, 
whom I account his beyond all reach of loose desires, Whilst,’ etc. [Craig, in his 
edition, did not repeat this plausible interpretation of ‘talents’ (see V. E. D., sb. 
II. 2. and 3), but merely quoted DowpEn’s note. Iachimo had made a bad 
beginning; the ‘boldness’ and ‘audacity’ which he had summoned to his aid 
proved futile, and instead of awakening jealousy his rapsodies had suggested to 
Imogen only that he was tainted in his wits and that he was not well. This would 
never do. So he invents Posthumus’s scoffs at the love of the Frenchman and the 
Gallian girl, ending with the sanctimonious but ambiguous remark that the 
Heavens know some men are much to blame, which may apply either to the 
Frenchman or to Posthumus. To Imogen’s placid but confident response, ‘Not 
he, I hope,’ Iachimo had to give an assent, for the reason, I think, given in the 
preceding note. Had he dissented and said outright that Posthumus was guilty, 
he might as well give up his wager at once and return to Italy; he had made no 
impression on Imogen. He changes his tactics, therefore, at once, and qualifies 
his assent by a regret that Posthumus is not sufficiently thankful for the gifts which 
Heaven’s bounty had bestowed on him. Towards himself that bounty had been 
much; towards Imogen, who was also to be counted in the sum of Posthumus’s 
gifts, that bounty had been bestowed beyond all calculation. Then follows the 
insidious remark that while he wonders he must also pity. This paraphrase hardly 
varies from some that have been given by my betters. I wish to give merely my 


ACT. 1, SC. Vil. | CYMBELINE gI 


Whil’ft Iam bound to wonder, I am bound 97 
To pitty too. 
Lmo. What do you pitty Sir? 
lach. Two Creatures heartyly, 100 
Imo. Am I one Sir ? 
You looke on me: what wrack difcerne you in me 
Deferues your pitty ? 
lach. Lamentable : what 
To hide me from the radiant Sun, and folace 105 
I’th’ Dungeon by a Snuffe. 
Imo. I pray you Sir, 
Deliuer with more openneffe your anfweres 
To my demands. Why do you pitty me? 
lach. That others do, 110 
(I was about to fay) enioy your but 
It is an office of the Gods to venge it, 


Not mine to fpeake on’t. rig 
07. Whil’ fi] whilft Ff. Varr. Knt. what, Cap. Dyce, Sta. 
102. wrack] F;F,, Rowe, Cap. wracke Glo. Cam. 
F,. wreck Pope et cet. 105. Sun, and| sun and Glo. 
104. Lamentable:| Lamentable! Rowe 106. P’th’] F;F,, Rowe,+. IJth Fz. 
et seq. I’the Cap. et seq. 
what] Ff, Rowe, Pope. what! tro. do,| do— Han. 
Theob.+, Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Iir. your ——but] Fi, Rowe,+. your 


—But Cap. et seq. 


opinion that it is not gratitude to Heaven for the bounty, but Heaven’s bounty 
lavished on Posthumus, which is the leading idea. Then, having shown to Imogen 
his appreciation, akin to wonder, of her husband’s heaven-sent gifts, with herself 
as that husband’s greatest possession, the proof that this rare man wallows in filth 
and slime will come with heavier force.—Eb.] 

oz. You looke on me] Here, I think, is one of Shakespeare’s stage direc- 
tions, almost the only kind we ever need or he ever uses. By the light of these 
words we are to see the bold, glittering eyes of Iachimo fixed steadily on Imogen.— 
Ep. 

105. To hide me] INGLEBY: ‘me’ is here expletive.—DEIGHTON: ‘me’ is the 
ethical dative—WvatrT: ‘me’ is pleonastic. [Does it not stand for myself? See 
ABBOTT, § 223.—ED.] 

106. Snuffe] Joun Hunter: An expiring candle. Herrorp: A candle-wick.— 
DowpeEN: The wick, as darkening the flame. 

tir. enjoy your ——but] Derrcuron: He interrupts himself in order to 
further excite her distrust. [A variation in the copies of F: is noted in ‘Talents’ 
in Text. Notes, line 96. There is here apparently another variation. The Cam. 
Ed. record ‘your: but’ as the reading of F:. My copy has ‘your ——but,’ and thus 
also are Vernor & Hood’s Reprint of 1807, Booth’s Reprint, and Staunton’s Photo- 
lithograph.—Eb.| 


92 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Imo. 


You do feeme to know 


(ACTet ASe.cviL 


Something of me, or what concernes me; pray you 115 
Since doubting things go ill, often hurts more 

Then to be fure they do. For Certainties 

Either are paft remedies; or timely knowing, 

The remedy then borne. Difcouer to me 


What both you fpur and ftop. 120 
Tach’ Had I this cheeke 

To bathe my lips vpon : this hand, whofe touch, 

(Whofe euery touch) would force the Feelers foule 123 


116-119. Since...borne.] In parenthe- 
ses (subs.), Pope et seq. In parenthe- 
ses. For Certainties...borne. Vaun. 

116. hurts] hurt Pope. 

117. Then] Than F,. 

do.| do; Rowe et seq. 
118. Hither] or Pope,+. 

remedies| remedy Boaden, Ing]. 
118, 119. knowing,...borne.] Ff. (born. 


knowing,...born, Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, 
Dyce. known, The remedy then born— 
Ktly. knowing,...born— Glo. knowing, 
...born,— Cam. knowing The remedy 
therefore Anon. ap. Cam. 

120. What both you] What’s both your 
Eccl. conj. 

122. bathe] F.. bath F3F,, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Warb. Cap. bait Bailey 


F,F,). knowing...born; Rowe, Pope, 
Thecb. Warb. known, The remedy’s 
then born; Han. Eccl. conj. knowing, 
The remedy’s then born; Johns. know- euery| Fo. 
ing,...born) Cap. Varr. Ran. Coll. Pope, Han. 


116. Since doubting things go ill] That is, being in doubt as to whether or 
not things go ill. 

118, 119. or timely knowing, The remedy then borne] JoHNSoN: Rather 
—timely Known.—Matone: I believe Shakespeare wrote Known, and that the 
transcribers ear deceived him here as in many other places.—J. BoApEN (reading, 
‘past remedy; or timely knowing The remedy, then borne’]: That is, ‘they are 
either past all remedy; or, the remedy being timely suggested to us by the knowing 
them, they are the more easily borne. DEIGHTON: That is, being known in time 
their remedy is then discovered.—Wvatt: ‘Knowing,’ as if the subject of the 
sentence were ‘we’ or ‘I,’ is a good example of an ‘unrelated participle. —VaucHAN 
(p. 378): Linterpret thus: ‘either the evils certainly known are past remedies, or 
the timely knowing them as certain is the remedy brought into existence con- 
currently with that of knowledge.’ ‘Knowing’ is both genuine and correct— 
DowneEN disagrees with Vaughan in taking ‘timely knowing’ as itself the remedy, 
and believes that ‘Imogen speaks of evils known as certain, yet not remediless; 
upon timely knowledge the remedy is (the “is” being understood and assumed out 
of “are”) then born.’ [As in many an elliptical sentence, the sense is here readily 
grasped. In unfolding the ellipsis, however, there is generally quot homines, tot 
sententiae, and it is perhaps well to lay his choice before the student. 
Dowden’s paraphrase is satisfactory.—Eb.] 

120. What both you spur and stop] Jomnson: What it is that at once 
incites you to speak and restrains you from it—M. Mason: What you seem 


anxious to utter, yet withhold.—SrrEvens informs us that there is here an allusion 
to horsemanship. 


(ii, 129). 

123. (Whofe euery touch)| No paren- 
theses Rowe et seq. 
very F3;F,, Rowe, 


To me 


ACT OT ESCa vile) CYMBELINE 


93 

To’th’oath of loyalty. This obieét, which 124 

Takes prifoner the wild motion of mine eye, 

Fiering it onely heere,fhould I (damn’d then ) 126 
124. th’oath] the oath Cap. et seq. ing Ff et cet. Fearing Nicholson ap. 
125. prifoner| pris’ner Pope,+. Cam. 

126. Fiering] Daniel, Dowden. Fix- 126. damn’d| F;F,. damnd F,. 


124. oath of loyalty] STrEEvENS admitted to his edition of 1793 a note by 
Horr Waiter, wherein it was maintained that there can be no connection between 
touching the hand and the oath of loyalty unless we perceive therein an allusion ‘to 
the manner in which the tenant performed homage to his lord’ when the vassal 
‘held his hands jointly together between the hands of his lord.’ No reference 
would have been here made to this dry-as-dust note had not HALtIweELt given it 
in full. It evoked from PvE (p. 275) the comment, noteworthy for its unwonted 
sense, that the ‘coloring in this passage is too warm to have any allusion to the 
cold ceremony of doing homage to a feudal lord.’ Pye, be it recalled, was, for more 
than twenty years Poet Laureate; he it was who not needing plumpie Bacchus with 
pink eyne to inspire him, compounded for £27 per annum the historic tierce of 
canary. 

124. This object] That is, Imogen herself, with cheek and hands. 

124, 125. which Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye] PECK (p. 
227) thinks that Shakespeare ‘copied’ this charming thought from the A pocrypha, 
Judith, chap. xvi, 9: ‘Her beautie tooke his minde prisoner.’ This raises the 
question of the version of the Bible used by Shakespeare. Grnspure (Atheneum, 
28 April, 1883) infers, from a line in Love’s Lab. Lost: ‘For charity itself fulfills 
the law’—(LV, iii, 364) that The Bishops’ Bible, 1568, was Shakespeare’s Version, 
because out of the eight versions then extant The Bishops’ alone has the phrase in 
Shakespeare’s words. On the other hand, Rev. T. Carter (p. 195) adduces many 
instances to prove that The Genevan Bible (1560) was most frequently paraphrased 
by Shakespeare. If the decision lie with the present passage, it must be given in 
favour of The Genevan, which has the words as given above, whereas The Bishops’ 
Bible reads: ‘her beautie captiuated his minde.’—Enp. 

126. Fiering it onely heere] DANtEL (p. 85): It seems to me that ‘fiering’ (firing, 
giving fire to) is a very good reading, and should be restored—Dowpen: I retain this 
reading of F:. The reading of the Fi, ‘Fixing,’ is, perhaps rightly, adopted by many 
editors [by all editors, I think —Eb.]. I explain: ‘from her alone does the passion 
of my eye catch fire’; ‘motion’ may mean passion here, as often elsewhere.—Craic, 
albeit following the Ff in his text, quotes Dowden’s explanation, with the remark, 
‘“Fiering” of F; is surely preferable.’ [To me it is an nterpretatio certissima. I 
know how strong may be the defence of ‘Fixing’ by alleging that it is Imogen’s 
beauty which imprisons the unconfined rovings of Iachimo’s eye, and fixes it 
enchained on her; this is the easiest reading, but it is the durior lectio which is to be 
preferred. ‘Motion’ here means passion, just as it does in Posthumus’s bitter 
soliloquy: ‘there’s no motion That tends to vice in man, but I affirme It is the 
Woman’s part.’—II, iv, 217; and where Brabantio accuses Othello of having prac- 
tised on Desdemona ‘with drugs or minerals That weaken motion’; and where 
Lucio describes Angelo, in Meas. for Meas.,as a man that ‘never feels the wanton 
stings and motions of the sense’; and in many a passage elsewhere. This wild and 
wandering motion is caught a prisoner, and by the sight of Imogen’s cheek and by 


94 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[AcT I, SC. vii. 


Slauuer with lippes as common as the ftayres 127 
That mount the Capitoll : loyne gripes, with hands 

Made hard with hourely falfhood (falfhood as 

With labour:) then by peeping in an eye 130 


128. gripes,| gripes Pope. 

129, 130. Made...labour:)] One line 
Rowe,+, Cap. 

129. hourely falfhood (falfhood| Fz. 
hourly falfhood (falfhood F;, Var. 73, 


130. then] than ¥,. Then glad myself 
Rowe,-+, Cap. 

by peeping] Ff, Rowe,+-, Cap. 

Coll. i. lye peeping Johnson conj. 

Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Dyce 


Coll. hourly (falfhood F,. hourly ii, iii. by-peeping Knt, Delius, Dyce i, 
falshood Rowe,+, Cap. hourly false- Sing. Wh. Sta. Glo. Cam. Dowden. 
hood—with falsehood Ktly. hourly bo-peeping Coll. ii, iii. bide peeping 


falsed falshood Vaun. hourly falsehood Ktly. sit peeping Huds. 


(falsehood, Var. ’78 et cet. 


the touch of her hands is set on fire by them alone; if so, could he then leave them 
and turn to other lips? This he could not do were his eyes still ‘fixed’ on her. The 
very supposition that he could seek a lower sort implies that his eyes were free to 
wander. The sentiment is parallel to Hamlet’s question to his mother: ‘Have 
you eyes? Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed, And batten on this 
moor?’—III, iv, 65.—Eb.] 

126. damn’d] Again there is a variation in the copies of F,. The Cam. Ed. 
give dampn’d as the spelling of this word in Fy:- In my copy of that edition, in 
Vernor & Hood’s Reprint, in Booth’s Reprint, and in Staunton’s Photolithograph 
it is spelled as in the text.—Eb. ‘ 

127. Slauuer] This is explained by more than one editor as ‘amorous,’ or ‘dis- 
gusting kisses.’ Is it not a profanation of a ‘kiss’ to think of it in this connection? 
‘Slavering with lips’ is not kissing, but mere slobbering.—Eb. 

127,128. stayres That mount the Capitoll] HALttrweLLt: Mr Fairholt sends 
this note: ‘In addition to the winding way, the via triumphalis, that gave carriages 
an ascent to the Capitoll at Rome, there was a flight of stairs for foot passengers 
leading direct to the summit from the Arch of Septimus Severus.’ 

128-130. hands Made hard with hourely falshood (falshood as With 
labour] JoHNson: That is, hard by being often griped with frequent change of 
hands.—RAnwn: ‘With hourly falshood’ means with frequent pressure—M. Mason 
(p. 324): One of these ‘falsehoods’ should be expunged. [The omission had been 
made from the Fourth Folio to Capell.|_—Hupson: Made hard by hourly clasping 
hands in vowing friendship, or in sealing covenants, falsely. [Is ‘friendship’ strong 
enough in this connection? or a thought of legal formality possible?-—Ep.J— 
INcLEBy: The hands were (metaphorically) hardened by familiar sin,—habituated 
to vicious ministrations,—as much as if they had been (literally) hardened by 
honest labour.—StauNToNn (Atheneum, 14 June, ’73): ‘Falsehood’ here implies 
robbery, dishonesty, as in Sonnet, xlviii: ‘How careful was I when I took my way, 
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust: That to my use it might unused stay From 
hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!’ and hence the ‘as’ in ‘as with labour’ 
may be suspected to have been borrowed from the neighbouring lines: the genuine 
lection being, ‘hourly falsehood (falsehood, not With labour).’ 

130. then by peeping in an eye] JoHNSON: I read, ‘then lye peeping.’— 
Kwnicut: ‘By-peeping,’—so in the original. [An oversight?—Ep.] It appears 


ACT I, SC. vii. ] CYMBELINE 95 


Bafe and illuftrious as the fmoakie light can 


13a illuftrious] unluftrious Rowe, Pope, Han.  illustrous Tieck, Coll. Wh. Sing. 
Ktly. ill-lustrous Ingl. inlustrous Anon. ap. Cam. unlustrous Theob. et cet. 


to us that ‘by-peeping’ is clandestinely peeping.—Corter (ed. ii.): The happy 
emendation of the MS. is bo-peeping. The allusion is to the game of bo-peep, often 
mentioned in the old dramatists; thus in The London Prodigal, 1605, a play im- 
puted to Shakespeare, Frances says, ‘Ha, ha! sister, there you played bo-peep with 
Tom.’ [ad. fin]. In The Captain (IV, iii, Beau. & Fl., ed. Dyce) Jachimo says to 
Frederick, ‘Nay, an’ you play bo-peep, I'll ha’ no mercy.’ In Patient Grissel, 
I, i, Babulo observes, ‘The sun hath played bo-peep in the element any times 
these two hours.’ Nothing could be more easy than to multiply instances. [Be 
the instances multiplied a hundredfold, they would not suffice to prove that, at 
such a moment, in such a presence, and in such a connection, Iachimo used a 
word suggestive of an innocent game in a child’s nursery. Ep.|—Lrtrsom (Preface 
to Walker, Crit., p. xxv.): Johnson mentioned the [original reading] with approbation 
[Where? Not in Johnson’s ed.—Ep.] in a note, and at the same time proposed 
to read lie for ‘by.’ His advice was taken in both cases by some succeeding editors 
[it appeared in seven successive editions before 1860, when Lettsom wrote], and 
it might have been expected that a passage, so successfully treated, might for the 
future have been left alone. But in the eyes of still later critics nothing is so 
terrible as the slightest conjecture, nothing so precious as an old typographical 
blunder. In every recent edition [this can refer only to Knight’s, Collier’s i. and 
ii, Dyce’s i, Singer’s, and Delius’s, the last Lettsom probably never saw]. Johnson’s 
conjecture, so slight, so easy, and so indispensable, had been unceremoniously 
rejected, and the sore has been salved, not cured, with the help of a hyphen, by 
reading by-peeping or bo-peeping. Neither of these reading satisfies the construc- 
tion. Mr Knight is mistaken in saying that ‘by-peeping’ is the reading of the old 
copy; the old copy omits the hyphen, the insertion of which is as much a conjec- 
ture as any other alteration. Not that it restored what the poet wrote. This I 
cannot think the case here. Johnson saw, what the more recent editors seem to 
have overlooked, that ‘slaver’ and ‘join’ require to be connected, not with a 
participle, but with another verb. The same error occurs in Goffe, Courageous 
Turk, Il, i, ‘Make him by snoring on a wanton breast, And suck the adulterate 
and spiced breath,’ etc., and in Beau. & Fl., Mad Lover, I, i, ‘Your cold sallads 
without salt or vinegar By wambling in your stomachs,’ where Mr Dyce properly 
adopts Sympson’s correction, Lie. [Lrtrrsom is too sound and keen a critic to be 
ever overlooked. In the present case I can say only, perhaps he is right. I, 
however, by-thinking (with a hyphen) can mean looking furtively or clandestinely, 
or winking on the sly, it befits the passage better, I think, than to le peeping, 
wherein I fail to see the force of a recumbent position for the purpose of peeping. 
The addition of a hyphen is certainly a less violent change than the substitution of a 
word, and as for rejecting a participle because it is preceded by two verbs in the 
subjunctive, it seems to me too Jate a week to demand a strict sequence in tenses 
from Shakespeare,—a chartered libertine in a grammar which he helped us to form. 
—Ep.] 

131. Base and illustrious] MALONE (reading ‘unlustrous’): Corrected by Mr 
Rowe [see Text. Notes; this error has been many times repeated, even by the 
Cam. Ed.]. That ‘illustrious’ was not used by our author in the sense of zlustrous 
or unlustrous is proved by a passage in the old comedy of Patient Grissel, 1603: 


96 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. vil. 


That’s fed with ftinking Tallow : it were fit 132 
That all the plagues of Hell fhould at one time 
Encounter fuch reuolt. 

Imo. My Lord, I feare 135 
Has forgot Brittaine. 

Tach. And himfelfe, not I 
Inclin’d to this intelligence, pronounce 


The Beggery of his change : but ’tis your Graces 139 
132. Tallow:] tallow? Rowe, Pope, 137. himfelfe,] himfelf, F;F,. himself; 
Han. tallow, Coll. Dyce i. Rowe, Cap. himself. Pope et cet. 


‘the buttons were illustrious and resplendent diamonds.’—StTEEvENs: A ‘lack- 
lustre eye’ has been already mentioned in As You Like It—Trecx (vol. ix, p. 377, 
1833) quotes the word as illustrous, thus anticipating Collier, and translates it 
glorreich, with the remark that those editors who adopt the tame word ‘unlustrous’ 
miss the bitter irony involved in the contrast——CoLtier (ed. ii.): All modern 
editors (anterior to 1843) change illustrous to unlustrous, which may be more 
strictly correct; but the word is z//ustrous (misprinted ‘illustrious’) in all the folios, 
and it ought on every account to be preferred, as that which came from the author’s 
pen. [This is, as Capell would say, a ‘wipe’ on Dyce, whose text reads wnlustrous. 
Dyce felt it, and revenged himself by adducing a quotation of which Collier was 
ignorant.|—Dvce (ed. ii.): But Chapman at least uses il/ustrous in a sense the very 
reverse of what they [?. e., Collier and those who followed him] would have it 
convey in our text: ‘Telemachus, into a roome built hie, Of his il/ustrous court, 
and to the eie Of circular prospect, to his bed ascended,’ &c., Homer’s Odyssey, B. i, 
p. 15, ed. fol—TuIsELTON (p. 15): The expression ‘ Base and illustrious’ signifies 
the conjunction of baseness and lustre, and is infinitely more forcible than any 
alteration that would merely couple the ideas of baseness and lack of lustre— 
DowveN: Perhaps Thiselton is right. [Whether we use illustrous or unlustrous, 
the meaning, Justreless, is the same, and, for all Tieck’s ‘bitter irony,’ the proper 
meaning, I think, in the present passage. I have little doubt, however, that 
‘illustrious’ is Shakespeare’s own word,—or his compositor’s, and is akin to jealious, 
dexterious, prolixious, robustious, beautious,—all to be found in the Folio and Quar- 
tos; this tendency survives even to this day in vulgar speech, in stupendious and 
mischievious. Wherefore, if we are to prefer ‘that which came from the author’s 
pen,’ I am afraid we should have to reject any alteration of ‘illustrious. —Ep.] 

134. Encounter such reuolt] Joun Hunter: Meet such apostacy DEIGHTON: 
Meet and punish such a revolt from fealty due to you. 

137, 138. not I inclin’d to this intelligence] Jonn Hunter: It is not that I 
having any inclination to impart this to you, pronounce, etc.—INGLEBY: It is not 
because I am inclined to convey such intelligence, that I pronounce, etc. [Neither 
of these paraphrases brings out, I think, the exact meaning of Iachimo’s words. 
He wishes to throw indirectly the obloquy of these revelations on Imogen. ‘It is 
not,’ he says in effect, ‘I who divulge the utter depths of his change, inclined 
though I be to impart the news, but ’tis your loveliness that has conjured up this 
report from the innermost silence of my consciousness.’ It seems not impossible 


that in the word ‘intelligence’ there lies a suggestion of information obtained in an 
underhand way, by stealth, or by spying. —Ep.] 


ACT I, SC. vii.] 


CYMBELINE Q7 


That from my muteft Confcience, to my tongue, 140 


Charmes this report out. 
Lmo. 


Let me heare no more. 


tach. O deereft Soule : your Caufe doth ftrike my hart 


With pitty, that doth make me ficke. 


A Lady | 


So faire, and faften’d to an Emperie 145 
Would make the great’ft King double, to be partner’d 

With Tomboyes hyr’d, with that felfe exhibition 

Which your owne Coffers yeeld : with difeas’d ventures 148 


143. Soule:| soul, Cap. Dyce, Sta. 
Cam. himself! Rowe et cet. 
144. ficke.] sick! Dyce, Sta. Cam. 
145, 146. So faire...double] In paren- 
theses Ktly. 
and...double| In parentheses 
Sta. 
Emperie.. double,| Ff. Han. 
Dyce ii, iii, Huds. Sta. (in parentheses). 
empery,...double, Rowe i, Coll. Dyce i, 
White, Del. Glo. Cam. Dtn, Rlfe, Dowd. 
empery,...double; Rowe ii, Ingl. em- 


pery,...double! Pope, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Cap. Varr. Ran. Mal. Steev. 
Varr. Knt, Sing. 

147. Tomboyes hyrd, with] F.F;. 
Tomboys hir’d, with F,, Rowe i. Tom- 
boys, hir’d with Rowe ii et seq (subs.) 

Jelfe exhibition] F,, Rowe, Cap. 
Coll. Cam. Dyce iii. /felfe-exhibition 
F.F;, Pope et cet. 

148. yeeld:| yield: F;F,. yield! Rowe 

et seq. 
ventures] venters Rowe ii, Pope. 


141. Charmes] This verb in the singular after a plural subject, ABBOTT (§ 412) 
calls ‘confusion by proximity’ inasmuch as it is close to ‘tongue.’ Older gram- 
marians call it ‘singular by attraction.—Br. NicHoxson (see Ingleby, ii, p. 48) 
gives a concise rule for this idiom, as follows: ‘When ¢hat intervenes between the 
noun and the verb in Elizabethan English, usage places the verb in the singular, 
even though the noun be in the plural.’ 

145, 146. and fasten’d to an Emperie Would make] It is difficult to deter- 
mine the meaning of this line. Does it mean: ‘A Lady so fair and fastened to an 
Empiry, which Empiry would thereby make the greatest King double’? according 
to the punctuation of the Folio; or does it mean, according to the punctuation of 
Rowe (ed. i.): ‘A Lady so fair, who fastened to an empery, Would make the 
great’st King double’? The solution largely depends on the presence or absence 
of a comma after ‘Emperie.’ The Text. Notes will, therefore, reveal the opinions of 
the various editors, without rehearsing them here.—Ep. 

145. Emperie] Braptey (NV. £. D., s. v., Empery 2. a.): The territory ruled 
by an Emperor. 6. In wider sense: The territory of an absolute or powerful ruler. 
[As here, probably.] 

147. Tomboyes] Hunter (ii, 293): This meant in Shakespeare’s time pretty much 
what it means now. Golding applies it to Arethusa, who was indeed quite a tomboy. 

147. selfe exhibition] JoHnson: That is, hired with the very pension which 
you allow your husband.—Nares (Gloss., s. v., exhibition): When Lear complains 
of being ‘confined to exhibition,’ he means put upon a stated allowance.—l, ii. 
The same is the intent of Othello when he requires for his wife, ‘Due reference of 
place and exhibition.’—I, iii. Still used in the universities, where the salaries 
bestowed by some foundations are called ‘exhibitions. —INncLeBy: Now restricted 
to a stipend awarded for proficiency in learning. 

148. ventures] CAPELL (p. 106): Put figuratively for ventures, 7. e., traders.— 


7 


98 THE TRAGEVDIE OF 


[ACT I, SC. vil. 


That play with all Infirmities for Gold, 


Which rottenneffe can lend Nature. 
Be reueng’d, 


As well might poyfon Poyfon. 


Such boyl’d ftuffe 150 


Or fhe that bore you, was no Queene, and you 


Recoyle from your great Stocke. 


Imo. Reueng’d : 


How fhould I be reueng’d? If this be true, 155 
(As I haue fuch a Heart, that both mine eares 
Muft not in hafte abufe) if it be true, 


How fhould I be reueng’d ? 
lach. Should he make me 


149. That play] To play Rowe ii, 
Pope, Han. That pay Coll. MS. Ktly 
conj. 

150. can lend] lends Pope,+-. 

Nature.| Nature, Ff. nature! 
Rowe et seq. 

151. Poyfon.] poison! Rowe et seq. 

reueng’d,| Fi, Rowe i, Coll. 


159 


152. and you] or you Ingl. conj. 

154. Reueng’d:] Ff. Reveng’d, alas! 
Han. Reveng’d! Rowe et cet. 

155. reueng’d? If...true,| reveng’d if 
this be true, Rowe. reveng’d, if this be 
true? Pope,-+, Var. ’73. 

156, 157. (As...abufe)] No parenthe- 
ses Rowe, Pope. 


Cam. vreveng’d Rowe ii, Han. re- 157. abufe)] abuses, Rowe ii,+, Var. 
veng’d; Theob. et cet. Z 


73- 
158. fhould] fhall F;F,, Rowe,-+-. 


Dyce (Gloss.): Chance lemans [The true interpretation, as I think.—Eb.]; or 
else equivalent to ventwrers——VAUGHAN (p. 380): ‘With those diseased gamblers 
who stake against money all the infirmities which rottenness can lend nature.’— 
DowvEN: Perhaps ‘ventures’ means things risked in the way of trade, as in 
Mer. of Ven., I, i, 42: ‘My ventures are not in one bottom trusted.’ 

149. That play with... for Gold] KericHTtry (Exp., 376): We might 
make a transposition, and read ‘That play for gold,’ etc., 7. e., stake their diseases 
against gold. 

150. boyl’d stuffe] On this unsavory subject, STEEVENS quotes passages from 
Shakespeare and elsewhere to prove that this phrase refers to the treatment for dis- 
graceful diseases, and closes well enough with the remark that, ‘all this stuff about 
boiling, scalding, etc., is a mere play on stew, which is afterwards used for a brothel 
by Imogen.’ 

153. Recoyle from your great Stocke] Rotre: That is, fall off, prove de- 
generate; as in Macb., IV, iii, 19: ‘A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an 
imperial charge.’ 


156. As I haue] This ‘as’ is here, I think, equivalent to inasmuch as. See FRANZ 
(Grammatik, p. 305). 

159. Should he make me] WuirTeE (Sh. Scholar, p. 457): Should we not read, 
‘Should he make you’? What power had Posthumus over the conduct of Iachimo? 
[etc., etc. This unhappy conjecture was not repeated in White’s edition; it is 
therefore, to be inferred that it was happily withdrawn. Unfortunately, noweren 
in that edition White adopted a reading which was almost as prosaic, nanueiy: 
‘Should he make thee,’ unmindful of the impropriety of addressing a princess with 
the familiar, or contemptuous Second Person, in one line, and, in a few lines after, 


AGUS IGESCe Vile CYMBELINE 99 


Liue like Diana’s Prieft, betwixt cold theets, 160 
Whiles he is vaulting variable Rampes 

In your defpight, vpon your purfe : reuenge it. 

I dedicate my felfe to your fweet pleafure, 

More Noble then that runnagate to your bed, 


And will continue faft to your Affection, 165 
Still clofe, as fure, 
Imo. What hoa, Pi/anio? 167 
160. Liue] Lie Walker, Huds. 162. purfe:] purse? Pope et seq. 
Prieft, betwixt] priestess, ’twixt reuenge it.] revenge it! Pope, 
Han. priest, between Cap. Theob. Han. Johns. 
JSheets,| sheets; Rowe, Cap. Varr. 163. your] you Pope ii. 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. sheets? Pope,+. 166. clofe, as] close as Han. Dyce. 
161. vaulting] valting Fo. 167, 176, 183. hoa] ho F, et seq. 


speaking of ‘your despite,’ ‘your purse.’ Throughout this interview both Imogen 
and Iachimo have used the respectful ‘you’; it is not until Imogen pours out on the 
Italian her indignation and scorn that she uses for the first time the contemptuous 
‘thee.’—Dvyce (ed. ii.), after expressing his surprise that White should have thought 
it necessary to make such a substitution, justly observed that ‘Iachimo evidently 
means “Jf I were you, should you make me,”’ etc.—THISELTON (p. 16) accepts 
the text literally, and paraphrases it,—‘ Ought it to be a consequence of Posthumus’s 
gross infidelity, that I, your devoted worshipper, should be restricted to a life of 
celibacy owing to my constancy to you?’—ED.] 

160. Diana’s Priest] MALONE: Hanmer supposed that the text was inac- 
curate, and that we should read ‘Diana’s priestiss,’ but the text is as the author 
wrote it. So, in Pericles, Diana says: ‘My temple stands at Ephesus; hie thee 
thither; There where my maiden Priests are met together.’—V, i, 243. 

162. reuenge it.] Imogen has asked how she is to be revenged. Should not 
these words of Iachimo echo her question, and be followed by an interrogation 
mark? ‘Revenge it?’ Then comes his answer, ‘I dedicate myself,’ etc.—Eb. 

166. Still close, as sure] Always as secretly, as faithfully. 

167. What hoa, Pisanio] R. G. Wu1TE (Sh. Scholar, p. 459): The exquisite 
purity, the firm undallying chastity of Imogen are indicated with unsurpassable 
tact and skill in this Scene, and by her first exclamation. She is slow to under- 
stand Jachimo; but the moment he makes his proposition plainly,—without an 
instant’s delay, before a word of anger or surprise passes her lips, she calls for the 
faithful servant of her lord, to remove him who has insulted her and his friend’s 
honor. Then her indignation bursts from her; but again and again she interrupts 
its flow with ‘What ho, Pisanio!’ She holds no question with him who made such 
a proposition to her; she enters into no dispute of why or wherefore, draws no 
contrast herself between her truth and her husband’s falsehood: she seeks nothing 
but the instantaneous removal of a man who has dared to attempt her chastity. 
Not only does she refuse all consideration of the right or wrong of his proposition, 
all going into the metaphysics of the question, but the mere proposal changes, on 
the moment, all previous relations between her and the proposer, although they 
were established by her husband himself. It is not until her pure soul, as quick to 
believe the good as it was slow to imagine ill, is quieted by the entire withdrawal 


100 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Act I, SC. vil. 


Tach. Let me my feruice tender on your lippes. 168 
Imo. Away, 1 do condemne mine eares, that haue 
So long attended thee. If thou wert Honourable 170 


Thou would’ft haue told this tale for Vertue, not 

For fuch an end thou feek’ft, as bafe,as ftrange : 

Thou wrong’f{t a Gentleman, who is as farre 

From thy report, as thou from Honor: and 

Solicites heere a Lady, that difdaines 175 


169. Away,] Away! Theob. Warb. evicet, 

et seq. 175. Solicites] Solicit/t F.F;. Solicit’t 
172. feek’ft,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Coll. F, et seq. 

Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. seek’st; Theob. 


of Iachimo’s advances, and the assignment of a comprehensible, though not 
excusable reason for them, that she ceases to call for him who is in some sort the 
representative of her husband. 

168. Let me my seruice, etc.] It seems a little strange that after Imogen’s 
call for Pisanio, Iachimo should persist in his attempt and not take instant alarm. 
But he knew that a few minutes must certainly elapse before the servant could 
appear—in fact, he does not come at all—and from Imogen’s imperative ‘Away!’ 
is it not to be inferred that he had actually drawn very close, his face almost touch- 
ing hers, to tender the kiss. Possibly it is always so represented on the stage.—Eb. 

169. condemne] Coriier (ed. ii.): This is amended to contemn, a much more 
forcible word, in the MS. ‘Condemn’ is certainly intelligible, but we cannot 
doubt that Shakespeare’s expression was, ‘I do contemn mine ears,’ i. e., ‘I do 
despise mine ears that have so long,’ etc. [It is hardly worth while to discuss the 
needlessness of this change. Cotter himself, after having adopted it in his 
Second Edition, deserted it in his Third.—Eb.] 

172. end thou seek’st, as base, as strange] VAUGHAN: I am not confident 
that this most obvious sense [as base as it is strange] is the right one. ‘The base 
end’ alluded to was in some senses not a ‘strange’ end. The line may mean, ‘for 
such an end as you are aiming at, who are as low a fellow as you are foreign and 
unknown.’ Imogen has said to him, ‘if thou wert honorable,’ etc. She also says 
below of him ‘a saucy stranger.’ [It is true enough that ‘in some senses,’ as 
Vaughan says, the end alluded to was not strange, but Imogen could not say that 
Tachimo was ‘unknown’ to her; he had brought high commendations from Posthu- 
mus. For a man, however, to make base advances to a Princess, already married, 
at a first interview, is certainly ‘strange’; it can hardly be a matter of common 
occurrence. It is hardly admissible to interpret ‘strange’ as foreign. In an un- 
happy hour Theobald substituted a semi-colon after ‘seek’st,’ for the comma of the 
Folio.—Ep.] 

175. Solicites] One of WALKER’s valuable chapters (Crit., ii, 126) is devoted to 
examples where s is substituted for st in the second person singular of a verb, and 
chiefly in verbs ending in ¢, asin the present instance. I cannot but believe that this 
substitution was intentional wherever used, indeed, in some cases, the rhyme re- 
quires it. There is a notable instance when Hamlet addresses his father’s ghost: 
srt DRE mage ei . . . Revisits thus the glimpses of the Moon,’ where 

most unpronounceable. There is another example in this 


ACT I, SC. Vil. ] CYMBELINE IOI 


Thee, and the Diuell alike. What hoa, Pi/anio? 176 
The King my Father fhall be made acquainted 

Of thy Affault : if he fhall thinke it fit, 

A fawcy Stranger in his Court, to Mart 

As in a Romifh Stew, and to expound 180 
His beaftly minde to vs ; he hath a Court 


178. thy] this Walker (Crit., ii, 179. to Mart] to match Vaun. 
238). 181. to vs;] to us, Han. Var. 73, Coll. 
A ffauli] insult Coll. conj. Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo. Cam. 


present play, ‘Thinking to barre thee of succession, as Thou refts me of my lands’ 
—ITI, iii, 112, where, as in the present ‘solicits,’ I think the Folio should be followed. 
Grammar is dearly purchased in poetry at the price of invincible cacophony.— 
Ep. 

178, 179. thinke it fit, A sawcy Stranger] VAUGHAN (p. 382): The con- 
struction of this phrase, as appears by the punctuation, has been universally mis- 
understood. Jn truth it means, ‘if he shall think that it becomes a saucy,’ etc., 
‘Fit’ is a verb, not an adjective; and this view of it makes quite regular the other- 
wise awkward and abnormal infinitives ‘to mart’ and ‘to expound.’ [The chief 
objection to this truly excellent interpretation, and chief though it be it is trifling, 
is the use of the subjunctive instead of the indicative fits. Where no doubt is 
expressed, the indicative may follow an ‘if’ (see Abbott, § 363), and the punctua- 
tion of the Folio shows that the compositors, at least, accepted ‘fit’ as an adjective. 
Dowden thinks that ‘perhaps Vaughan may be right’; and he adopts his interpre- 
tation so far as to omit the comma after ‘fit.’ Vaughan is, I think, a little hasty in 
saying that the infinitives ‘to mart’ and ‘to expound’ are ‘awkward and abnormal.’ 
The instances in Shakespeare are many where the infinitive is used indefinitely. 
(See ABBOTT, § 356.)—Eb.] 

180. Romish] STEEVENS asserts that ‘Romish’ in Shakespeare’s time was used 
for Roman, and quotes three instances in proof. He is, of course, correct in his 
assertion; it was so used; but had he quoted thirty examples, it would not have 
explained the use of the word here and by Shakespeare. There is to this day a 
subtle atmosphere of nobility and grandeur surrounding the word ‘Roman.’ 
Shakespeare had to use it many times; a glance at Bartlett’s Concordance will show 
more than a column and a half’ of instances. But the present word ‘Romish’ 
from Imogen’s impassioned and indignant lips is full of scorn and contempt; and 
here, and here only, is it used by Shakespeare. In ‘swam cuique is our Roman 
justice,—substitute Romish, and mark the contempt.’—Ep. 

181. His beastly minde to vs] R. G. Waite (Sh. Scholar, p. 458): Here 
is an exquisite touch of the master’s hand in a single pronoun. Born a princess, 
she has given herself to Posthumus, a nameless man, as freely as if she were a 
peasant’s daughter; and she is remarkable, with all her dignity, for her unassuming 
deportment; but the insult of Jachimo stings her into pride, and for the first and 
only time she takes her state and speaks of herself in the plural number. She 
says, ‘to expound his mind,’ not to me, but ‘to us.’ Mrs Jameson’s delicate 
perception doubtless saw this, as well as the constrained brevity of Imogen’s 
replies, even after she has admitted the excuses of Iachimo. 


102 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acr 1, Sc. vil. 


He little cares for, and a Daughter, who 182 
He not refpects at all. What hoa, Pifanio? 
Tach. O happy Leonatus I may fay, 
The credit that thy Lady hath of thee 185 
Deferues thy truft, and thy moft perfect goodneffe 
Her affur’d credit. Bleffed liue you long, 
A Lady to the worthieft Sir, that euer 
Country call’d his ; and you his Miftris, onely 
For the moft worthieft fit. Giue me your pardon, 190 
I haue fpoke this to know if your Affiance 
Were deeply rooted, and fhall make your Lord, 
That which he is, new o’re: And he is one 


The trueft manner’d : fuch a holy Witch, 194 

182. a Daughter] Daughter F3F,. 187. long,| long! Cap. Var. ’78 et 
who| Dyce, Glo. Cam. Wh. ii. seq. 

whom Ff et cet. 189. his;] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
184. fay] Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. Cap. Coll. his! Theob. et cet. 

say; Theob. et cet. 190. mojft worthie/t] most worthy Pope, 
186. truft,| Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. 

Warb. Johns. Sta. Glo. Cam. frust; -. fit.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Coll. Ktly. 

Han. et cet. ju! Theob. et cet. 
187. credit. Bleffed] Cap. Coll. Dyce, -194. trueft manner’d| truest-manner’d 

Glo. Cam. credit, Bleffed F2. credit, Var. ’73. 

bleffed F3F4. credit; blessed Rowe, Han. manner’d:| manner’d, Pope,+, 

credit! blessed Pope et cet. Cam. 


182. who He little cares for] Recent editors wisely retain this ‘who,’ char- 
acteristic as it is of Shakespeare and his times. See also, ‘who the King... 
called,’ III, iti, 96; ‘To who.’—IV, ii, 102. 

185. The credit that thy Lady hath of thee] Ecctrs: The confidence 
which she reposes in thee deserves an equal return on thy part, and thy unsullied 
virtue and integrity is the surest foundation for that confidence in her—or possibly, 
‘credit’ may signify the good opinion which you entertain of her. 

189. Country call’d his] That is, called its own. 

190. most worthiest] For instances of double comparatives and double super- 
latives, see, if need be, ABBort, § rr. 

191. Affiance] Murray (N. E. D., s. v. 3.): The pledging of faith; solemn en- 
gagement; especially, the plighting of troth between two persons in marriage, a 
marriage contract. 

193, 194. one The truest] ABBortr (§18): ‘one’ is used for above all in Eliza- 
bethan English with superlatives. 

194. a holy Witch] WALKER (Crit., ii, 88): ‘Witch’ in the sense of a male sor- 
cerer, or without any specific reference to sex, frequently occurs in the old writers 
[whereof many examples follow, among them the present passage. In Wint. Tale, 
an example which Walker did not note, Leontes calls Paulina a ‘witch,’ and to add 
to it an especial roughness calls her a ‘mankind witch.’ Walker concludes his 
article with a quotation from Minsheu’s Guide Into the T. ongues, 1617 (s. v. ‘Coniura- 


AGU BI SCuvile]| CYMBELINE 103 


That he enchants Societies into him: 195 
Halfe all men hearts are his. 
Imo. You make amends. 


fach. He fits ’mong’ft men, like a defended God; 198 
195. into] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Theob. ii. et seq. 

Warb. Johns. Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo. 198. mong fi] mongft F.. amongh 

Cam. unto Han. et cet. F;F,, Rowe i. ’mong Theob. ii, Warb. 
196. men] mens Ff, Rowe, Pope, Johns. 

Theob. i, Han. mens’ Var. ’73. men’s defended] defcended Ff et seq. 


tion’) where the difference is set forth ‘betueene Conjuration, Witchcraft, and 
Inchantment’;—‘the Coniurer seemeth by praiers and inuocation of Gods powerfull 
names, to compell the Diuell to say or doe what he commandeth him; The Witch 
dealeth rather by a friendly and voluntarie conference or agreement betweene him 
or her and the Dzuell or Familiar, to haue his or her turne serued in Jiew or stead of 
blood, or other gift offered vnto him, especially of his or her soule; So that a Con- 
iurer compacts for curiositie to know secrets, and work maruels; and the Witch 
of meere malice to doe mischiefe: And both these differ from Inchanters or Sor- 
cerers, because the former two haue personall conference with the Diuell, and the 
other meddles but with Medicines and ceremoniall formes of words called Charmes, 
without apparition.” Walker quotes only a portion of the foregoing, but the whole 
of it seems interesting. —CHuRTON Cottins (Note in The Pinner of Wakefield, III, 
li, 703) quotes from Latimer: ‘We run hither and thither to witches or sorcerers 
whom we call wise men.’—Sermons preached in Lincolnshire, V. (ed. not given). 
In my edition of 1572, however, this passage runs, ‘we runne hither and thither 
to wyssardes, or sorcerers, whome we call wyse men.’—Fol. 98, verso. The fore- 
going note is reprinted from Commentary on Ant. & Cleop., I, ii, 42, of this edi- 
tion.—Eb.] 

195. he enchants] That is, as a Witch—Matone: So, in Shakespeare’s Lover’s 
Complaint: ‘That he did in the general bosom reign Of young of old; and sexes 
both enchanted . . . Consents bewitch’d, ere he desire, have granted.’ 

195. into] Dyce: There are other passages in these plays where our author 
(like the writers of his day) uses ‘into’ for unto. 

196. Halfe all men hearts are his] It will be deemed, possibly, a flagrant 
instance of ‘Foliolatry’ to suggest that we should not too hastily change ‘men 
hearts’ into ‘men’s hearts.’ Yet may not something be pleaded in its favour? 
Shakespeare could hardly say all ‘male hearts’ nor all ‘man-hearts.’ And yet is it 
not the idea which he intended to convey that ‘half of all men who have manly 
hearts are his’? It is because they are ‘men’ that they sympathise with Posthu- 
mus, not because they have hearts.—Eb. 

198. defended God] Upton (p. 220), whose laudable zeal it was to prove that 
Shakespeare, bred in a learned age, was equal in learning with his contemporaries, 
here points out that ‘there is no less learning than elegance in this expression.’ 
The Greeks called a ‘descended God’ xaraBarns, and that Jupiter was peculiarly 
worshipped as such. ‘Agreeable to this opinion, Paul and Barnabas were thought 
by the people of Lycaonia to be descended Gods.’—A cts, xiv. 11.—CAPELL (p. 106): 
This very learned allusion never enter’d into the head of the Poet.—PorTer and 
CLARKE: There is some appropriateness in the unusual adjective ‘defended God,’ 


104 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[AcT I, SC. vil. 


He hath a kinde of Honor fets him off, 

More then a mortall feeming. Be not angrie 200 
(Moft mighty Princeffe) that I haue aduentur’d 

To try your taking of a falfe report, which hath 

Honour’d with confirmation your great Iudgement, 


In the eleétion of a Sir, fo rare, 


Which you know, cannot erre. 


The loue I beare him, 205 


Made me to fan you thus, but the Gods made you 


( Vnlike all others ) chaffeleffe. 
All’s well Sir: 


Tino. 


Pray your pardon. 


Take my powre i’th’Court for yours. 


Lach. 


My humble thankes: I had almoft forgot 210 


T’intreat your Grace, but in a {mall requeft, 
And yet of moment too, for it concernes : 
Your Lord, my felfe, and other Noble Friends 213 


199. Honor] F.. honour F3F,. 

202. your taking of a] you with a Han. 
you by a Cap. your taking a Steev. 
Var. 778. your taking, a Knt. your 
taking of Vaun. 

Sir, fo rare,| sir so rare, Var. ’78 
et seq. 
rare,| rare. F2. 


208, 209. One line Rowe et seq. 

209. wth |ith’ F.F;. «the Cap. et seq. 

211. T’intreat] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. 

ii, iil To intreat Cap. et cet. 

212. concernes:] Ingl. ii. concernes, 
F.. concerns, F3. concerns F, et cet. 

213. Lord,| Ff, Dyce, Coll. ii, Sta. 
Lord; Rowe et cet. 


meaning that he sets aloof from others, defended as a God from mortal contact or 
degradation by the Honor that sets him off. So royalty was set off by sitting apart, 
fended off from rude contact, on a dais or at a table by itself. A ‘descended’ 
God is not thought of readily as sitting, but as alighting. Hence we suspect 
that ‘defended’ was intended, and the ‘correction [‘‘descended”] is really a 
corruption.’ 

200. More then a mortall seeming] CAPELL (p. 106): ‘Honor’ in the line 
before this, is: dignity of carriage and thinking; and that such as seem’d more than 
‘a mortal one,’ or than might belong to a mortal; the expression were less ambigu- 
ous, if we read—‘more than a mortal’s,’ or, ‘more than of mortal.’ 

202-204. which hath...a Sir, so rare] Ecctes and others have given 
profuse paraphrases of these lines; they seem to me superfluous. Language can 
hardly be less obscure than the original. The only point wherein there seems to lie 
any doubt is the antecedent to ‘which’; it has been taken as ‘false report.’ Is it 
not rather the trial of Imogen’s fidelity by a false report?—Ep. 

205. Which you know, cannot erre] That is, you yourself know your judge- 
ment of your husband’s character cannot be mistaken. 

212, 213. for it concernes: Your Lord,] H. Inctesy (Rev. ed.): Editors have 
without sufficient justification, placed a stop at ‘Lord’ instead of at Ceenicemies? 
asin the Folio. ‘It concerns’ is equivalent to ‘it concerns you,’—it is your Pines 
We find exactly the same use in Wint. Tale, III, ii, 85: ‘Which to deny concernes 
more than avails,’ where you is similarly understood. As Posthumus is mixed up 


ACD BI SC RVIIs)| CYMBELINE 105 


Are partners in the bufineffe. 
Imo. Pray whatis’t ? 215 
Lach. Some dozen Romanes of vs, and your Lord 
(The beft Feather of our wing) haue mingled fummes 
To buy a Prefent for the Emperor : 
Which I (the Faétor for the reft) haue done 
In France : ’tis Plate of rare deuice, and Iewels 220 
Of rich, and exquifite forme, their valewes great, 
And I am fomething curious, being ftrange 
To haue them in fafe ftowage : May it pleafe you 
To take them in protection. 
Imo. Willingly: 225 
And pawne mine Honor for their fafety, fince 
My Lord hath intereft in them, I will keepe them 


In my Bed-chamber. 228 
217. (The befi] Best Pope,+. Tibest seq. 

Cap. 222. ftrange] ftrange, Ff et seq. 
220. dewice,| device; Vaun. 224. protection.| Ff, Rowe, Pope, 


221. forme,| form. Coll. form; Cap. Var. ’73. protection? Theob. et cet. 

et seq. . 226. fafety,| F;F, Rowe. /fafty, F.. 
valewes| values F3F,. value’s safety. Pope,+. safety: Cap. et cet. 

Coll. ii, mi, Ktly. 228. Bed-chamber.| F,. Bed chamber: 

great,| Fi, Coll. great; Rowe et F,. Bed chamber. F;. 


in this business, it naturally concerns Imogen; and the change of punctuation, be 
it noted, still leaves something to be desired. [In addition to this instance from 
The Wint. Tale, Scumipt (Lex.) gives a second, where ‘concern’ is used intransi- 
tively, from Love’s Lab. L.: ‘deliver this paper into the royal hand of the king; it 
may concern much.’—IV, li, 146. To these two instances the present should 
unquestionably be added as a third, and if so, it is not necessary to suppose that 
you is understood; it means simply, ‘for it is of much importance,’ thereby justi- 
fying the assertion that the request, though small, was yet of moment. ‘This just 
adherence to the Folio by H. Ingleby obviates the necessity of the semi-colon after 
‘Lord’ in the next line, which was placed there by Rowe and adopted by every 
subsequent editor, except Dyce, Collier (ed. ii.), and Staunton, who retained the 
comma of the Folio, ‘Lord,’ and remarked that ‘who’ or ‘that’ has to be supplied 
before ‘Are partners,’ etc., which is presumably what H. Ingleby refers to in his 
concluding remark that the modern punctuation ‘still leaves something to be 
desired.’—Ep.] 

222. curious] This has been defined as careful, accurate, scrupulous, particular, 
anxious, and painstaking. The ‘curious’ student may, therefore, take his choice.— 
Ep. 

222. strange] HALLIWELL: That is, being a stranger. So in Lyly’s Euphues and 
his England, 1623, ‘—at the last they came to London where they met with divers 
stranges.’ 

228. In my Bed-chamber] OHLE (p. 65) in an exhaustive discussion of the 


106 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT I, SC. vii. 


Tach, They are in a Trunke 
Attended by my men : I will make bold 230 
To fend them to you, onely for this night : 
I muft aboord to morrow, 
Imo. Ono, no, 
Tach. Yes 1 befeech : or I fhall fhort my word 
By length’ning my returne. From Gallia, 235 
I croft the Seas on purpofe,and on promife 
To fee your Grace. 
Imo. \thanke you for your paines : 
But not away to morrow. 


Tach. OT muft Madam, 240 


229. Trunke] Trunk F3F,, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. trunk, Theob. et seq. 

230. men] man Elze. 

231. night:] night. Knt. 


et cet. 
234. befeech] beseech you Rowe,+. 
236. purpofe,| purpose Dyce, Sta. 


night, Coll. Glo. Cam. 


232. aboord] aboard F3F,.  a-board 239. to morrow.| Ff, Rowe, Cap. to- 
Werte ex -morrow? Pope,+, Varr. Mal. Varr. 
to morrow.| Fy. to morrow, Coll. to-morrow! Knt, Dyce, Sta. Glo. 


F.F;. 
233. O no] Fi, Rowe,+. O! no, 


Cam.. 
240: OI] F.F;. I Pope, Han. O/T 


Coll. i, iii. Oh! no, Coll. ii. O, no, Cap. Coll. i, i. O#, T Coll.1i- O,7 Ey eticet: 


sources of the Plot, criticises the introduction of the trunk into the story. It was 
well enough in the early versions of the story, because the scene was laid among the 
common people, but here in Shakespeare’s version the characters are of the highest 
nobility. ‘The trunk is, therefore, unnecessary, nay, unbefitting. By virtue of 
his letter of introduction, Iachimo had received a free admittance to Imogen’s 
presence. He petitions that he should bring the trunk to her; she at once volun- 
tarily offers to take it into her bed-chamber. But this offer of hers, with its 
specific place of concealment at once arouses the suspicion of a spectator at the 
improbability of any predetermined scheme; for Iachimo himself had forgotten the 
main item of his petition, namely, that the trunk should find a place of conceal- 
ment in her bed-chamber. His scheme would have utterly failed had not Imogen 
come to his aid. No original narrator of the story could have made so clumsy an 
intrigue. It is clear, therefore, that both Iachimo and Imogen were well-drilled 
actors who had, in some way or other, read or heard the Italian novel.’ Beneath 
Ohle’s humour there lies the question more or less serious, as to what would have 
been Iachimo’s course had Imogen not made the offer of her bed-chamber, Shake- 
speare foresaw this difficulty, I think, and, therefore, it is that Iachimo dwells on 
the interest Posthumus had in the safekeeping of the imperial presents, and it is this 
fact that prompts Imogen’s offer —Ep. 

234. short my word] Scumipt (Lex.): That is, to take from, to impair, to 
infringe (antithetically). [The present passage is Schmidt’s only example of its 
use with this meaning. ‘Short’ as a verb occurs in ‘Short, night, tonight, and 


length thyself tomorrow.’—Pass. Pilg., 210, but this bears a different signification. 
—Ep.] 


ACT, I, SC; vil. ] CYMBELINE 107 


Therefore I fhall befeech you, if you pleafe 241 
To greet your Lord with writing, doo’t to night, 
I haue out-{tood my time, which is materiall 
To’th’tender of our Prefent. 

Imo. Iwill write: 245 
Send your Trunke to me, it fhall fafe be kept, 
And truely yeelded you : you’re very welcome. xveunt. 


244. To’'th’| F.. To th’ F;F,, Rowe, Han. 


+. To the Cap. et seq. 247. yow re] Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. Coll. 
245. write:] write. Cap. et seq. Dyce, Glo. Cam. you are Var. ’73 et 
246. me,] me; Cap. et seq. celn 
Safe be] be fafe F;F,, Rowe, Pope, Exeunt] Fxeunt Fo. 


243. out-stood] CoLtier (ed. ii.): In the MS. it is owtstay’d, and perhaps the 
line was sometimes so delivered, but alteration would be unadvisable. It may be 
added that in short-hand ‘owtstood’ and outstay’d would be spelt with the same 
letters. 

246. Send your Trunke to me] Horn (iv, 162): We must bear in mind that 
Imogen cannot possibly be as fortunate as we are, who can, at any time, from 
any moderately sized circulating library, reap such a harvest of the knowledge of 
human nature that we can hardly carry it. We would assuredly not have taken 
Tachimo’s trunk into our bed-chamber, simply because we have read Boccaccio 
and Shakespeare, which poor Imogen cannot very well have done. 

246. it shall safe be kept] WALKER (Crit., ii, 247): I am not quite sure that 
we ought not to read, ‘it shall be safe kept.’ [Walker was evidently unaware he 
had been long anticipated in this change. See Text. Notes.] 

247. yeelded you: you’re very welcome] Br. Nicuotson (NV. & Q., VII, 
ii, 23): suggests a dash after ‘you,’ because ‘Iachimo, like a true courtier, and as a 
private gentleman answering a princess, acknowledges her gracious assent to his 
request by a low bend of the knee or head, perhaps even kisses her hand, for most 
dutiful observance is now his cue. And it is to this that she replies, ‘ You’re very 
welcome,’ that is, as the hearer likes, either generally welcome to the court, or to 
this granted assent, or to both. 

247. Exeunt] Hazuitr (p. 5): Imogen’s readiness to pardon Iachimo’s false 
imputations and false designs against herself is a good lesson to prudes; and may 
show that where there is a real attachment to virtue, it has no need to bolster itself 
up with an outrageous or affected antipathy to vice. 


108 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. 1. 


AGius Secundus. Scena Prima. 


Enter Clotten and the two Lords. 

Clot. Was there euer man had fuch lucke ? when I kift 
the Iacke vpon an vp-caft, to be hit away? I had a hun- 
dred pound on’t : and then a whorfon Iacke-an-Apes, 5 
muft take me vp for fwearing, as if I borrowed mine 
oathes of him,and might not fpend them at my pleafure. 

1. What got he by that ? you haue broke his pate 
with your Bowle. 

2. If his wit had bin like him that broke it : it would 10 
haue run all out. 


1. Scena Prima] Scene 1. Eccles. Sta. Coll. iii, Glo. Huds. Cam. 
Scene. The Palace. Rowe i. A 5. Lacke-an-A pes] jackanapes Cap. et 
Palace. Rowe ii. Cymbeline’s Palace. seq. 
Pope. Court before the Palace. Cap. 8, 10, etc. z. 2.] 1 Lord. 2 Lord, etc. 
2. the two Lords.] Ff. two Lords. Rowe. 


Rowe et cet. the two lords, as from to. [Aside. Theob. 
the Bowling-alley Coll. MS. had\ had not Kinnear. 
4. Iacke upon an vp-caft, to] jack, him] his Han. Cap. 


upon an up-cast to Knt, Dyce, Sing. 


1. Actus Secundus] Eccres: The time is the evening of the same day con- 
tinued, and, perhaps, pretty far advanced. The sport of bowling, however, must 
be pursued in the open air and by daylight, and Cloten appears to have but 
lately retired from the scene of his amusement.—DaAnrzz still continues Day 3. 

3, 4. I kist the Iacke vpon an vpcast,] JoHNSON: He is describing his fate 
at bowls. The ‘jack’ is the small bowl at which the others are aimed. He who is 
nearest to it wins. ‘To kiss the jack’ is a state of great advantage.—STEEVENS: 
The expression frequently occurs in the old comedies. So, in A Woman Never Vex’t, 
by Rowley, 1632: ‘Yon city bowler has kissed the mistress at the first cast.’— 
[IV, i.}—Mourray (NV. E. D., s. v., Jack. 18) quotes the present passage as an illus- 
tration that the ‘Jack’ is ‘a smaller bowl, placed as a mark for the players to aim at.’ 
Also from Taylor, the Water Poet’s Comedy, Wit and Worth (Works, ii, 1093): 
‘The which they ayme at hath sundry names and Epithets, as a Blocke, a Jacke, 
and a Mistris.—M. Mason (p. 325): Cloten means to lament his ill-fortune in 
being hit away by an ‘upcast when he kissed the jack.’ The line should, therefore, 
be pointed thus: ‘When I kissed the jack, upon an upcast To be hit away.’— 
[Knicut adopted this punctuation, because, as he said, ‘the jack was kissed by 
Cloten’s bowl, and the wp-cast of another bowler hit it away.’ But is any change 
necessary? Might not an opponent’s upcast make Cloten’s bowl kiss the jack 
quite as easily as drive it away? Dowden thinks that the punctuation of the Folio 
may be right and that the ‘upcast’ was made by Cloten himself, and not by his 
opponent. Whatever obscurity may surround the phrase, is hardly worth the 
time spent in removing it.—Ep.] 

6. must take one vp] Scummpr (Lex., 9): That is, rebuke, rate, scold. 


10, 11. it would haue run all out] That is, because it wasso thin, watery, and 
so little of it. 


AGT RII ESCs) CYMBELINE 


109 
Clot. When a Gentleman is difpos’d to fweare: it is 12 
not for any ftanders by to curtall his oathes. Ha? 
2. No my Lord; nor crop the eares of them. 
Clot. Whorfon dog: I gaue him fatisfaGtion? would 15 
he had bin one of my Ranke. 
2. To haue fmell’d like a Foole. 
Clot. I am not vext more at any thing in th’earth : a 
pox on’t. [had rather not be fo Noble as I am: they dare 
not fight with me, becaufe of the Queene my Mo- 20 
ther : euery Iacke-Slaue hath his belly full of Fighting, 
and I muft go vp and downe like a Cock, that no body 
can match. 
2. You are Cocke and Capon too, and you crow 24 


13. fianders by] standers-by Pope et 


17. fmell’d| {melt F;F, et seq. 
seq. stander-by Walker (Crit., i, 245). 


18. th’earth:] F2. the earth: ¥3F,, 


curtall] F,. curtal F;. curtail Glo. Cam. the earth. Coll. the earth,— 
1 Rowe et cet. 

oathes. Ha?] Ff, Rowe, + 2t. belly full| belly-full Cap. Sta. 
Var. ’73. oaths, ha? Coll. Dyce, Sta. Belly fully Rowe ii.  bellyful Dyce, 


Glo. Cam. oaths: Ha? Cap. et cet. 
14. 2. No...nor...them | 1 Lord. No 
my lord. 2 Lord. WNor...them. [Aside. 
Johnson conj., Ran. 
15. dog:| dog! Rowe et seq. 


Glo. Cam. 
24. [Aside. Rowe. 
Cocke and Capon] F2. Mal. Steev. 
Knt, Coll. Sing. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
a cock and capon Cap. Var. ’03,’21. a 


gaue| give Ff et seq. 
16. bin] been F;. 
17. [Aside. Pope. 


Cock and a capon F;F, et cet. 
crow] crow, Theob. et seq. 


13, 14, 16, 17, curtall... crop... Ranke... smell’d] All this cheap punning 
and quibbling is unworthy of Shakespeare, and so, indeed, is the whole scene, 
if he ever wrote it, whereof there may be a doubt. It is dramatically necessary, 
however, that a scene, preferably light and airy, should intervene between Iachimo’s 
failure and his success. His estimate of Shakespeare’s fertility of invention must 
be low indeed, who does not know that Shakespeare could have devised some scene 
better than this, and one which could at the same time have informed us that 
Tachimo’s visit was not unknown at Court, which seems to be all that the present 
scene accomplished.—Eb. 

13. Ha] Thus Shylock says, ‘What says that fool of Hagar’s off-spring? ha? 
Where, as here, I think we should pronounce it ‘Hey’?—Epb. 

15. I gaue him satisfaction ?] In order to retain the interrogation, all editors 
have adopted ‘give’ of the Ff. The Cam. Ed. records a suggestion by Br. NicHot- 
son which retains ‘gave,’ but changes the interrogation into an exclamation, for 
the better, I think. Cloten had given satisfaction by an ignoble blow on the pate 
with a bowl, and in these words exults in it, but immediately wishes that the jacka- 
napes had been one of his own rank that he might have fought and wounded him. 
I suppose that this was Nicholson’s idea; I do not know where his explanation of the 
suggestion is to be found.—Eb. 

24. Capon] Murray (N. E. D., s.v.1.c.): As a type of dullness, and a term of 


110 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT II, SC. i. 


Cock, with your combe on. 25 

Clot. Sayeft thou ? 

2. It is not fit you Lordfhip fhould vndertake euery 
Companion, that you giue offence too. 

Clot. No, I know that : but it is fit I fhould commit 
offence to my inferiors. 30 

2 I, it is fit for your Lordfhip onely. 

Clot. Why fo I fay. 

1. Did you heere of a Stranger that’s come to Court 
night ? 

Clot. A Stranger, and I not know on’t? 35 

2. He’s a ftrange Fellow himfelfe,and knowes it not. 

1. There’s an Italian come, and ’tis thought one of 
Leonatus Friends. 

Clot. Leonatus? A banifht Rafcall; and he’s another, 
whatfoeuer he be. Who told you of this Stranger ? 40 

1. One of your Lordfhips Pages. 

Clot. Is it fit I went to looke vpon him? Is there no 
de,ogation in’t ? 


2. You cannot derogate my Lord. 44 
25. your combe on] your cap-on Ran. 36. [Aside. Theobald. 
conj. 37. thought] though F>. 
26. Sayeft] Say’st Rowe,+, Var. ’73. 38. Leonatus] Ff. Leonatus’s Rowe, 
27. 2.| 1 Lord. Johns. +, Var. ’73. Leonatus’ Cap. et cet. 
you] your F3F,. 39. another,| another. F2. 
28. Companion,] Fi, Rowe,+. 40. whatfoeuer] F2. wheresoever F3F 4, 
too.| Fy. Rowe, Pope. whosoever Han. Cap. 
31. I,] Ay, Rowe. Om. Johns. 43. derogation] Fy. 
34. night?| to night. Fi. to night? 44. 2.) 1 Lord. Johns. Var. Mal. 
Rowe. Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. 


reproach. 1551. T. Wilson, Logike, 11: ‘Some [men] are capones by kinde, and so 
blunt by nature, that no arte at all can whet them.’ 15090. Com. of Err., III, i, 32: 
‘capon, coxcomb, idiot, patch!’ 

25. with your combe on| JonNsoNn: The allusion is to a fool’s cap, which hath a 
comb like a cock’s.—StauntTon: A cock’s comb was one of the badges of the house- 
hold fool, and hence the compound became the synonym for simpleton. 

28. Companion] Jonson: The use of ‘companion’ was the same as of fellow 
now. It was a word of contempt. 

29, 30. commit offence] This bears, at times, a coarse meaning. It is in 
reference to this meaning that the Second Lord levels his sarcasm in the next line. 
The phrase ‘do no offence’ occurs in the exquisite Song by the Fairies in Mid. N. 
Dream, Il, ii, 23.—En. 


44. derogate] Murray (NX. E. D.,s.v. 6 intrans.): To do something derogatory 


ACTelI, SC. is] 


Clot. Not eafily I thinke. 


CYMBELINE 


III 


45 


2. You are a Foole graunted, therefore your Iffues 


being foolifh do not derogate. 
Clot. 


Come, Ile go fee this Italian : what I haue loft 


to day at Bowles, Ile winne to night of him. Come : go. 


2. Ile attend your Lordhfhip. 


LES, 50 


That fuch a craftie Diuell as is his Mother 

Should yeild the world this Affe : A woman, that 
Beares all downe with her Braine, and this her Sonne, 
Cannot take two from twenty for his heart, 


Aud leaue eighteene. 


Alas poore Princeffe, 55 


Thou diuine /mogen, what thou endur’ft, 

Betwixt a Father by thy Step-dame gouern’d, 

A Mother hourely coyning plots : A Wooer, 

More hatefull then the foule expulfion is 

Of thy deere Husband. Then that horrid Act 60 
Of the diuorce, heel’d make the Heauens hold firme 


46. [Aside. Pope. 
47. foolifh| F2. foolish, F;F,. Rowe, 
Pope, Cap. et seq. 
49. Bowles,| bowls Knt, Dyce, Glo. - 
Cam. 
Come:] Come, Cap. et seq. 
50. Exit.] Exit Glov. Rowe. 
Cloten and 1 Lord. Cap. 
50, 51- 2. Lle...That] «1 Lord. I’Ul... 
2 Lord. That Elze, 305. 
51. is] Om. Pope,+, Cap. Varr. 
Mal. Rann. 
52. yeild |F.. 
Affe:| ass! Cap. et seq. 
54. twenty for] twenty, for Dyce, Coll. 


Exit 


li, Sta. Glo. Cam. 

55- Princeffe] princess! alas, Ktly. 

59. expulfion| expufion Fy, Capell’s 
Copy, ap. Cam. 

60. Husband. Then] husband, Then 
F,. husband, then ¥;. husband. From 
Knt. Husband, than F, et cet. 

61. diuorce, heel’d make the] Ff. 
divorce—he’'ll make the Rowe, Pope. 
divorce he’ld make.—The Theob. Glo. 
divorce hell made. The Han. divorce 
Hell-made. The Warb. divorce he'd 
make, the Knt. divorce he'd make! 
The Cap. et cet. (subs.) 


to one’s rank or position. 


entailing loss of the privileges of nobility.) 


(Cf. French déroger, déroger & noblesse, to do anything 


[The present passage is quoted.] 


46. Issues] DowpEN: That is, what proceeds from you, your acts, with a play 
on issues meaning offspring. Compare Jul. Ce@s., III, i, 294: ‘the cruel issue of 


these bloody men.’ 


51 That such a craftie] Scumupt (Lew., s. v. ‘That,’ conj. 1) gives many exam- 
ples where ‘that’ is used ‘when the principal sentence is omitted, and the sub- 


ordinate clause (with should) express indignant surprise.’ 


The omission here is, 


possibly, some such phrase as can it be possible, who would believe, etc.—Ep. 
s6. Thou diuine Imogen] Rotre: ‘Divine’ is accented on the first syllable, 


because preceding the noun. 


{Not of necessity, in the present case; iambic metre 


admits of a choriamb in the first two feet.—ED.] 
60, 61. Then that horrid Act of the diuorce, heel’d make the Heauens 
hold firme] TuEosarp: I dare be positive, I have reformed the pointing and by 


Riz THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. il. 


The walls of thy deere Honour. Keepe vnfhak’d 62 
That Temple thy faire mind, that thou maift ftand 
T’enioy thy banifh’d Lord : and this great Land. Erewnt. 64 


Scena Secunda. 


Enter Imogen,in her Bed,and a Lady. 


Imo. Who’s there? My woman : Helene? 3 
62. Honour.|F,. honor. F.¥3. honour; A magnificent Bedchamber, in one 
Rowe et seq. part of it a large Trunk. Rowe. 
64. T’enioy] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Sing. 2. Enter...| Imogen is discover’d 
Ktly. To enjoy Cap. et cet. reading in Bed, a Lady attending. 
Lord:| Ff, Rowe, Pope. lord Rowe. 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. lord, Theob. et cet. 3. woman: Helene?] F2. woman, 
Exeunt.] Exit. Cap. Helen? Coll. woman Helen? F3F, et 
1. Scena Secunda.] Scene mr. Eccl. cet. 


that retrieved the true sense. ‘This wooer,’ says the speaker, ‘is more hateful to 
her than the banishment of her lord, or the horrid attempt to make that banish- 
ment perpetual by his marrying her in her lord’s absence.’ Having made this 
reflexion, he subjoins a virtuous wish, that Heaven may preserve her honour 
unblemished, and her to enjoy her husband back and her rights in the Kingdom. 
[See Text. Notes. This punctuation with its consequent interpretation is one of 
Theobald’s happy emendations, and has been followed, substantially, from that 
day to this; the exceptions are HANMER, WARBURTON, and Knicur, the last be- 
lieves that a ‘clearer sense is attained by the change of “‘Then that horrid act” 
to “From that horrid act,” than by altering the construction of the sentence. 
The Lord implores that the honour of Imogen may be held firm, to resist the horrid 
act of the divorce from her husband which Cloten would make.’—VauGHAN 
(p. 387) would retain the ‘Then’ in ‘Then that horrid Act,’ and emphasize it, and 
he may be right. ‘The wooer,’ he says, could not be ‘more hateful’ than the 
‘horrid act’ by which he would ‘divorce’ Imogen from her husband. ‘Then’ 
introduces a final and crowning misery and the prayer to ‘Heavens.’—THIsELTON 
(p. 17): Divorces were under the jurisdiction of the Spiritual Courts and were 
allowed only within certain clearly defined limits. The ‘Act’ is here the judicial 
Act; as we might say ‘the Desire.’ In modern style the comma after ‘divorce’ 
would be represented by a note of exclamation. 

1. Scena Secunda] Ecctres: The time,—midnight, succeeding the same day.— 
IncLEBy: In the course of this lovely scene one is frequently reminded of pas- 
sages in the Second Act of Macbeth; a fact which may be of use in determining an 
earlier date (1606) for parts of this play. One would naturally infer that this 
scene was written while Macbeth, IT, i, ii, and iii were fresh in the writer’s mind. 
There is little else to be done, in the way of comment, but to note some of these 
resemblances:—lines 5, 6, Cf. Macb., II, i, 3: ‘Ban. How goes the night, boy? 
Fle. The moon is down: I have not heard the clock. Ban. And she goes down at 
twelve.’ Lines 12-15. Cf. Ibid., 6-9: ‘A heavy summons lies like lead upon me. 
- - » Merciful powers! Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature gives 
way to in repose!’ Lines 17, 18. Cf. Ibid., II, ii, 38: ‘Sore labour’s bath.’ Lines 
18, 19. Cf. Zbid., II, i, 55, 56: ‘With Tarquin’s ravishing strides, towards his 


ACY Il, SCrti.] CYMBELINE 113 


La. Pleafe you Madam. 
Imo. What houre is it? 5 
Lady. Almoft midnight, Madam. 
fmo. J haue read three houres then : 
Mine eyes are weake, 
Fold downe the leafe! where I haue left ; to bed. 
Take not away the Taper, leaue it burning: IO 
And if thou canft awake by foure o’th’clock, 
I prythee call me: Sleepe hath ceiz’d me wholly. 
To your protection I commend me, Gods, 
From Fayries, and the Tempters of the night, 


Guard me befeech yee. Sleepes, 15 
Lachimo from the Trunke. 
fach. he Crickets fing,and mans ore-labor’d fenfe W/ 
4. Madam.) Madam— Rowe,+. Warb. me. Johns. et seq. 
5. houre] houe F;. Capell’s copy, 12. ceiz’d| feiz’d Ff. 
ap. Cam. [Exit Lady. Rowe et seq. 
7, 8. One line Rowe et seq. 13. Gods,| Ff, Rowe. gods; Pope,+, 
7. then:] then. Coll. Cap. Var. ’73. gods! Var. ’78 et cet. 
8. weake,] weak: Cap. et seq. 15. me] me, F, et seq. 
9. bed.] Fz. Johns. Var. 773, Coll. yee.] ye! Han. Cap. et seq. 
bed F3;F,, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. 16. Iachimo...] Iachimo rises... Rowe. 
bed: Cap. et seq. Tachimo comes... Coll.i. Enter Iachi- 
11. o'th’| othe Cap. et seq. mo... Coll. ii. Iachimo rises out of the 
12. me:] me— Rowe, Pope, Han. trunk. Coll. iii. 


design Moves like a ghost.’ Lines 28, 29. Cf. Jbid., II, iii, 118: ‘His silver skin 
laced with his golden blood.’ Line 37. Cf. Jbid., I, iii, 81: ‘Shake off this downy 
sleep, death’s counterfeit.’ Add to these the slight resemblance in the mention of 
‘heaven’ and ‘hell’ at the end both of this scene and of Macb., II, i. 

14. From Fayries, and the Tempters of the night] Ritson (p. 27): Fairies 
are supposed by some to have been malignant, but this, it may be, was mere 
calumny, as being utterly inconsistent with their general character, which was 
singularly innocent and amiable. Jt must have been the Incubus (now called the 
nightmare) Imogen was so afraid of. [Steevens, Dyce, Ingleby, and others have re- 
ferred to Banquo’s words as here parallel to Imogen’s or, at least, suggestive of hers, 
which is to me more than doubtful. In Banquo’s mind dark suspicions of Macbeth 
were rising; he himself tells Macbeth that the night before he had dreamt of the 
Witches and of the verification thus far of their prophecies; such ‘cursed thoughts’ 
he prays may not again visit him when his reason is not alert to dispel them. 
That Imogen couples the tempters of the night with fairies shows how innocent 
and pure was the temple of her fair mind. That she and Banquo both prayed before 
going to sleep seems to be the sole point of resemblance.—Ep.] 

17. Iach.] Morety (p. 293): Mr Anderson’s bedroom scene, spoken throughout 
in an oppressively ostentatious stage-whisper, is an intolerable blunder. Does he 
suppose that Shakespeare’s soliloquies are pieces of mere realism, representing the 
defects of people who can’t keep their tongues still even when they are alone? 

8 


114 THE TRAGEDIZ OF [acT 1, SC. ii. 


Repaires it felfe by reft : Our Zarguine thus 18 
Did foftly preffe the Rufhes, ere he waken’d 
The Chaftitie he wounded. Cytherea, 20 


How brauely thou becom’ft thy Bed;freth Lilly, 
And whiter then the Sheetes : that I might touch, 
But kiffe, one kiffe. Rubies vnparagon’d, 23 


20. Cytherea,] Cytherea! Eccl. Ktly. et cet. i 

21. Bed;frefh Lilly,] Ff. Bed! fresh 23. kiffe, one kiffe.] Ff, Ingl. kiss, 
lilly, Rowe,+, Var. ’73. bed, fresh one kiss— Rowe,+. kiss; one kiss! 
lily, Glo. Bed! fresh lilly! Cap. Var. Cap. et cet. kiss one kiss! Vaun. kiss! 
78 et seq. one kiss! John Hunter. 

22. Sheetes...touch,) Ff.  Sheets!... [Kissing her. Cap. Coll. iii. 
touch, Rowe,+. sheets!...touch! Cap. (MS.) 


In all the soliloquies,—and Iachimo’s part in Imogen’s bedroom is especially 
and most necessarily of this sort,—we are supposed only to be following a train 
of secret thought. We can thus, by slight exercise of imagination, pass into the 
innermost recesses of the mind depicted for us, watch its secret workings, and look 
for the mainspring of its action. It would be the densest stupidity to suppose that 
Tachimo uttered a sound he could suppress while he was at his base work around 
the sleeping Imogen. Let his part here be unostentatiously spoken, and we under- 
stand well enough that, in the usual way, we are enabled to penetrate to the thoughts 
that direct his silent action. But let it all be ostentatiously whispered, and we 
have the foolish spectacle of Iachimo, with a tongue too loosely hung, making noise 
enough to wake fifty Imogens, and huskily struggling to keep his importunate hiss- 
ing and breathing as much as he can below the standard of an engine blowing off 
its steam. The laboured stage-effect hopelessly ruins the illusion of the scene. 

17. The Crickets sing] When Macbeth, in a frenzy of terror, after murdering 
Duncan asks Lady Macbeth if she heard no noise, she, in order to give a proof of 
the deepest silence, replies, ‘I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.’ Thus, 
here, Iachimo, in three words, hushes the chamber into a silence so profound that 
the chirp of a cricket is audible. And, in ‘man’s oer-laboured sense repairs itself 
by rest,’ this quiet and repose are extended to the whole house. So also Macbeth’s 
‘now o’er the one half-world nature seems dead.’—Ep. 

18. Our Tarquine] JoHNSON: The speaker is an Italian. 

19. Did softly presse the Rushes] JoHNSON: It was the custom in the time 
of our author to strew chambers with rushes, as we now cover them with carpets; 
the practice is mentioned in Caius de Ephemera Britannica. [A needless, and, I 
fear, pedantic reference. Shakespeare himself is an all-sufficient authority for the 
custom. Thus, Romeo says: ‘let wantons light of heart Tickle the senseless rushes 
with their heels.’—I, iv, 35. And Grumio, in Tam. of the Shrew, says: ‘is supper 
ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept?’ etc., IV,i, 48. If the 
student need examples from other sources, they may be found in the Variorum of 
1821, and in Halliwell—Ep.] 

20, Cytherea] Eccres: This should be considered, I think, as an exclamation ad- 
dressed to the goddess who presided over beautiful objects upon the first view of so 
much beauty. [This interpretation seems, to me, to carry conviction. It is also pro- 
posed by VAUGHAN (p. 387) and had occurred independently to the present Ep.] 


AGTSIT, Se ts] CYMBELINE 115 


How deerely they doo’t : ’Tis her breathing that 


Perfumes the Chamber thus : the Flame o’th’Taper oa 

Bowes toward her,and would vnder-peepe her lids. 

To fee th’inclofed Lights, now Canopied By) 
24. they doo’t:] they do’t— Rowe, othe: Cap. et seq. 

Pope. they'd do’t! Nicholson, ap. 26. lids.] Ff. lids Cam. lids, Rowe 

Cam. Vaun. they do’t! Theob. et eucets 

seq. 27. th’| Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce. the Cap. 


25. oth] Fy, Rowe,+. oth’ F.F;. et cet. 


22, 23. that I might touch, But kisse, one kisse] Coriier (ed. ii.): It seems 
by the MS. that Iachimo actually ‘kissed Imogen’ at these words.—[CapEtt here 
adds the stage-direction, ‘kissing her,’ without comment, as though it were an act 
so generally accepted and so manifest as to need no remark. Therein, I think, he 
erred. I doubt that, in recent times, this passage has been generally thus 
interpreted. There are few notes on it—none at all before the foregoing note 
by Collier. Apart from the disgust, instinctively felt at the sight of such a lib- 
erty, by such a man, at such a time, the risk of discovery is too great. Into 
such a peril, Iachimo was too cautious and too self-controlled to venture; his 
whole fortune, nay, his very life, was at stake; everything depended on Imogen’s 
profound slumber.—INGLEBY asserts roundly that Iachimo ‘does not kiss her,’ 
and denounces Capell’s stage-direction as ‘vulgar’ and ‘too monstrous to need 
refutation.’—Ep.] 

24. How deerely they doo’t:] VAUGHAN (p. 387) having suggested the punc- 
tuation, ‘But kiss one kiss!’ accordingly adds the amendment, ‘How dearly 
they'd do’t!’ 7. e., ‘kiss one kiss.’ ‘As the passage stands,’ he asserts, ‘there is no 
action to which ‘do’t’ can possibly refer.’ This dogmatic assertion is well-nigh 
incomprehensible. I should rather say that the action is so clear that it cannot 
possibly be missed. Jachimo yearns to steal a kiss, but this cannot be done, 
whereas her lips ‘two kissing cherries’—how dearly they doit. Rev. JouN HUNTER 
explains ‘How dearly they do’t’ as meaning ‘at what peril they take the kiss,’ 
which implies, I think, his assumption that Iachimo kisses Imogen. Downpen, 
on the other hand, says that ‘dearly’ is equivalent to exquisitely, but makes no 
reference to an actual kiss by Iachimo, wherefrom we may hopefully infer his dis- 
belief in it.—Eb. 

24, 25.’Tis her breathing that Perfumes, etc.] MaLone: Thus, in The 
Metamorphosis of Pigmalions Image, by J. Marston, 1598: ‘Then view’s her lips, 
no lips did seeme so faire In his conceit, through which he thinks doth flie so sweet 
a breath, that doth perfume the ayre.’ [Stanza 7, ed. Grossart.] 

26. Bowes toward her] FLETCHER (p. 44): Was ever the victory of silent 
beauty, elegance, and purity, over the awe-struck spirit of a sensualist, so ex- 
quisitely painted or so nobly celebrated as in the lines of this soliloquy? It is not 
‘the flame 0’ the taper’ that here ‘bows toward her,’ but the unhallowed flames in a 
voluptuary and a treacherous breast, that render extorted yet grateful homage to 
that lovely, spotless, and fragrant soul! [Is there herein a suggestion that the 
atmosphere of the chamber is so absolutely quiet and still that the mere move- 
ment of Iachimo’s body, as he glides past, causes the flame to follow his motion 
toward the bed?—Eb.] 


116 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT II, SC. il. 


Vnder thefe windowes, White and Azure lac’d 28 
With Blew of Heauens owne tinét. But my defigne. 


28. thefe] the Fi, Rowe, Pope, Cap. 

28, 29. thefe windowes...With] those 
curtains white with azure lac’d, The 
Han. 

28. windowes,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. windows: Theob. 
et cet. 

28, 29. and Azure lac’d With] Fi, 
Sta. Glo. with azure lac’d, The Warb. 
and azure! lac’d With Johns. Varr. 
and azure, lac’d: With Cap. Mal. 
with azure lac’d With Ran. and azure- 


-lac'd With B. Nicholson, ap. Cam. 
Ingl. ii. and azure, lac’d With Rowe et 
cet. 

29. tinct.| tinct, Ff. 
Pope. 


tinct— Rowe, 


defigne.| F., Var. ’21, Knt i. 
defigne’s F3. defign’s Fy, Rowe,+, 
Eccl. Dyce ii, iii, Huds. Coll. iii. 
design Var. ’73, Knt ii, Ingl. design, 
Coll. i, ii, Dyce i, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
design? F, (Capell’s copy, ap. Cam.), 
Caps et cet: 


27, 28. th’enclosed Lights, now Canopied Vnder these windowes, White 
and Azure lac’d] CapEtt asserts that the comma after ‘windows’ (‘which 
the Poet would have called shutters, for that’s his meaning, had the dignity of his 
subject permitted it’) maims the sense by making ‘ White and Azure’ refer to them; 
‘whereas there is much more propriety in applying those words to all the visible 
parts of the lady, pronouncing them rapturously,—Here is “white and azure!” 
the white “lac’d” with’t, as ’twere! with an azure as rich as that of the heavens!’ 
[I believe no editor or commentator has adopted this extended and comprehensive 
view of Capell—Ep.]—Matone: These words, I apprehend, refer not to Imogen’s 
eye-lids (of which the poet would scarcely have given so particular a description), 
but to the inclosed lights, i. e., her eyes, which, though now shut, Iachimo had seen 
before, and which are here said in poetical language to be blue, and that blue celes- 
tial. [That the ‘windows’ are the eye-lids, Malone shows by Friar Laurence’s 
words: ‘thy eyes’ windows fall, Like death, when he shuts up the day of life.’— 
Rom. and Jul., TV, i, t00o.—PorTER and CLARKE are, I think, Malone’s sole fol- 
lowers in the belief that ‘lac’d with blue’ refers to the blue of the enclosed lights; 
‘As fancied not seen,’ they say, ‘beneath the fringe of the lashes interlaced over 
them, this is not unlikely. —Ep.]—Knicut: We are disposed to agree with 
Warburton that the eye-lids were intended. The eye-lid of an extremely fair young 
woman is often of a tint that may be properly called ‘white and azure,’ which is 
produced by the network of exceedingly fine veins that runs through and colours 
that beautiful structure. In the text before us, the eye-lids are not only of a 
‘white and azure’ hue, but they are also ‘lac’d with blue of heaven’s own tinct’— 
marked with the deeper blue of the larger veins. The description here is as accurate 
as it is beautiful. It cannot apply with such propriety to the eye, which certainly 
is not ‘laced’ with blue, nor to the skin generally, which would not be beautiful 
as ‘white and azure,’ It is, to our minds, one of the many examples of Shake- 
speare’s extreme accuracy of observation, and of his transcendant power of making 
the exact and the poetical blend with and support each other.—STauNTON: 
The beauty of this image is not enhanced by the usual punctuation. [That is, 
with a comma after ‘azure,’ whereby ‘white and azure’ are made to refer to 
‘windows.’ Staunton’s text reads ‘white, and azure lac’d With,’ etc. ‘Perhaps,’ 
says Dowpen, ‘this reading of Staunton is right.’"}—Hupson: Observe, ‘lac’d’ 
agrees with ‘windows,’ not with ‘white and azure’; for the ‘azure’ is the ‘blue 
of heaven’s own tinct.’ ‘Perhaps the sense would be clearer thus: ‘white with 


ACT IG ws. i | CYMBELINE 117 


To note the Chamber, I will write all downe, 30 
Such, and fuch piétures : There the window, fuch 
Th’adornement of her Bed; the Arras, Figures, 32 
30. Chamber,...downe,| Ff. chamber 32. adornement| adronemeni Fy (Ca- 
—...down, Rowe,-+. chamber,...down: pell’s copy, ap. Cam.). 
Cap. et cet. Bed;| bed— Rowe,+. 
[Takes out his tables. Coll. MS. Arras, Figures] arras-figures M. 
(monovol.) Mason, Ran. Wh. i. arras; figures Glo. 
31. pictures:| pictures— Rowe,+. Wh. ii. 
window,] window; Cap. et seq. Figures,| figures— Rowe,+, Ran. 


32. Th’] Fi, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce. jigures? Cap. Varr. 
The Cap. et cet. 


azure lac’d, the blue.’ [Herein Hudson is anticipated by Warburton. In referring 
“‘lac’d’ to ‘windows’ Hudson anticipates Vaughan, who thinks the sense would be 
made clearer by reading: ‘These windows white and azure, lac’d With blue,’ etc. 

29. But my designe.] When Shylock replies, ‘I’ll not answer that; But say it is 
my humour,’ there is, I believe, an absorption of fo in the final ¢ of ‘But’; thus: 
‘Vl not answer that But [to] say,’ etc., which might be printed ‘Bud’ say. Thus 
here, there is, I think, another case of similar absorption, and Iachimo’s words, 
slightly changing the punctuation of Fx, should be printed ‘But my design To 
note the Chamber. I will write all down,’ etc. (Since writing these lines, I find, 
on referring to the Cam. Ed., that I have been anticipated in the insertion of to by 
‘Nicholson.’ If this be the late Brinsley Nicholson I am happy in recording that 
there are very few whom I would more gladly follow than that keen-sighted, 
well-equipped, accurate scholar.)—Ep. 

29. designe.] CAPELL: The interrogation at the end of ‘design’ is only in the Fy. 
[See Text. Notes.] Here the speaker pulls out his tables; and having minuted some 
of his items is stopped by a reflection upon their little significance in comparison 
with some others he specifies, but in lines that were neither grammatical nor sense 
as they have been written and pointed hitherto. [In the conclusion of this note by 
Capell, see Comment on lines 34-36.] 

30. I will write all downe] Cottier (ed. ii.): It seems by a marginal note 
in the MS. that, at these words, Iachimo ‘took out his tables,’ and noted at the 
moment the particulars which he observed in the Chamber. It may be doubted 
whether the poet intended that he should do so at the time; but we take it for 
granted that such was the course when the old annotator saw the play, and such 
may certainly have been the custom on our early stage. 

32. the Arras, Figures] M. Mason (p. 325): This should be pointed thus, 
‘the Arras-figures?’ That is, the figures of the Arras.—WuiTteE (ed. i.) adopted this 
hyphen of Mason, but, in his ed. ii, following the Globe, he placed an emphatic 
semicolon between the two words.—Matone: I think Mason is mistaken. It 
appears from what Iachimo says afterwards [II, iv, 87], that he had noted not only 
the figures of the arras, but the stuff of which the arras was composed. Again in 
[V, v, 238] ‘averring notes of Chamber-hanging, Pictures,’ etc. [That these 
‘Figures’ have any connection with the Arras is, I think, doubtful. When Iachimo 
afterwards describes this chamber to Posthumus, he refers to the ‘story’ on the 
‘tapistry’ or arras, which was that of Cleopatra; he then describes the chimney- 
piece where the ‘figures’ were carved. Is it not to these ‘figures’ which he now 
refers?e—Ep.] 


118 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Act 11, SC. 10 


Why fuch, and fuch : and the Contents o’th’Story. 33 
Ah, but fome naturall notes about her Body, 
Aboue ten thoufand meaner Moueables 


Would teftifie, t’enrich mine Inuentorie. 36 
33. and fuch:] and such— Rowe,+. 34. naturall] nat’ral Pope,+. 
o'th’| of the Cap. o’the Var. °73 35. Moueables] moveables, Theob. 
et seq. Warb. Johns. moveables they Cap. 
Story.] story,— Cap. et seq. 36. Would] They’ld Elze. 
34. fome| Jofhe F2. Venrich| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. 


Sing. Dyce. to enrich Cap. et cet. 


34-36. Some naturall notes about her Body, Aboue ten thousand meaner 
Moueables Would testifie, t’enrich mine Inuentorie] Capreti: If the 
reader shall think it permissible, and the lines improved by it, they might be 
ranged thus: ‘Ah, but some natural notes about her body | To enrich mine inven- 
tory! they would testify | Above ten thousand meaner moveables.’ While the 
speaker is about making search for those ‘natural notes,’ his eye is caught by the 
bracelet, and having taken it off, spies the ‘mole’: at finding of which he expresses 
much exultation, and is going to enter that in his tables, but stops, asking himself a 
question, that has much dramatical beauty when relieved from those impertinent 
words [‘No more’]. The book is spied next; of which he makes another memento, and 
then shuts up his tables—VAuGHAN (p. 389): This passage has been universally 
misunderstood. The universal punctuation shows that ‘would testify,’ etc., is 
interpreted ‘would testify in such a way as to enrich my inventory.’ But the 
enrichment of his inventory would be a very paltry effect of their testimony; nor, 
as their testimony must follow the possession of his inventory, could they well be 
said to testify to enrich his inventory at all? ‘To enrich mine inventory’ really 
depends on ‘sleep lie dull upon her, and be her sense,’ etc. This would give him the 
precious bracelet, ‘to witness outwardly’; and thus enrich the inventory of his 
possessions, and also of his proofs, by a proof as strong as conscience. A full 
period should be placed after ‘testify,’ where the sense is completed. I would 
read, therefore, and punctuate: ‘some natural notes about her body Above ten 
thousand meaner moveables would testify. To enrich mine inventory O sleep, 
thou ape,’ etc. [This remarkable comment is given unabridged, and, possibly, 
would not have been given at all, were it not that in his punctuation Vaughan 
anticipated Dowden, as Dowden himself tells us, whence we may infer that he 
substantially agrees with Vaughan. It seems to me that it is Vaughan (and not 
the ‘universe’) who, misled by the virtual parenthesis in the second line, has 
misunderstood the whole passage. Attention to the punctuation, here faultless, 
of the Folio, or even to Capell’s proposed reading, as recorded in the Cam. Ed., 
would never have induced the belief that Iachimo intended the ‘meaner moveables’ 
to testify so as to enrich his inventory, or even to testify at all. It is the ‘natural 
notes’ about Imogen’s body that are to enrich the inventory as nothing else could. 
In effect, Iachimo says: let me enrich my list by a few birthmarks, the proof 
afforded by these would outweigh the testimony of ten thousand articles of furni- 
ture, whereof the knowledge could be gained by hearsay. It was while gazing . 
in search of these natural notes that his eye catches sight of the bracelet. Then 
follows the adjuration to Sleep to make Imogen as insensate as marble so that he 


ACE 10,SC.all. | CYMBELINE 119 


O fleepe, thou Ape of death, lye dull vpon her, ey) 
And be her Senfe but as a Monument, 

Thus in a Chappell lying. Come off,come off; 

As flippery as the Gordian-knot was hard. 40 
’Tis mine, and this will witneffe outwardly, 

As {ftrongly as the Confcience do’s within : 


To’th’madding of her Lord. On her left breft 43 
37. fleepe,| sleep! Coll. ii, Ingl. 40. Gordian-knot] Gordian knot Pope 
her,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Sta. et seq. 
her; Coll. ti. her! Theob. et cet. hard.| hard! Cap. et seq. 
38. Monument] monument’s Vaun. 41. mine,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
39. lying.] lying! Theob. et seq. mine! Coll. i, ii. mine; Theob. et cet. 
Come off,| Off, Cap. conj. will witneffe] witneffe F5F,. 
come off;| come off,— Rowe i, 42. within:| within, Rowe et seq. 
Var. ’73. come off— Rowe ii,+. 43. To’th’| To th’ Fi,+. To the Cap. 


[Taking off her bracelet. Rowe. et seq. 


can secure it. The very word ‘sense’ (that is, feeling, sensation) intimates this, 
and his ‘Come off, come off’ proves it.—Eb.] 

38. Sense] WuitE: That is, her sensuous part, her body. 

38. a Monument, Thus in a Chappell lying] Matonr: Shakespeare was 
here thinking of the recumbent whole-length figures, which, in his time, were 
usually placed on the tombs of considerable persons. The head always reposed 
upon a pillow. He has again the same allusion in his R. of L.: ‘Where like a vir- 
tuous monument she lies, To be admired,’ etc. [line 391]. 

30, 40. come off; As slippery as] VAUGHAN: All editors have, it seems to me, 
slightly misunderstood this. [Vaughan then proceeds to prove the proper under- 
standing by proposing to consider ‘slippery’ an adverb qualifying ‘come off,’ thus 
“come off As slippery as,’ etc. If this be the true interpretation, it is obtained, I 
think, at the expense of the dramatic action and of all appreciation of the scene. 
There is a pause after the first, ‘Come off!’ and a second pause, longer and more 
breathless, after the latter, ‘Come off!’—as the bracelet was nearing the wrist and 
hand. Then as the bracelet is almost free Iachimo breathes forth, ‘As slippery as 
the Gordian knot, was hard.’ It is, of course, the bracelet that was slippery. If 
Vaughan’s construction be correct and ‘slippery’ qualifies the coming off, then to 
maintain the analogy he should read ‘as the Gordian knot was hard in untying.’ 
As the text stands, ‘slippery’ qualifies bracelet and ‘hard’ qualifies the Gordian knot. 
In the use of ‘slippery,’ may we not detect one of Shakespeare’s stage-directions? 
Posthumus, when he gave the bracelet to Imogen, called it a ‘manacle.’ Manacles 
are fastened with a clasp. To unclasp the bracelet would have been an easier and 
more momentary task than to free it with infinite delicacy of touch, and with eyes 
glancing every tenth of a second at the sleeper’s closed lids, along the arm, down 
the wrist, and over thehand. By using ‘slippery’ Shakespeare tells us that it was 
not to be unclasped, but removed by a way more perilous and dramatic, and one 
which sustains the thrill of suspense until there comes the triumphant, ‘Tis mine!’ 
—Ep.] 

42. Conscience] Dyce (Few Notes, 155): It may not be useless to observe that 
‘conscience’ is used here for consciousness. (‘As strongly as his inward conscious- 
ness.’) 


120 THE TRAGEDIE OF ACT Tl, Sculls 


A mole Cinque-fpotted : Like the Crimfon drops 

I’ th’bottome of a Cowflippe. Heere’s a Voucher, 45 
Stronger then euer Law could make; this Secret 

Will force him thinke I haue pick’d the lock, and t’ane 


The treafure of her Honour. No more: to what end? 48 
44. {potted:] spotted— Rowe, spotted, 47. I haue] I’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii, 
Pope et seq. Huds. 
45. (th) the Cap. et seq. Vane] Fi. ta’en Rowe. 
Cowflippe.| cowslip: Cap. et 48. No more:| Ff. No more— Rowe, 
seq. +,Om. Cap. No more. Var. 78 et seq. 


44. A mole] In reference to this mole, MALONE notes that Shakespeare derived 
it from Boccaccio, and not from Westward for Smelts. See Appendix: Source of the 
Plot. 

44. the Crimson drops] STEEVENS: This simile contains the smallest out of a 
thousand proofs that Shakespeare was an observer of nature, though, in this 
instance, no very accurate describer of it, for the drops alluded to are of a deep 
yellow.—BEIsLEY (p. 20): This description shows how particularly Shakespeare 
observed natural objects. The five spots in the corolla of the cowslip have escaped 
the attention of some of our botanists.—ELLACOMBE (p. 49): ‘Cowslips! how 
the children love them, and go out into the fields on sunny April mornings to 
collect them in their little baskets, and then come home and pick the pips to make 
sweet unintoxicating wine, preserving, at the sare time untouched, a bunch of the 
goodliest flowers as a harvest-sheaf of beauty! and then the white soft husks are 
gathered into balls and tossed from hand to hand till they drop to pieces, to be 
trodden upon and forgotten. And so at last, when each sense has had its fill of 
the flower and they are thoroughly tired of their play, the children rest from their 
Celebration of the Cowslip. Blessed are such flowers that appeal to every sense!’ 
So wrote Dr Forbes Watson in his pretty and Ruskinesque little work, Flowers and 
Gardens, and the passage well expresses one of the chief charms of the cowslip. 
It is the most favourite flower with children. It must have been also with Shake- 
speare.—GRINDON (p. 5): The solitary Shakespearian botanical slip is, like all his 
other lapses, so palpable as to be detected on the instant. . . . A certain amount of 
latitude is always permissible in descriptions designed to be vivid and picturesque, 

. but it is going quite beyond the reality to say that the spots in the cup of the 
cowslip are ‘crimson.’ The nearest approach to that colour ever seen could be 
described only as rosy orange. [It is not the flower but the leaves which receive 
the fullest description, both in Lyte’s Niewe Herbal, 1578, and in Gerarde’s Herball, 
1623 (2d and larger ed.). The latter rather provokingly says of the flower that it 
‘is so commonly knowne that it needeth no description,’—not that any description 
can equal Shakespeare’s, but it seemed to me worth while to examine these ancient 
books and see if, by chance, the spots were anywhere called ‘drops,’ which, pos- 
sibly, Shakespeare used to avoid the repetition involved in ‘cinque-spotted.’ 
—Morray (WV. E. D., s. 2. ¢ 9): A spot of colour (like the mark or stain of a drop). 
1607. Topsell, Foure-footed Beasts, 91: ‘Their belly is parted with black strokes or 
drops.’ As for the ‘botanical error,’ in calling the drops crimson, we must bear in 
mind how extremely difficult it is to determine the value of colours. Here Steevens 
and Grindon are not precisely at one. Shakespeare frequently terms blood crimson, 
and yet Macbeth speaks of Duncan’s ‘silver skin lac’d with his golden blood.’—Ep.] 


ACT It, SC. il. | 


CYMBELINE 


121 


Why fhould I write this downe, that’s riueted, 


Screw’d to my memorie. 


She hath bin reading late, 50 


The Tale of Zereus, heere the leaffe’s turn’d downe 


Where Philomele gaue vp. 


I haue enough, 


To’th’Truncke againe, and fhut the fpring of it. 
Swift, fwift, you Dragons of the night, that dawning 
May beare the Rauens eye : I lodge in feare, 55 


49. riveted] riveteds F2. rivitted F3. 
rivetted Fy. riuete F;, Capell’s copy, ap. 
Cam. 

50. memorie.| mem’ry? or memory? 


up— Rowe,-++, Cap. Varr. Ran. up; 
Mal. et cet. 

53- th’| the Cap. et seq. 

54. night,| Knt, Coll. Dyce, Sta. 


Theob. et seq. Glo. Cam. night! Pope et cet. 
She hath| SV hath Pope, Theob. i, 55~ beare...eye:] F2. bear...eye: F3F,, 
Han. Rowe, Theob. Warb. Cap. ofe...eye: 
bin] been Fy. Pope. bare it’s raven-eye: Han. Johns. 
late,| Fi,+, Varr. bare...eye! Knt, Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
late Mal. et seq. Ingl. ii. bear...eye! Ingl. i. bare the 
Pieleretis.| Hae heaven’s eye Leo (withdrawn). clear 
reus; Theob. et seq. the raven’s eye Vaun. bar or bier the 
52. Philomele] Philomel Johns. et raven’s eye. Thiselton. bare...eye: Var. 
seq. 72 et cet. 
vp.] Fi, Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. feare,| fear; Cap. et seq. 


late: Cap. 


Terus, F3;F,. Te- 


51. The Tale of Tereus ... Where Philomele gaue up] MAtone: 
Tereus and Progne is the second [‘pretie hystorie’] in A Petite Pallace of Pettie his 
Pieasure, in Qto, 1576. The same tale is in Gower’s Confessio Amantis, lib. V 
[p. 313, ed. Pauli.], and in Ovid, Metam., lib. vi. [‘frustra clamato saepe parente, 
Saepe sorore sua, magnis super omnia divis.’—line 524. Golding’s Trans., p. 74, 
verso, 1567.|—HeErRForD: It is characteristic that Imogen should stop at this 
point.—WALKER (Crit., i, 152) devotes a chapter to Ovid’s Influence on Shakespeare. 

54. you Dragons of the night] StEEvENS (Note on ‘night-swift Dragons,’— 
Mid. N. D., III, ii, 400, of this ed.): The task of drawing the chariot of the night 
was assigned to dragons on account of their supposed watchfulness.—M ALONE: 
This circumstance Shakespeare might have learned from Golding’s Ovid, which 
he has imitated in The Tempest: ‘And brought asleep the dragon fell, whose eyes 
were never shet.’ 

54, 55. that dawning May beare the Rauen’s eye] Turosatp (Nichol’s 
Illust., ii, 265) wrote to Warburton: ‘I think “beare” should be either bore, or bare, 
i. e., make bare. Though the raven be a night-bird, it does not prey during that 
whole season, but slumbers towards morning, and is disturbed by the first approach 
of dawn. Now making bare the eye seems to me peculiarly proper, as most birds 
and many quadrupeds have a membrane for nictation, wherewith they can at 
pleasure cover their eyes, though their eyelids be open, and with this membrane 
they often defend their eyes from too strong a light, and draw it over the pupil, 
when they do not shut down the eyelid at all.’ Theobald did not again refer to his 
conjecture, bore, so we may consider it as withdrawn. In his subsequent edition, 
he has, after severely criticising Pope for the reading ope, the following: ‘I could 
help Mr Pope to an emendation with a very minute change of letter: May bare 
the raven’s eye, i. ¢., make bare, naked; and this would be a much more poetical 


122 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Il, SC. ti. 


[54, 55. that dawning May beare the Rauen’s eye] 
word than ope.’ After writing thus sensibly, and offering an emendation, which 
has been ever since generally adopted, he succumbed, in an unhappy hour, to the 
domineering influence of ‘thought-swarming, but idealess, Warburton,’ as Cole- 
ridge calls him, and retained ‘bear,’ as ‘a very grand and poetical expression’ 
(Warburton himself, having devised it, pronounces it ‘sublime’), inasmuch as it is 
‘a metaphor borrowed from Heraldry; as in Much Ado, “Sf he have wit enough to 
keep himself warm, let him bear it for a difference between himself and his horse.”’’— 
I, i, 66.] Theobald then goes on to say, ‘that the Dawn should bear the Rauen’s eye, 
means that it should rise and show that colour. Now the Raven’s eye is remark- 
ably grey: and grey-eyed, ‘tis known, is the epithet universally joined to the morn- 
ing,’ Here follow five or six quotations where grey is thus ‘joined to morning,’ 
which need not be here repeated; a Concordance will furnish them.—WARBURTON: 
Had Shakespeare meant to bare or open the eye, that is, to awake, he had instanced 
rather in the lark than raven as the earliest riser. Besides, whether the morning 
bared or opened the raven’s eye was of no advantage to the speaker, but it was much 
advantage that it should bear it, that is, become light.—Heatu (p. 476): I am 
inclined to think that bare, that is, open it, is the genuine text. Our poet says of 
the crow (a bird whose properties resemble very much those of the raven) in Tyo. 
& Cress., ‘O Cressida! but that the busie day, Wak’d by the lark, has rous’d the 
ribald crows.’—[LV, ii, 8.] Mr Warburton objects that ‘the opening of the raven’s 
eye was no advantage to the speaker’; no more was the dawning, decking itself in 
grey, considered in itself, but both were of equal advantage to him, considered as 
the constant forerunner of day.—STEEVENS: The poet means no more than that the 
light might wake the raven; or, as it is poetically expressed, bare his eye —KNIGHT: 
We are not quite sure of the propriety of Theobald’s correction, bare. . . . The 
dawning may bare that eye; or the dawning may bear, may sustain, may be distinct 
enough to endure—the proof of that acute vision [attributed to the raven in search 
of his prey.|—Co.tier (ed. i.) notes a suggestion of Barron Field that ‘night’ is 
here poetically described as ‘the raven.’ ‘This may certainly be so,’ adds Collier, 
and the suggestion deserves attention, though we are not acquainted with any other 
instance where night is so personified, admitting that the ‘raven’ and its plumage 
are often mentioned as accompaniments of or similes for night; as in the well- 
known words of Milton: ‘smoothing the raven down Of darkness till it smiled.’— 
Dyce (Remarks, etc., 254) quotes this note of Collier, and scorns it: ‘That “you 
dragons of the night” mean ‘‘you dragons that draw the chariot of the Night,” 
neither Mr Field nor Mr Collier will, I presume, dispute; here, therefore, Night 
is spoken of as A Goppgss; and is it to be supposed for a moment that in the very 
next line Shakespeare would turn her into A RAvEN? Besides, how could the 
“dawning” said to open the eye of Night? do not poets invariably describe Night as 
betaking herself to repose at the dawn of Day? “ Darknesse is fled: looke, infant 
Morne hath drawne Bright siluer curtains ’bout the couch of Night.”’—Marston’s 
Antonio’s Reuenge, 1602, sig. B. 2.—Cor ter (ed. ii. reading ‘may dare the raven’s 
eye’. (Perhaps the letter d was mistaken by the old printer, and thus dare might 
become bare or ‘beare.’ ‘May dare the raven’s eye’ must have reference to the 
practice of daring, or dazzling, the eyes of larks by pieces of looking-glass. On the 
other hand, the true reading of ‘beare’ may be bleare, in the sense of ‘blear the eye,’ 
which was a very common expression in the time of Shakespeare. . . . To ‘blear 
the raven’s eye’ would mean to render it dim, like any other night-bird by the 


ACT ©, SCs ii. CYMBELINE 123 


[54, 55. that dawning May beare the Rauen’s eye] 


brightness of the morning; but having no authority for blear, we adopt dare from 
the MS. [In his ed. iii. Collier abandoned dare and returned to bare.|—SINcER 
(Text Vindicated, etc., p. 304): How any one could have conceived that he could 
amend this passage, and suggest dare and bleare, is past my comprehension! One 
must be blear-eyed indeed not to perceive that ‘dawning may bare the raven’s 
eye’ is a highly poetical image for returning day opening the eye of night. The 
celebrated passage in Macbeth: ‘Come, seeling night Scarf up the tender eye of 
pitiful day,’—alone might have opened the eyes of the correctors of this passagem 
and spared us their dare and bleare—Letrsom (? Blackwood’s Maga., Oct., 1853, 
p. 470): We have little doubt that ‘the raven’s eye here means night’s eye. ‘May 
bare the raven’s eye’—that is, may open the eye of darkness and thus usher in the 
day. Has not Milton got ‘smoothing the raven down of darkness till it smiled’? 
This interpretation must be placed to the credit of Mr Singer, although it had 
occurred previously to ourselves. [Who the author was of these Notes in Black- 
wood has never, as far as I know, been made authoritatively known. Ingleby 
(V. & Q., V, vii, 224, speaks of them as ‘by the late Mr Lettsom’; but Lettsom 
himself, in his Preface to Walker (Crit. i, p. liv.), quotes a sentence from them with 
which he utterly disagrees and holds the author of them up to ridicule.-—Ep.] 
Dyce (ed. ii.) refers to a passage in Drout’s Pityfull Historie of Gaulfrido and Bar- 
nado le vayne, etc., Sig. F. 2. Then, after quoting the note in Collier’s ed. ii, just 
given, repeats the note from his Remarks, etc., and adds, ‘1865. Mr Collier . . . 
also proposes (most ridiculously) ‘May blear the raven’s eye.’ [KEIGHTLEY 
so far from finding it ridiculous, adopts it in his text.|—CARTWRIGHT (p. 38) pro- 
poses cheer for ‘bare,’ because the raven wanted his breakfast—The Misses 
PorTER and CLARKE: Iachimo had reason to fear the Raven’s eye, reason to fear 
the prompt guard of the loyal servant, Pisanio, to whom he may here refer under 
this figure. . . . He longs for that dawning when he, no longer there in the trunk, 
subject to discovery, may thus beare, stand the Raven’s scrutiny.—THISELTON 
(p. 18): The Raven here is clearly the Night-raven; hence the usual modern reading 
bare is singularly out of place. Why did not Theobald conjecture bar, which would 
be written barre? . . . We might then have had a really neat allusion to the 
membrana nictitans, though the sense might shift well enough without it. Com- 
pare ‘The Night-raven or Crowe is of the same manner of life that the Owle is, for 
she onely commeth abrode in the darke night fleeing the daylighte and sunne’ 
(Maplet’s A Greene Forest,—Cent. Dict.; ‘this Birde (‘ the night crowe’’] is called 
Noctua, as it were sharply seeing by night; for by night she maye see, and when 
shining of the sunne commeth, her sight is dim ’)—[Batman, Bk, 12, chap. 27. 
In Batman’s own addition to this chapter, the bird is spoken of as ‘this kinde of 
Owle.’ In Batman’s chap. 10 ‘of the Rauen,’ there is no reference to its nocturnal 
habits.—Ep.] I am indebted to a friend for another interpretation of the original 
text, which has the advantage of dispensing with any suspicion of alteration therein. 
According to this, Iachimo calls upon the Dragons of the Night so to accelerate 
their flight that dawning may for once undergo or endure the Night-raven’s eye, 
which it usually avoids by its gradual approach. There is a further possibility 
that in ‘beare’ we may have the word bier used as a verb, and that by ‘the Raven’s 
eye’ Iachimo may mean his own, boding ill-luck to Imogen. His thought would 
then be ‘Let it be dawning that carries the Raven’s eye’ into its seclusion as of the 
grave; and slipping into the ‘Trunke’ which sufficiently resembles a coffin, he would 


124 THE TRAGEDIE OF (ACT SIL Sha 


Though this a heauenly Angell : hell is heere. 56 
Clocke ftrtkes 

One, two, three : time, time. Exit. 58 

56. Angell:] angel, Rowe et seq. 58. [He goes into the Trunk, the 

57. [Counting the clock. Cap. Scene shifts. Rowe i. (closes. Rowe ii.). 

58. time.] time! Pope et seq. Shuts the trunk upon himself. The 


scene closes. Cap. 


imagine himself as dead, Imogen appearing as an Angel, and the darkness of the 
‘Trunke’ as Hell. . . . Such an interpretation will, however, probably be regarded 
as too fanciful, if not grotesque. [In the Shakespeare Jahrbuch (iv, 383, 1869), 
Jutrus MarTENSEN rehearses various interpretations that have been given of this 
passage, and comes to the conclusion that they are all insufficient, and that the true 
meaning is that the ‘raven’ is ‘the trunk itself with its raven-black darkness. 
The raven’s eye is, therefore, the opening of the trunk, the opening, which the lid 
of the trunk holds fast shut like an eyelid,’ etc. Further amplification or comment 
is needless; in the Jahrbuch for 1875 (p. 382) the suggestion was judiciously with- 
drawn. We have thus seen that the Raven has been supposed to be Night, the 
Trunk, and Pisanio. What, we may ask, has Iachimo himself done that he should 
be overlooked? Is he not to join the sable group? Thiselton has just answered. 
Verily, a whole flock of ravens could not yearn for dawning to bare their eyes 
more bitterly than the stifled prisoner. After mentioning the Raven’s eye, does 
he not instantly refer to himself: ‘Z lodge’—one eye almost in grammatical 
apposition to the other? Assuredly, the Raven is Iachimo. In conclusion, it 
seems to me that the meaning of the phrase can be expressed hardly better or more 
tersely than it has been by Steevens.—ED.] 

56. Though this a] WALKER (Vers., 85) regards this as one of the many in- 
stances when an absorption occurs of zs in ‘this. —Dvyce (ed. ii.) quotes Walker, 
and remarks that ‘he is probably right.’ It is difficult to come to any other con- 
clusion in view of the numerous examples gathered by Walker in his Article VI, 
not only from Shakespeare, but from his contemporaries. Indeed, the number is so 
great that the theory of absorption is threatened, and one might almost affirm 
that ‘This’ is used absolutely in Elizabethan English.—Ep. 

56. hell is heere] If there be anywhere a comment on these words I have failed 
to find it, and to me they are not so clear as to need none. DEIGHTON, it is true, 
remarks that ‘hell’ is ‘torment,’ but this does not help us much; it is hardly to be 
supposed that hell is a synonym of comfortable ease. Of course, it has no reference 
to the trunk. Does not Jachimo strike his breast? and is not ‘here’ used decxrixOs? 
(I dislike the pedantic word, but no other will precisely fit.) Is it that after the 
deed is done a wave of sudden remorse overwhelms him, like Macbeth’s, ‘Wake 
Duncan with thy knocking? I would thou couldst!’ Or, as Wordsworth expresses 
it: ‘’Tis done—and in the after vacancy We wonder at ourselves as men betrayed.’ 
Or is it one of Shakespeare’s ways of preparing us for the future, like Brabantio’s 
warning to Othello in reference to Desdemona: ‘She has deceived her father and 
may thee’? Tachimo’s final repentance must be represented in the last Act as 
deep and long, and is this a preparation for it?—Ep. 

58. One, two, three] MALone: Our author is often careless in his computation 
of time. Just before Imogen went to sleep, she asked her attendant what hour it 


was, and was informed by her it was almost midnight. Iachimo, immediately 


ACT II, SC. iil. | CYMBELINE 125 


Scena Tertia. 


inter Clotten,and Lords. 2 
1. Your Lordfhip is the moft patient man in loffe, the 
moft coldeft that euer turn’d vp Ace. 4 
1. Scena Tertia.] Scene rv. Ecl. Cap. The same. An ante-chamber 
The Palace. Rowe. The Palace adjoining Imogen’s apartments in the 
again. Pope. Scene changes to another same. Dyce. 
Part of the Palace, facing Imogen’s 3. I.) 1 Lord. Rowe. 
Apartments. Theob. Without the Pal- 4. moft coldefi| coldest Pope,+. 
ace, under Imogen’s Apartment. Han. euer] Om. Ff. 


An Anti-Room to the above Chamber. 


after she has fallen asleep, comes from the trunk, and the present soliloquy cannot 
have consumed more than a’ few minutes,—yet we are now told that it is three 
o’clock. [This shallow remark is admirably answered by] DanteL (New. Sh. Soc. 
Trans., 1877-79, p. 242, foot-note): Surely the many dramatic camels Malone 
must have swallowed should have enabled him to pass this little fly without 
straining. Stage-time is not measured by the glass, and to an expectant audience 
the awful pause between the falling asleep by Imogen and the stealthy opening of 
the trunk from which Iachimo issues would be note and mark of time enough. 
Instances of the night of one day passing into the morning of the next in one un- 
broken scene is too frequent in these plays to need more than a general reference. 

58. time, time] INcLtEBY: This means that ‘four’ is struck, the hour when 
Helen was to call Imogen. [But ‘four’ has not struck,—only three. When Lady 
Macbeth counts ‘One! Two!’ are we to suppose she means ‘three’ o’clock? More- 
over, would it not be foolhardiness in the extreme for Iachimo to wait until the 
very moment when he was liable to be caught by Helen?p—Eb.] 

58. Exit] Corrrer (ed. ii.): It seems likely that the traverse-curtain, which 
sometimes separated the back from the front of the stage, was used on the occasion. 
Thus, what was left of the stage would form an ante-chamber to Imogen’s bedroom. 

2. Enter Clotten] Ecctrs: The time is early the following morning.—Accord- 
ing to DANtet (p. 242) Day 4 begins when Iachimo issues from the trunk; and 
his scheme agrees with Eccles’s as to early morning. 

4. turn’d vp Ace] Assuming that a game of cards is here intended, INGLEBY 
(Revised ed.) observes that the ‘ace is evidently here,—contrary to expectation,— 
a losing card; but if we can apply “turned up” to the cutting of the pack, the 
ace would naturally be, as it always has been, the lowest card; and, as Dr Nichol- 
son observes, the game of cutting for stakes (if it can be dignified with the title 
of “‘game’’) would best suit Cloten’s impatience and limited comprehension.’ 
But Murray (WN. £. D., s. v.) assumes, and rightly, that dice are referred to, and 
gives as his first definition of ‘ace’ (with this present line as an example), ‘one at 
dice, or the side of the die marked with one pip or point.’ This, as we all know, is 
the lowest throw.—Scumipt (Lex.) says that ‘ace’ is here used with a quibble; 
this means, of course, that it was pronounced much like ass. And that this in- 
terpretation is not astray we learn from the only other passage where Shake- 
speare uses it. In Mid. N.D., after Pyramus has exclaimed ‘dye, dye, dye,’ there 


126 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 1, SC. iil. 


Clot. Jt would make any man cold to loofe. 5 
1. But not euery man patient after the noble temper 
of your Lordfhip; You are moft hot, and furious when 
you winne. 
Winning will put any man into courage: if I could get 
this foolith Jmogen, I fhould haue Gold enough: it’s al- fe) 
moft morning, is’t not ? 
1 Day, my Lord. 
Clot. I would this Muficke would come: I am adui- 
fed to giue her Muficke a mornings, they fay it will pene- 
trate. Enter Mufitians. 15 
Come on, tune: If you can penetrate her with your fin- 
gering, fo : wee’l try with tongue too: if none will do, let 
her remaine : but Ile neuer giue o’re. Firft, a very excel- 
lent good conceyted thing; after a wonderful fweet aire, 


with admirable rich words to it, and then let her confi- 20 
der. 
SONG. 

5. loofe] Om. Ff. 14.°@ mornings] a-mornings Pope, 

9. Winning] Clot. Winning F,. Han. o’mornings Theob. et seq. 
(Clot. is the catchword on preceding “16. her] here Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
page in F,F.F;.) 18. gine] Om. Cap. 

10. fhould] shall Rowe ii, Pope, Han. 18, 19. excellent good conceyted] Ff, 


enough:| enough. Johns. Knt, Rowe,+, Knt, Coll. excellent good- 

Coll. Dyce, Sing. Sta. Ky, Glo. Cam. conceited Cap. et cet. excellent-good- 
14. Muficke a mornings,| music; -conceited B. Nicholson ap. Cam. 
o’mornings Anon. ap. Cam. 19. after a] after, a Pope et seq. 


follows this colloquy: ‘Demetrius. No die, but an ace for him; for he is but one. 
Lysander. Lesse than an ace, man. For he is dead, he is nothing. Duke. With the 
helpe of a surgeon, he might yet recover, and proue an Asse.’—V, i, 310. Of 
course, Cloten is too obtuse to note the quibble.—Eb. 

7, 8. most hot, and furious when you winne] A back-handed compliment; 
betokening boisterous and domineering manners.—Ep. 

14. a mornings] What scholarly reason can be given for changing this into 
o’mornings? especially here, where, if it be an illiterate pronunciation, it is in 
character?—Ep. 

14,15. it will penetrate] The present passage is the only instance given by 
Murray (WN. E. D., s. v.) of the intransitive use of this verb. He defines it: ‘To 
touch the heart, affect the feelings.’ 

21. SONG] StEeEvens: Compare the 29th Sonnet. ‘Like to the lark, at break of 
day arising From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven’s gate.’—REED quotes some 
of the lines from Lyly’s Compaspe. The whole song is as follows, from Bond’s ad- 
mirable edition, vol. ii, p. 351: ‘Trico singeth. Song. What bird so sings, yet 
so dos wayle? O t’is the rauish’d Nightingale. Jug, Jug, Jug, Jug tereu, shee cryes 
And still her woes at Midnight rise. Braue prick song! who is’t now we hear’ 


AGT IT) SC. il.) CYMBELINE 127 


Hlearke, hearke, the Larke at Heauens gate fings, 22 
and Phebus gins arife, 
fhis Steeds to water at thofe Springs 


on chahe’d Flowres that lyes: 25 

22. Hearke, hearke] Hark, hark! 23. gins] ’gins Rowe et seq. (except 
Theob.+. Hark! hark! Var. 773 et Dyce, Ingl. Rife). 

seq. (subs.) 25. on...lyes] Each chalic’d flower 


supplies: Han. 


None but the Larke so shrill and cleare; How at heauens gate she claps her wings, 
The Morne not waking till shee sings. Heark, heark, with what a pretty throat 
Poore Robin red-breast tunes his note; Heark how the jolly Cuckoes sing Cuckoe, 
to welcome in the spring, Cuckoe, to welcome in the spring.’—Douce contributed 
to Steevens’s edition the following passages from other poets; he says, of course, 
that Shakespeare ‘might have imitated’ them, for which remark it is not Douce 
that is to be blamed, but the tinsel times in which he lived: ‘The busy larke, mes- 
sager of day, Saluteth in hire song the merwe gray; And fyry Phebus ryseth up so 
bright,’ etc.—Chaucer, Knightes Tale, 633, ed. Morris. ‘Wake now my loue, 
awake; for it is time, The Rosy Morne long since left Tithones bed, All ready to her 
siluer coche to clyme, And Pheebus gins to shew his glorious hed. Hark how the 
cheerefull birds do chaunt theyr laies And carroll of loues praise. The merry 
Larke hir mattins sings aloft, . . . Ah my deere loue why doe ye sleepe thus long.’ 
Spenser, Epithalamion, 74, ed. Grosart. ‘Again,’ says Douce, ‘in our author’s 
Venus and Adonis: “ Lo, here the gentle lark, weary of rest, From his moist cabinet 
mounts up on high, And wakes the morning, from whose silver breast The sun 
ariseth in his majesty.” ’—854. [It is needless either to quote or cite more passages 
wherein occur references to the lark or Phoebus; all aubades contain them, just as 
all serenades refer to the nightingale or the moon. Every one will recall the 
charming dispute between Romeo and Juliet, on the morning after their marriage 
(Act III, sc. v.), whether the song they hear is the nightingale’s which betokens 
that it is still night, or the lark’s, which heralds the day. This present ‘Song’ 
is the supreme crown of all aubades, and comes, by Shakespeare’s consummate 
art, laden with heaven’s pure, refreshing breath, after the stifling presence of 
Tachimo in Imogen’s chamber.—ED.] 

22. Heauens gate] According to WALKER these two words are pronounced 
as one, with the accent on the first syllable. So also ‘swannes-nest,’ III, iv, 158, 
where the hyphen occurs in the Folio. See III, i, 39. 

23. gins] BrapLey (NV. £. D.): Aphetic form of BEGIN (in early instances 
perhaps rather of oncrn); in Mid. Eng. chiefly used in the past tense, gan. In 
modern archaistic use sometimes written ’gin. [The present passage is quoted.] 

24. Springs] It seems almost food for babes to note that this refers to what 
Shakespeare elsewhere calls ‘the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf.’—Ep. 

25. chalic’d Flowres] JoHnson: It may be noted that the cup of a flower 
is called the calix, whence ‘chalice.’ [Sir, he who calls the ‘cup’ of a flower the 
chalice should vindicate his assertion by producing his authority. I doubt that 
the ‘cup of a flower,’ whatever that may be, was ever called the calix. The earliest 
reference I can find to ‘Calix’ is in Lyte’s Nievve Herbal, 1578, p. 655, where it is 
stated that ‘the bud of the Rose before the opening is called Calix,’ which, barring 
the spelling, is not egregiously at variance with the Botany of today. According 


128 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. ili. 


And winking Mary-buds begin to ope their Golden eyes 26 
With euery thing that pretty is, my Lady fweet arye : 
Arie ,arife. 28 
26. Two lines, the first ending: ‘be- 27. euery...is,] all _the things...bin; 
gin,’ Pope et seq. (except Knt, Wh. i.). Han. _everything...bin Warb. 
26, 27. eyes With] eyes, With Pope. is] bin Han. Warb. Johns. Cap. 
eyes; with Theob. et seq. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
27. Two lines, the first ending: ‘is’ Ktly. 
Pope et seq. (except Knt, Wh. i.). 28. arife.] arise! Coll. et seq. 


to WuItNey (Cent. Dict., s.v. calyx): ‘In modern use the Lat. calyx, Greek xadvé, 
a calyx, and its derivatives, are often confounded with the Lat. calix, a cup, and its 
derivatives. In Botany, in general, the calyx is the outer set of the envelopes which 
form the perianth of a flower.’ From Murray (WN. £. D., s. 2. Chalice) we learn that 
from the Lat. calix, through Old French, with a phonetic change, we get chalice. 
Under chaliced the present passage is given with the definition, ‘Having cup-like 
blossoms.’ He also notes that from a quotation, in 1824, the Daffodil was called 
the Chalice-flower, ‘from the nectary being shaped like a chalice.’ If only we 
could trace this name for daffodils back to Shakespeare’s time, and could change 
the words to Chalice-flowers, an additional gleam of gold would be possibly flashed 
into these perfect lines,—only possibly; we cannot gild refined gold; and we must 
bear in mind that the golden eyes of the Mary-buds are just beginning to wink.—Eb.] 

25. that lyes] For many examples where ‘the relative takes a singular verb, 
though the antecedent be plural,’ see ABBOTT, § 247. 

26. Mary-buds] Lyte (p. 163 of marygolds. Calendula.): ‘At the toppe of the 
stalkes [of the Marygold] growe pleasant bright & shining yellow flowers, somewhat 
strong in savour, the whiche do close, at the setting downe of the Sunne, and do 
spread and open againe at the Sunne rising.’—R. C. A. Prior (p. 146,s. v., Mary- 
bud) quotes that portion of Lyte’s observation which refers to the opening and 
shutting of the flower, and adds: ‘a phenomenon to which the older poets allude 
with great delight, both in respect to this flower and the daisy’; he gives its botan- 
ical name, Calendula officinalis—BritTen and Hotianp (p. 326): This has given 
rise to some discussion, but [the Calendula officinalis] is almost certainly meant 
{here in Cym.]. Chatterton speaks of ‘The marybud that shutteth with the light.’ 
[The discussion just referrred to is, probably, that which was carried on in Notes 
& Queries, in 1873. It began by P. P. C’s demurring to the marigold, and asserting 
that it is the daisy—Br. NIcHOLson replied, and quoted Perdita, who says, ‘Here’s 
flowers for you: . . . The marigold that goes to bed wi’ the sun, And with him 
rises weeping.’ —Wint. Tale, IV, iv, 103.—JameEs BRITTEN continued the discus- 
sion, and quoted Dr Prior, as above; he then added, ‘but if it is thought that a 
common British plant is indicated, it is probably the Lesser Celandine (Ranunculus 
ficaria). I do not think the daisy was meant, nor was that plant, as far as I am 
aware, ever dedicated to our Lady.’ C. A. W. thinks that ‘there is very little 
difficulty in asserting that these “Mary-buds” are marigolds, but which of the 
marigolds is meant, of course, nobody can settle positively, and there is no need to 
settle it at all. Every one of them is classed by Withering under the genus Syn- 
genesia, and the daisy comes under the same head.’ The painful student may find 
the full discussion in Notes & Queries, IV, xii, 243, 283, 363, 456; V,i, 24. I think 
the betossed soul may find peace in Calendula officinalis —Ep.] 

27. that pretty is] It is not easy to recall any needless emendation of Shake- 


ACT TIT, SC. iii. ] CYMBELINE 129 


So, get you gone: if this pen trate, I will confider your 29 


29. So] Clo. So Dyce, Glo. Cam. 29. pen trate] Fy. 
gone:| gone— Rowe,+. 


speare which is become so imbedded in the popular mind as this substitution by 
Hanmer of bin for ‘is.’ This is due partly to the mistaken idea that a rhyme is 
needed to ‘begin,’ partly because Hanmer’s was the edition of the ‘nobility and 
gentry,’ and partly, I think, because ‘bin’ is adopted in the version which Schubert 
set to peerless music.—JOHNSON observes that Hanmer ‘very properly restored’ 
bin; ‘but,’ he added, ‘he too grammatically reads: “With all the things that pretty 
bin.”’ And hereby hangs a tale. Johnson says that bin is ‘too grammatical,’ and 
yet every one of the four quotations which his fellow-editor, STEEVENS, adduced 
to prove the proper use of ‘bin’ shows that the authors of these quotations properly 
used bi as a plural. Hanmer must have known this, and, therefore, changed 
“every thing’ into all the things for the sake of concord, which Johnson pronounced 
‘too grammatical.’ Not one of Hanmer’s twelve critical followers, save only 
Keightly, has noted the necessity of providing a plural nominative to the plural 
bin,— possibly because they found a plural use in ‘every thing,’ which is the excuse 
put forward by Keightley, and, too, a legitimate one. That his predecessors were 
aware of it may be doubted, else, I think, they would have instantly availed them- 
selves of it.—CAPELL gives the strangest of excuses for following Hanmer’s bin; 
he grants that the word is ‘both rustick and antequated,’ but says that it is in keep- 
ing with the character of the ‘owner’ of the song, that is, Cloten. Angels and 
ministers of grace, defend us!—Murray, in his monumental article on ‘Be,’ notes 
(A. I, 1-3 plural, y , §.) that ‘Been, bin was erroneously used by 16th century Scotch 
writers, in supposed imitation of Chaucer, and by Byron (in supposed imitation 
of Shakespeare) as singular. . . . Don Juan, XIII, xxvi, “Also there bin another 
pious reason,’’’ etc. Lo, here there is another excuse for the advocates of bin; 
Cloten, Capell’s Cloten, lapsed into Scotch, and was imitating Chaucer! As to 
the needlessness of Hanmer’s change,—had Pope not tampered with the division of 
the lines as they stand in the Folios and in Rowe, the necessity for a rhyme to 
‘begin’ would have, possibly, occurred tono one. (It is temerarious rashness to deny 
the possibility of any change in Shakespeare’s text.) Knight’s is the first loyal 
voice to be raised in protest against this division. He remarks that as the lines 
are printed in the Folio, ‘in all probability, a different time of the air was indicated, 
—a more rapid movement.’—Grant Wuite’s voice is the second in protest, and 
as far as I know, the last. ‘The stanza or stave of this song is,’ he says, ‘one of four 
fourteen-syllable verses and a refrain. The subdivision of such verses into alter- 
nate lines of eight and six syllables was at first an irregularity caused by the intro- 
duction of rhymes at the cesural pauses. These ceesural rhymes were sometimes 
introduced in one part of a song and omitted in others.’ Thus reads his First 
Edition; in his Second, which he printed from the Globe Text, he adopted Pope’s 
division —Ep. 

29. consider] STEEVENS (note on ‘gently consider’d,’ Wint. Tale, IV, iv, 882, of 
this ed.): This means, ‘I having a gentlemanlike consideration given me,’ 7. ¢., 
a bribe. So in The Three Ladies of London, 1584: ‘Sure, sir, Pll consider it here- 
after if I can. Dissimulation. What? consider me? does thou think I am a bribe- 
taker?’ [p. 279 ed. Hazlitt-Dodsley]—Dycr (Gloss.): That is, requisite. [The 
present instance, and the foregoing from Wint. Tale, are the only examples given by 
Dyce where ‘consider’ bears the meaning to requite—ScuminT (Lex.) adds a third, 


9 


130 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT II, SC. ill. 


Muficke the better : if it do not, it is a voyce in her eares 30 
which Horfe-haires, and Calues-guts, nor the voyce of 
vnpaued Eunuch to boot, can neuer amed. 
Enter Cymbaline ,and Queene. 
2 Heere comes the King. 
Clot. Tam glad I was vp fo late, for that’s the reafon 35 
I was vp fo earely : he cannot choofe but take this Ser- 


30. voyce] F,. voice FF, Knt. 32. unpaued] Castratus, 7. e. sine tes- 
fault Coll. MS. Vice Rowe et seq. ticulis, 7. e. stones. 
31. and] Om. Ecl. can neuer] can ever Vaun. 
Calues-guts| cat’s-guts Rowe, amed| amend Ff. 
Cap. cats-guts Pope, Theob. i, Johns. {[Exeunt Musicians. Theob. 
Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr.  cats’-guts 33. Enter...] Enter Queen and Cym- 
Theob. ii, Warb. cat-guts Rann. beline. F;F,. After fatherly, line 37 
nor| with Han. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
of] of an Coll. MS. 34. 2] 2 Lord. Rowe. 


also from Wint. Tale, IV, ii, 19, which, I think, is open to doubt; nevertheless, 
including it, we have but three examples bearing the meaning of bribing or requit- 
ing. But be it noted that the last word Cloten utters before the Song begins is 
‘consider,’ where it can have no reference whatever to payment, but means simply 
“let her lay it to heart.’ Why should Cloten, after speaking ten or a dozen words, 
use the identical expression in an entirely different meaning? Why should he 
not intend in this second use of ‘consider’ to say, ‘If your music touches her soul 
I will more highly appreciate it’? At the same time, it is possible that Cloten uses 
the word a second time, with the meaning given by Steevens.—Eb.] 

30. voyce in her eares] Knicut (ed. i.): ‘Voice’ has been changed to vice. 
But whyr—Dyce (Remarks, p. 254): The answer is, because common sense 
shews the absolute necessity of the change. [When a character is described to us 
as so utterly stupid that he ‘cannot take two from twenty, for his heart, and leave 
eighteen,’ does it behoove us to reform his language to meet the requirements of 
“common sense’? On the contrary, does not the attempt show a lack of common 
sense in us? Possibly, vice, 7. e., defect, is the meaning here; but it is, I think, open 
to doubt. WALKER (Crit.,i, 319) points out, however, an instance in Mer. of Ven. 
(III, ii, 81), where all the Folios have ‘vice’ and the Quartos ‘voyce,’ the true 
word. It is the application of ‘common sense’ to the uncouth words or expressions 
of such characters as Cloten, Sir Andrew Aguecheek, and Clowns and Peasants 
which is, I think, to be deprecated. The Misses Porter and CLARKE stoutly 
uphold ‘voyce,’ for the reason that ‘music, as the natural voice of love, is nothing 
of practical use to Cloten, otherwise it is a mere “voice in her ears.” ’—Ep.] 

31. Horse-haires, and Calues-guts] Of course, ‘Horse-hairs’ refers to the 
violin-bow.—Murray (N. E. D., s. v. Catgut): So far as the name can be traced 
back, it distinctly means guts or intestines of the cat, though it is not known that 
these were ever used for the purpose. (Some have conjectured a humourous refer- 
ence to the resemblance of the sound to caterwauling). 1. The dried and twisted 
intestines of the horse and ass, used for the strings of musical instruments. 

35, 36. I was vp so late...vp so earely] Sir Toby Belch says, ‘not to 
be abed after midnight, is to be up betimes.’-—Twel. N LE tine 


ACT IT) SCF it. ] CYMBELINE 131 


uice I haue done, fatherly. Good morrow to your Ma- 37 
iefty, and to my gracious Mother. 
Cym.Attend you here the doore of our ftern daughter 
Will fhe not forth ? 40 
Clot.I haue affayl’d her with Mufickes, but fhe vouch- 
fafes no notice. 
Cym. The Exile of her Minion is too new, 
She hath not yet forgot him, fome more time 
Muft weare the print of his remembrance on’t, 45 
And then fhe’s yours, 
Qu. You are moft bound to’th’King, 
Who let’s go by no vantages, that may 
Preferre you to his daughter : Frame your felfe 


To orderly folicity, and be friended 50 
38. to my] Om. F;F,, Rowe. 45. on’t] F,, Dowden. owt F;F,. 
39. daughter] F.. daughter. F,F,. out Rowe et cet. 

daughter? Rowe et seq. 47. to'th’| F2. to th’ F,F,, Rowe,+. 
41. Mufickes] F, Mujficks F;F,, to the Cap. et seq. 

Rowe,+, Cap. Varr. Rann, Herford, 48. let’s| Fx. 

Knt, Dowden. music Han. Mal. et 50. folicity,] folicits, Ff, Rowe. solicit- 

eeu img Coll. ii, Ktly, Glo. Cam. _ solicits; 
43. new,] Johns. new. Fi, Rowe, Pope et cet. 

Pope, Han. new; Theob. et cet. be friended| befriended Rowe ii, 
44. him,| him: Pope et seq. Pope, Han. Knt, Sing. Coll. ii. 


41. Musickes] For other instances of this interpolated s, if it be one here, see 
Walker’s note on J, v, 84.—On the present passage Letrsom, Walker’s editor, 
remarks, in a foot-note (Crit., i, 240), that, since many editors have retained 
‘musics’ (see Text. Notes), ‘it is, therefore, not superfluous to show that in this 
particular point [the interpolated s] the authority of the First Folio is next to noth- 
ing.’ Lettsom, albeit an admirable critic, keen and well-equipped, sometimes 
was, I think, unduly severe on the First Folio. HERFORD ingeniously upholds 
‘musics,’ which, he says, is ‘a Clotenism for ‘‘pieces of music.” He has assailed her 
as yet with only one; but the plural gives a heightened impression of Imogen’s 
obstinacy.’ He may be right; albeit, we have ‘Musicke’ in lines 13, 14, and 30, just 
above. ’Tis dangerous to meddle with anything Cloten says, at least here, com- 
paratively in the beginning of our acquaintance. His character changes much 
before the curtain falls——Eb. 

44, 45. time Must weare...remembrance on’t] If ‘on’t’ were without 
the apostrophe, it is likely that there would be no hesitation in pronouncing it a 
misprint for owt; but the persistent apostrophe in all the Folios must give us pause; 
and I cannot but follow DowbeEN in retaining it, and in reading ‘on’t.’ It is time 
which must wear the remembrance imprinted on it a little longer. In ‘his remem- 
brance,’ ‘his’ is an objective genitive-—ED. 

49. Preferre] Scamp (Lex.): That is, recommend. Thus also IV, ii, 476, and 
IV, ii, 490. 

50. orderly solicity] Srrevens: That is, regular courtship, courtship after 


132 THE TRAGEDIE OF facr 1, Sc. i, 


With aptneffe of the feafon : make denials 51 
Encreafe your Seruices : fo feeme, as if 
You were infpir’d to do thofe duties which 


You tender to her : that you in all obey her, 54 
st. feafon:] season, Pope, Han. Knt, 53. were] are Rowe ii, Pope, Han. 
Sing. Coll. it. 54. her: that...her,) her: that...her. 


Ff. her, that...her, Knt. 


the established fashion. [The large number is eminently noteworthy of the in- 
stances ‘of a certain class of noun substantives (accuse for accusation, begin for 
beginning, depart for departure)’ which WALKER (Crit., ii, 313) has furnished. 
The present word or, rather, its correction, solicits, from the Second Folio, is among 
them; and another example of it is given by Walker from Shirley, The Arcadia, 
V, ii, p. 245, ed. Dyce: ‘tir’d with his solicits I had no time to perfect my desires.’ 
Cf. ‘Speak, Prince of Ithaca; and be’t of less expect.’—Tro. & Cress., I, iii, 70. 
‘Again. What’s his excuse? Ulyss. He hath none, But carries on the stream of his 
dispose Without observance.’—J0. II, iii, 173. Lerrsom, in a foot-note, observes 
that ‘Dispose is found in DRYDEN, Rival Ladies, ii, about fifty-five lines from the 
end: “Your dowry is at my dispose.’’’ Milton uses retire as a substantive in 
Par. Lost, xi, 267. COLLIER (ed. ii.) reads soliciting, ‘the old printer having mistaken 
the termination ting for ty, a not unlikely error.’—Ep.] 

50-52. and be friended With aptnesse of the season: make denials 
Encrease your Seruices] In Rowe’s ed. ii. ‘be friended’ is changed to 
befriended. This change was adopted by sundry editors (see Text. Notes), and 
proposed (‘stumbled on,’ says Dyce) by M. Mason as a new reading. Dyce, 
however, disapproved of it and asks, ‘what has Cloten’s being “befriended with 
aptness of the season” to do with his “‘making denials increase his services’’?’ 
Although ‘be friended’ seems the better reading, as more in accord with the other 
imperatives, ‘make denials’ and ‘so seem,’ yet it is not easy to perceive the per- 
tinency of Dyce’s question; befriended merely changes an imperative into a parti- 
ciple, and makes the phrase parenthetical. ‘And,’ says the Queen (favoured by 
the fitness of the occasion), ‘make denials increase,’ etc. This parenthesis is indi- 
cated by commas in the text of Knicut, thus: ‘and, befriended With aptness 
of the season, make denials Increase,’ etc. This reading and exactly the same 
punctuation is proposed by Vaughan (p. 34) as his own, and, therefore, the correct 
one.—ED. 

52-54. SO seeme, as if...tender to her: that you in all obey her] 
Here again the colon after ‘to her,’ in line 54, presents the same difficulty as the 
colon after ‘Seruices,’ in line 52. KwnicHT again replaces the colon by a comma, 
and connects ‘that you in all obey her’ with ‘so seem,’ and gives as the ‘clear 
meaning,’ ‘so seem that you in all obey her, as if you were inspir’d, etc.’ The 
cutting off,’ says Knight, ‘of the last member of the sentence [whereby he refers, 
I suppose, to the colon—Ep.] is destructive to the sense. ‘‘ You are senseless” 
has the meaning of be you senseless.’ Again Vaughan’s punctuation is the same as 
Knight's. This time, however, he is aware of the fact, but, apparently, begrudges 
Knight all credit, because, he says, though Knight gives the right punctuation, he 
gives the wrong interpretation, and fails to see that the force of ‘so,’ in the first 
line, extends to therein ‘you are senseless,’ in the last, to which Knight ‘unwarrant- 
ably’ gives the wrong meaning. The right meaning, according to Vaughan, is ‘so 


ACT II, SC. iil. ] CYMBELINE I 


ro 
LoS) 


Saue when command to your difmiffion tends, 5 
And therein you are fenfeleffe. 
Clot. Senfeleffe? Not fo. 
Mef. So like you (Sir) Ambaffadors from R ome; 
The one is Cazus Lucius. 
Cym. A worthy Fellow, 60 
Albeit he comes on angry purpofe now ; 
But that’s no fault of his: we muft receyue him 
According to the Honor of his Sender, 
And towards himfelfe, his goodneffe fore-fpent on vs 


mn 


We mutt extend our notice: Our deere Sonne, 65 
57. [Enter a Messenger. Rowe. 64. his] for’s Han. for his Cap. 
58. from] fr from F>. Ktly. 
59. The one is| One’s Han. his...fore-[pent| for his goodness 
64. himfelfe,| himself Mal. Steev. spent Anon. ap. Cam. 

Varr. on vs] on Rowe ii, Pope. 

seem ... that you do not in such case [of your dismission] even understand her 


in doing so.’ To which, I think, Knight could retort that his interpretation is 
much the more vigorous; it is, in effect: ‘appear to be\inspired to do everything 
you tender her, and that you will obey her implicitly until she commands you to 
leave her—then (not tamely put on an appearance, but—) be you senseless!’—Ep.] 

56. senselesse] The CowpEN-CLARKES: The cunning Queen uses this word 
with the signification of ‘unconscious,’ ‘purposely without perception’; her obtuse 
son affrontedly disclaims it, as signifying ‘stupid,’ ‘devoid of sense.’ The angry 
susceptibility and tetchiness of ignorance, just sufficiently aware of its own in- 
capacity to be perpetually afraid that it is found out and insulted by others, 
blended with the stolid conceit that invariably accompanies this inadequate self- 
knowledge, are all admirably delineated in Cloten: he is a dolt striving to pass for 
an accomplished prince, a vulgar boor fancying himself, and desirous of being taken 
for, a thorough gentleman. He presumes upon his position; believes that it con- 
stitutes him the exalted personage who ought to command respect; not perceiving 
that it renders the more conspicuous those natural disqualifications which deprive 
him of all respect, even from those who flatter and humour him to his face and sneer 
at him behind his back. 

58. So like you] ApBortr (§ 297): ‘Like,’ in this present instance, is probably 
(not merely by derivation, but consciously used as) impersonal. 

64, 65. towards himselfe, his goodnesse fore-spent on vs We must extend 
our notice] MALoNE: That is, we must extend towards himself our notice 
of his goodness heretofore shown to us. VAUGHAN (p. 397) paraphrases: ‘we 
must extend our notice to’ (‘towards’) ‘his own goodness forespent upon us,’ 
which apparently means that notice must be extended to the man’s goodness 
instead of to the man himself; it is somewhat difficult to see how Caius can appre- 
ciate this nice discrimination. Vaughan then goes on to say that ‘“‘himself his 
goodness” is identical with “himself’s goodness,’’—that is, “his own personal 
goodness.”’ This Dyce would call, I fear, a barbarous construction. It is the 
presence, however, of the comma between ‘himself’ and ‘his’ which causes Vaughan 


134 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[AcT II, SC. ii. 


When you haue giuen good morning to your Miftris, 66 
Attend the Queene, and vs, we fhall haue neede 
T’employ you towards|this Romane. 


Come our Queene. 


Clot. 


Exeunt. 


If fhe be vp, Ile fpeake with her : if not 70 


Let her lye ftill, and dreame : by your leaue hoa, 

I know her women are about her : what 

If I do line one of their hands, ’tis Gold 

Which buyes admittance (oft it doth) yea, and makes 

Diana’s Rangers falfe themfelues, yeeld vp 75 


68. T’employ| Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, 
Sing. Ktly. To employ Cap. et cet. 

68, 69. One line Rowe et seq. 

69. Exeunt.] Exeunt Cym. Queen, 
Mess. and Lords. Cap. Exeunt all but 
Cloten. Glo. 

Scene iv. Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. 

71. leaue hoa,| F.F3. leave ho, F4. 
leave ho! Rowe, Pope. leave, ho! Theob. 
et seq. 

{Knocks. Theob. 
(monovol.) 


Calls. Coll. 


73. hands,| F2. hands: F3F,. hands— 


Rowe. hands! Ktly. hands? Pope et 
cet. 

74. buyes] buys F,. buy Pope (mis- 
print). 


(oft it doth)| of doth; or oft 
doth; Vaun. 

yea] Erased, Coll. MS. 

and| Om. Pope,+. 

75. Rangers] rangers, Coll. (mono- 

vol.) _ 

yeeld vp] and yield up Rowe. 
and yield Pope, Han. 


72. her:| her— Rowe,+. her. Johns. 


to assert that ‘all editors and critics’ who retain it are proved thereby to misun- 
derstand the construction.—Eb. 

75. Diana’s Rangers] Crarcie (WV. E. D., s. v. Ranger. 2): A first officer, a 
gamekeeper. Now only archaic, and as the official title of the keepers of the royal 
parks.—MApDEN (p. 241): To carry out this scheme the aid of the forester was 
needed. It was by his directions that the company were to be conducted to the 
special stands assigned to them. This aid, however, might be bought. In these 
days (I write of three hundred years ago) there could be found foresters and 
keepers [7. e., rangers] willing to accept gold at the hands of their masters’ guests. 
‘Take this for telling true.’ So saying, the Princess in Love’s Lab. Lost rewards the 
forester who leads her to what he describes as ‘a stand where you may make the 
fairest shoot.’ When Cloten would gain admittance to Imogen, he bethinks him 
thus: [here follow lines 72-76]. I know not whether this thought was suggested 
by the venality of Master Shallow’s forester. But it is certain that he was somehow 
induced to lend his aid. It was arranged that he should himself attend to the 
driving of the deer, leaving to assistants the placing of the company in their stands. 
Thus it would be easy to persuade the Justice afterwards that these varlets mistook 
his directions and he would escape scot free. [Of course, the rangers of Diana are 
Imogen’s ‘women,’ the foresters of the Goddess of hunting and of chastity.] 

75- false themselues] ‘False’ cannot here be classed with any certainty either 
as a verb or as an adjective-—Braptey (N. E. D.) places it under the heading of a 
verb, and, if a verb, it is the sole example of its reflexive use; but not only does he 
precede it with a ‘?,’ but after defining it, ‘To betray one’s trust,’ adds in paren- 
theses, ‘(Doubtful; the word may be an adjective.)’ There is no objection to urge 


ACT Il, SC, iti. ] CYMBELINE 135 


Their Deere to’th’{tand o’th’Stealer : and ’tis Gold 76 
Which makes the True-man kill’d, and faues the Theefe: 
Nay, fometime hangs both Theefe, and True-man: what 
Can it not do, and vndoo? I will make 
One of her women Lawyer to me, for 80 
I yet not vnderftand the cafe my felfe. 
By your leaue. Knackes. 
Enter a Lady. 
La. Who’s there that knockes? 
Clot. A Gentleman. 85 
La. No more. 
Clot. Yes, and a Gentlewomans Sonne. 
La. That’s more 
Then fome whofe Taylors are as deere as yours, 


Can iuftly boaft of : what’s your Lordfhips pleafwre ? fore) 
Clot. Your Ladies perfon, is fhe ready? 
La. I, to keepe her Chamber. 92 
76. to’th’...o’th’| to the...of thee Steev. 82. leaue.] leave— Var. 73. 
Varr. to the...o’the Cap. et cet. (subs.) 86. more.| more? Rowe ii. et seq. 
77. True-man] Fi, Rowe i, Cap. Var. 88-90. That’s...boaft of] Aside Del. 
73. true man Rowe ii. et cet. conj. 
78. fometime] sometimes Rowe,+, o1, 92. Your...[,] As one line Han. 
Werte, “7: Cap. Steev. et seq. 
True-man:] true-man. Johns. Var. 92. I,] Ay, Rowe. 
73. true man: Han. Var. ’78 et seq. to keepe her Chamber] Aside Del. 
79. vndoo?| undo: F3F4. conj. 


against it as a verb. Examples are not lacking of its inflected use.—STEEVENS 
quotes an example thereof in Com. of Err., ‘Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.’—II, 
ii, 95. And Bradley furnishes others, with varying meanings, from the Ancren 
Riwle down to the beginning of the eighteenth century.—EbD. 

77, 78. True-man] WALKER’S seventy-eighth Article (Cyvit., ii, 136) deals with 
‘noticeable modes of spelling in the Folio,—not, indeed, peculiar to it, being common 
(for the most part at least, if not universally) to all the publications of that age’; 
such as Richman, youngman, oldman, deadman (as in this play, ‘the strait pass was 
damm’d with deadmen,’—V, iii, 15, 16). ‘In fact,’ says Walker, ‘man, in combina- 
tions of this kind, such of them, I mean, as from their nature are of frequent occur- 
rence, had an enclitic force. This is evident not only from their being so frequently 
printed either in the manner above or with a hyphen [as in the present instance], 
but also from the flow of the verse in many of the passages where they occur.’ 

89. Taylors are as deere as yours] INGLEBy (ed. ii.): Dr Nicholson states 
this to be directed at the new knights and others of no birth recently made favour- 
ites at Court. But that the creation of Baronets was a year later than the latest 
date assigned to this play, one might suppose it to be a hit at them. [Is it not a 
universal truth, applicable at all times and in all countries?—Ep.| 

gi. ready] Crarcie (NV. E. D., s. v. A. 1. b.): Properly dressed or attired; 


136 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT WJ, SC. ili. 
Clot. There is Gold for you, 93 
Sell me your good report. 
La. How, my good name? or to report of you 95 


What I hall thinke is good. The Princeffe. 


Enter Imogen. 


Clot. Good morrow faireft, Sifter your fweet hand. 

Imo. Good morrow Sir, you lay out too much paines 
For purchafing but trouble : the thankes I giue, 100 
Is telling you that I am poore of thankes, 
And fcarfe can fpare them. 

Clot. Still I fweare I loue you. 

Imo. Mf you but faid fo, ’twere as deepe with me : 104 


03, 94. There is...report] One line 
Pope et seq. (except Cap. Dyce, Glo. 
Cam.) 

93. There is] There’s Var. ’78, 85, 
Mal. Rann, Steev. Varr. Coll. Sing. 


Sta. Ktly. 

94, 95. Sell...name?] As one line Han. 
Cap. 

95. How,] How F, How! Cap. et 
seq. 


95, 96. or to...thinke] One line Cap. 
96. I shall thinke is| I think Han. 
good.| good? Pope et seq. 
The Princeffe.| As separate line 


Cam. The Princess— Pope et cet. 

96. [Exit Lady. Cap. 

08. faireft, Sifter] Fi. Rowe, Pope. 
fairest. Sister Johns. Var. ’73, Ktly. 
fairest sister: Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. 
Ran. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Sta. fairest: 
sister. Theob. et cet. 

99. Sir,] Fi, Rowe. Sir. Coll. Dyce. 
Sta. Ktly, Glo. Cam. Si; Pope et 
cet. 

103. Still I fweare] Ff. Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Theob. i, Cam. Still, I swear 
Knt, Dyce, Sta. Glo. Still, I swear, 
Theob. ii. et cet. 


Han. The Princess! Dyce, Sta. Glo. 104. you but] you'd but F;F,, Rowe. 


having finished one’s toilet. [Thus in Macbeth when the occupants of the Castle, 
hurried from their beds by the horror of Duncan’s murder, and the time comes for 
them to separate, Banquo says, ‘when we have our naked frailities hid That suffer 
in exposure, let us meet,’ and Macbeth replies, ‘Let’s briefly put on manly readi- 
ness,’ where ‘readiness’ bears the same meaning as ‘ready’ here. The Lady, 
however, to spite Cloten gives the ordinary meaning to the word. JoHN HUNTER 
appositely refers to the stage direction in r Hen. VI: II, i, 38: ‘Enter the Bastard 
of Orleans, Alencon, and Reignier, half ready, and half unready.’—Eb.] 

94. your good report] Again, to tease Cloten, the Lady takes ‘report’ in the 
sense of reputation; as Belarius uses it where he says ‘my report was once First 
with the best of note,’ ITI, iii, 63.—Ep. 

104. as deepe with me] ROLFE: ‘Deep’ is elsewhere associated with swearing, 
as in Sonn., 152, 9, ‘I have sworn deep oaths’; R. of L., 1847, ‘that deep vow.’ 
[‘Deep’ is one of Shakespeare’s favourite adjectives. Naturally, he uses ‘good’ 
far more frequently than any other adjective. Independently of its general use, 
BarRTLetr’s Concordance gives about fourteen columns of its use in especial com- 
binations, such as ‘good faith,’ ‘good credit,’ ‘good sweet,’ etc. ‘High’ comes 
next, in these especial combinations, with about two columns. ‘Brave’ next, 


ACT 11, SC-ili, | CYMBELINE rey 


If you {weare ftill, your recompence is ftill 105 
That I regard it not. 

Clot. This is no anfwer. 

/mo, But that you fhall not fay, I yeeld being filent, 
I would not fpeake. I pray you fpare me, ’faith 


I {hall vnfold equall difcourtefie 110 
To your beft kindueffe : one of your great knowing 
Should learne (being taught ) forbearance. ae 
108. yeeld] Fi, Rowe ii, Dyce, Sta. Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. me; Theob. i. 
Glo. Cam. yield, Rowe ii. et cet. et cet. 
109. me,| Fi, Rowe, Pope. me— 109. “faith] 7faith Var. ’03, ’13, ’21, 


Knt. faith Coll. Dyce, Cam. 


with about a column and a half. Then ‘deep,’ as the fourth favourite, with over a 
column. ‘Bad’ and ‘light’ with about three-quarters of a column each. These, 
of course, are rough approximations, but sufficiently accurate to convey a general 
idea, and it is, at least, highly satisfactory to know that there is far, far more of 
‘good’ in Shakespeare than ‘bad’ or any other quality.—Eb.| 

105. still] That is, constantly, for ever, as in Shakespeare passim. 

tro, 111. I shall vnfold equall discourtesie To your best kinduesse] 
That is, I shall unfold discourtesy equal to your best kindness. See ABBOTT, 
§ 419 a. on Transposition of adjective phrases, where this line is quoted—WvYattT: 
But it is at least equally likely that the more obvious meaning is the right one. 
[What the more ‘obvious meaning’ is DOWDEN supplies, ‘as much discourtesy as I 
have shown.’] 

III, 112. one of your great knowing Should learne (being taught) for- 
bearance] It seems hardly fair to Warburton to record, in the Text. Notes, 
his wild amendments without giving his reasons for them. Accordingly, he ex- 
plains his reading, ‘Should learn (being tort) forbearance,’ as meaning ‘one of your 
wisdom should learn (from a sense of your pursuing a forbidden object) forbearance: 
which gives us a good and pertinent meaning in a correct expression.’ He then 
proceeds to say that ‘tort is an old French word, signifying being in the wrong,’ 
and appeals to Skinner’s Hiymologicon as his authority. Warburton had assailants 
(Edwards, author of the Canons of Criticisms, and Heath, the author of The Revisal 
of Shakespeare’s Text), between them they seriously and deservedly injured the sale 
of his edition. Of them Dr Johnson speaks, in his immortal Preface, in terms that 
we well might commit to memory, so characteristic is it and so vigorous—of Dr 
Warburton’s chief assailants: ‘one [Edwards] ridicules his errours with airy petu- 
lance, suitable enough to the levity of the controversy; the other [Heath] attacks 
them with gloomy malignity, as if he were dragging to justice an assassin or an 
incendiary. The one stings like a fly, sucks a little blood, takes a gay flutter, and 
returns for more; the other bites like a viper, and would be glad to leave inflam- 
mations and gangrene behind him.’ In the present instance the chance was too 
good for Edwards to lose; accordingly (p. 100) he shows that tort is not an ‘old 
French word’ in any sense other than that all French words are old, and that it is a 
noun and not an adjective, and that a reference to Skinner’s definition, which he 
quotes in full, gives no manner of authority to Warburton’s assertion, and ends 
with the hope that ‘for the future Mr Warburton will apply Imogen’s advice to this 


138 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act 11, SC. iL 


Clot. To leaue you in your madneffe, ’twere my fin, 113 
I will not. 

Imo. Fooles are not mad Folkes. 115 

113. fin,] Ff, Rowe, Pope. sin. 115. are not] cure not Theob.+, Cap. 
Johns. Var. ’73. sin; Theob. et cet. White, Huds. Ingl. Baugust, Wyatt, 

114. not.| not do’t. Han. are not for Daniel ap. Cam. 


Folkes.| folks, Sir Han. 


liberty he takes of coining words, and according to his own reading, “‘—learn 
(being TORT) forbearance.”’—Heatu’s ‘gloomy malignity’ is as follows: ‘For 
this most extravagant and ridiculous imagination of Mr Warburton’s we must, 
it seems, discard the natural easy sense of the common reading. But Mr Warbur- 
ton objects, that “whoever is taught necessarily learns, and that learning is not 
the consequence of being taught, but the thing itself.” Which is just the same as 
to say that there is no manner of distinction between the means and the end. Do 
we not every day see glowing examples of people who are taught what they never 
do, and, indeed, are never able to learn? Hath not, for instance, a well-known 
antick [i. e., Warburton] been on many occasions abundantly taught modesty 
and good manners, and that teaching sometimes accompanied with very severe 
discipline, of the pen at least? But would it, therefore, be a just conclusion to say 
that he hath learned them? I appeal to the reader, who will find [in the foregoing 
quotation from Edwards] the common text well explained and fully justified, and 
this idle whimsey unanswerably, and with great spirit and pleasantry, fully 
exploded.’—Jounson: That is, a man being taught forbearance should learn it.— 
CAPELL (p. 108): ‘Being taught’ means—being so often desired to it, [z. e., being 
so often desired to forbear], which had been a teaching to any other but Cloten. 
—THISELTON (p. 19): Cloten misunderstood Imogen to mean merely that she 
wishes him to withdraw, in accordance with a frequent signification of the word 
‘forbear.’ [This ingenious suggestion seems clearly right.—Ep.] 

115. Fooles are not mad Folkes] THEOBALD: The reasoning is perplexed 
in a slight corruption; and we must restore as Mr Warburton likewise saw: ‘Fools 
cure not madness.’ You are mad, says he, and it would be a crime in me to leave 
you to yourself. Nay, says she, why should you stay? A Fool never cured madness. 
Do you call me Fool? replies he, etc. All this is easy and natural. And that cure 
was certainly the Poet’s word I think is very evident from what Imogen imme- 
diately rejoins: ‘If you'll be patient, I'll no more be mad, That cures us both,’ i. e., 
If you'll cease to torture me with your foolish solicitations, I’ll cease to show 
towards you anything like madness; so a double cure will be effected, of your 
folly and my supposed frenzy. [This note, without any acknowledgment to 
Theobald, is copied word for word (except the reference to Mr Warburton), but 
not signed by Warburton, and consequently to him it is accredited by Johnson, 
by the Varr. 1773, 1778, and 1785, and by several other editors; it is as clear a 
piece of literary dishonesty as one may wish to see in a summer’s day.—Ep.|— 
STEEVENS: This, as Cloten very well understands it, is a covert mode of calling 
him fool. The meaning implied is this: if I am mad, as you tell me, I am what 
fools can never be. ‘Fools are not mad folks.’—Wutte: Even admitting such a 
very subtle and recondite meaning [as this of Steevens], what fitness has it to the 
passage? Cloten says he must stop with Imogen to take care of her because she 
is mad; and she being provoked by his boorishness to ‘unfold equal discourtesy,’ 


INC Tis Se, wtih] CYMBELINE 139 


Clot. Do you call me Foole? 116 
Imo. Aslam mad_I do: 
If you’l be patient, Ile no more be mad, 
That cures vs both. I am much forry (Sir)s 
You put me to forget a Ladies manners 120 
By being fo verball : and learne now, for all, 


118. patient] prudent Warb. conj. 118. mad,| mad; Theob. et seq. 
(probably withdrawn). 


indirectly calls him a fool by telling him that the attendance of fools is of no 
service to the mad. This reading is confirmed [by ‘cures’ in her reply]—Hvpson: 
Cloten had just implied that his purpose is to cure Imogen of her imputed madness. 
She, in her reply, insinuates that he is a fool; and so he understands her. Her 
next reply is in accordance with this; meaning, ‘If you will desist from your folly 
in making suit to me, I will leave off being mad; that act of yours will cure us both.’ 
[DEIcHTON’s text follows the Folio, but in his note he cites Ingleby as adopting 
Theobald’s cure, and adds, ‘rightly, I think,’ in MS. in the copy which Deighton 
kindly sent me. He quotes Ingleby’s note in full, which is virtually the same in 
effect as White’s and Hudson’s; as is also Baucust’s.]}—Wyatrt quotes Steevens’s 
interpretation, with this comment: ‘If Cloten understood this, he must have been 
as clever as a Shakespearian commentator. It is certainly not the most obvious 
inference from “Fools are not mad folks,”’ which rather is: ‘‘Whether I am a fool 
may be a matter of question, but even fools are not necessarily mad.” I am com- 
pelled to adopt Warburton’s [sic] conjecture: (1) because it makes Imogen’s reply 
to Cloten perfectly apposite, and his following question most natural and pertinent; 
(2) because of the added force it gives to “‘That cures us both”’; (3) because, though 
there are plenty of obscurities in the later plays, there is hardly a trace of obscurity 
in all Imogen’s very plain speaking to Cloten. To this I need only add, that when 
Imogen says she’ll ‘no more be mad,” she does not refer to the madness that 
Cloten meant, that of her love, but to the madness which made her call him fool.’— 
Herrorp: That is, you are in no danger of such ‘madness’ as mine.—THISELTON 
(p. 20): That Imogen herself means ‘though you may think me a Fool, you have 
no right to class me, a Princess, with Bedlamites,’ is, I think, clenched by the 
initial capital (‘Folkes’). She has overheard Cloten’s mention of ‘This foolish 
Imogen’ (line ro). He, of course, has no idea of this, and takes her to mean ‘I had 
rather be mad than a Fool like you.—Downen: I take it to mean: ‘I am not mad, 
I am only a fool, and so you may safely leave me to my folly.’ . . . If we are to 
emend, I may add the conjecture ‘Fools spare not mad folks,’ fools exercise 
no forbearance to mad folks, but torment them. The word ‘spare’ is commonly so 
used by Shakespeare, and Imogen has prayed (line 10g) to be spared. But no 
emendation should be made.—Rotre: Cure certainly gives a simpler sense, and is 
favoured by cures just below, but no change is imperatively demanded. [I say 
‘ditto to Mr Burke.’—Eb.] 

121. so verball] Jounson: That is, so verbose, so full of talk—Kwicurt: 
But neither Cloten nor Imogen have used many words. Imogen had been parrying 
her strange admirer; but she now resolves to speak plainly,—to be verbal,—and 
thus to forget a lady’s manners.—TIEcK (p. 378): ‘Verbal’ does not mean prolix, 
talkative, but outright, that is, to speak out bluntly or without mincing matters. 


140 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iil. 


That I which know my heart, do heere pronounce 122 
By th’very truth of it, I care not for you, 
And am fo neere the lacke of Charitie 
To accufe my felfe, I hate you : which I had rather 125 
You felt, then make’t my boaft. 

Clot. You finne againft 
Obedience, which you owe your Father, for 


The Contract you pretend with that bafe Wretch, 129 
122. which] who Pope,+. myself) Cap. et seq. (subs.) 
125. To accufe] T’accuse Pope,+, 126. make’t] make Pope,+. 

Dyce ii, iii. 128. Father, for] Ff. father; for 


To accufe my felfe,] (To accuse Rowe,+. father. For Cap. et seq. 


—Scumipt (Lex.) adopts this view.—Sr1ncER: That is, so explicit, not verbose.— 
Hupson: Imogen refers to his forcing her thus to the discourtesy of expressing 
her mind to him, of putting her thoughts into words.—WuitTe (ed. ii.): That is, 
wordy and ready to catch at words.—INcLEBy: That is, by expressing in words 
what is ordinarily understood by implication VAUGHAN (p. 398): This imports: 
‘I am sorry, sir, that you provoke me to forget a lady’s good manners in speaking 
so plainly to you.’—DrIGHTon: To meit seems plain that Imogen refers to Cloten’s 
worrying her with so many protestations. ‘You will take no denial,’ she says, ‘you, 
by pestering me with so many words, cause me to:lose my temper’; thus, Middle- 
ton, A Chaste Maid, etc., I, line 64, ‘He’s grown too verbal,’ 7. ¢., as the context 
shows, too fond of words. [Deighton’s interpretation is essentially that of Herford, 
and of Wyatt.|—Downpen: If this refers to Imogen, as I think, it may mean, pro- 
fuse of words, or perhaps plain-spoken.—MINSHEU (1627) explains ‘verbal’ as ‘full 
of words.’ [I cannot but think that this refers to Cloten. If it refer to Imogen, it 
will make no difference in the meaning wherever the phrase occurs in the sentence. 
Transpose it, and it will then clearly seem, I think, to refer to Cloten; thus: ‘I 
am much sorry, sir, By being so verball, you put me to forget A lady’s manners.’ 
We must bear in mind the tension of Imogen’s mood at this moment,—over the 
loss of her bracelet her mind was distracted, and while every nerve was quivering 
with dismay and anxiety she was sprighted with a fool, frighted, and angered worse. 
She had begged him to forbear further words (line 109), and would have held her 
peace but for the fear that silence would seem to give consent. And yet there still 
came from Cloten those intolerable bursts of speaking, with the snatches in his 
voice, which fairly maddened her. But mistress of herself, she retained her calm 
dignity until she saw that he must receive an outspoken refusal,—this, she says, is 
to forget a lady’s manners.—Eb.] 

124,125. Charitie To accuse myselfe] CAPELL (p. 108): If, instead of the 
long notes [on cure, the editors] had bestowed their attention upon Imogen’s next 
speech, they had perceived the wrong pointing in the last line but one of it, and 
amended it as it is in this copy, [#.e., Capell’s text. See Text. Notes, where Capell’s 
parenthesis corrects the faulty punctuation of the Folio, and makes it evident that 
Imogen herein accuses herself of lack of charity.—En.]. 

129. The Contract] Jonnson: Here Shakespeare has not preserved, with his 
common nicety, the uniformity of his character. The speech of Cloten is rough and 
harsh, but certainly not the talk of one ‘Who can’t take two from twenty, for his 


ACT II, SC. iii.] CYMBELINE I4! 


One, bred of Almes, and fofter’d with cold difhes, 130 
With fcraps o’th’Court : It is no Contraét, none ; 

And though it be allowed in meaner parties 

( Yet who then he more meane ) to knit their foules 

(On whom there is no more dependancie 


But Brats and Beggery) in felfe-figur’d knot, 135 

Yet you are curb’d from that enlargement, by 

T he confequence o’th’Crowne, and mutt not,foyle 137, 
132. allowed] allow’d Rowe et seq. 135. Jelfe-figur’d| felf figur’d F3F,. 
133. then] than Rowe. 136. enlargement,] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 

meane] F2. mean FF. mean, enlargement Theob. et cet. 

Rowe. mean? Pope et cet. 137. not, foyle] not foyle F2F;. not 
133-135. foules (On...Beggery)] souls foil F,, Rowe,+, Mal. Coll. i, Ktly. 

On...Beggary, Rowe, Pope. not soil Han. et cet. “file Ing]. conj. 


heart, And leave eighteen.’ His argument is just and well enforced, and its prev- 
alence is allowed throughout all civil nations; as for rudeness, he seems not to be 
much over-matched. [An ill-considered remark, with all respect be it spoken; or 
did Dr Johnson wish to illustrate in this note the ‘imbecility’ with which he 
charges the whole play?—Ep.]—INcLEBy (Revised Ed.): Dr Nicholson observes 
that Cloten’s phrases and perseverance show that there had been no marriage 
between Imogen and Posthumus, but simply a ‘contract’ or handfasting, which, 
however, was then considered equivalent to it, as far as intercourse was concerned. 

130 bred of Almes] HAttiwett: ‘A foster-father, that keepeth a child of 
almes, or for God’s sake.’—Withals’s Dictionarie, ed. 1608, p. 275. 

134. dependancie] Murray (JV. £. D. 4. b.): A body of dependants; a house- 
hold establishment.—D£EIGHTON understands this differently; thus: ‘And though 
with people of lower origin, in the case of whose marriage no other result is de- 
pending except the rearing of brats in begging, it is permitted to them to enter 
into any union they choose,’ etc. [And perhaps rightly. ‘On whom’ in this line 
refers, I think, to ‘meaner parties.’—Eb.] 

135. in selfe-figur’d knot] WARBURTON: This is nonsense. We should read, 
self-finger’d knot, 7. e., a knot solely of their own tying, without any regard to 
parents or other more public consideration. [It is not worth contention, but I 
think that this emendation was Thirlby’s. See Nichols, J/lust., ii, p. 829.]—JOHN- 
son: But why nonsense? A ‘self-figured knot’ is a knot formed by yourself.— 
Cottier (ed. ii.): We are strongly inclined to think Warburton’s emendation, in 
the sense of a knot tied only by themselves, right; we do not alter the text—Hup- 
son: That is, marrying to suit themselves; whereas the expectant of a throne must 
marry to serve the interests of his or her position. 

137. must not,foyle] Cottier: Here ‘foil’ seems to have been a misprint for 
soil.—INGLEBY: The Folio has ‘.foyle,’ the point being inverted. If the apostrophe 
were intentional, ‘.foyle’ might be an error for ‘’fyle’ or ‘’file,’ equivalent to dejile. 
But soil seems the most probable correction.—BRapDLeEy (N. E. D., s. v. Foil, 
whereof one of the forms during the 14th and 16th centuries is foyle, verb II, 6): 
To foul, defile, pollute. [As authorities, a quotation is given from Wiclif, in 1380; 
a second from Hytron, Souls Perfect (in 1440—W. de W., 1497), |. xxxiv: ‘A 
man hath be moche foyled with wordly or flesshely synnes,’ which seems to bear 


142 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iii. 


T he precious note of it; with a bafe Slaue, 138 

AHilding for a Liuorie,a Squires Cloth, 

A.Pantler; not fo eminent. 140 
138. note] robe Elze. hope Wray ap. 140. A.Paniler;] Fi, Rowe,+, Var. 

Cam. 73, A pantler,— Sta. Ktly. A paniler, 
138. it; with] it with Pope et seq. Cap.et cet. 


out the meaning to pollute; a third from Upat1, Ralph Roister Doister (1550): ‘a 
man Hath no honour to foil his hands on a woman.’—V, vi; a fourth is from 
Phineas Fletcher’s Purple Island, 1633: ‘Ranc’rous Enemies, that hourely toil 
Thy humble votarie with loathsome spot to foil.—xi, 33. Of these, the last seems 
fully to authorize the meaning given by Bradley; if the date were only a little 
earlier it would be more appropriate to the present passage from Shakespeare. 
The quotation from Ralph Roister Doister is, I fear, somewhat doubtful. The 
meaning given to ‘foil’ in that passage by Farmer in his ed. of 1906, p. 127, is ‘to 
lay hands on; literally, to make a mark or track: fotl is equivalent to the track of a 
deer.’ This definition seems quite to exclude an application to Cloten’s ‘foyle.’ 
DOowDEN quotes from Capt. Smith’s Advertisements, etc., 1631 (Works, Arber, p. 
926): ‘all our Plantations have beene so foyled and abused, their best good willers 
have beene . . . discouraged, and their good intents disgraced,’ etc. But the 
context shows, I think, that here the word hardly. means to pollute, but rather to 
frustrate, to baulk, owing to the complaints of thé people in England; accordingly, 
the quotation would fall, I think, more befittingly under Bradley’s 5th head. If 
the word ‘foyle’ here in the text before us can bear no other meaning than to 
pollute, to disgrace, and it very closely approaches that meaning, we need no author- 
ity for its use. It is all-sufficient that Shakespeare so uses it. Unfortunately, 
editors and critics are not here all of one mind, and many are beguiled by the 
simple change of f into s. VAUGHAN (p. 399) asserts that ‘foyle’ is here meta- 
phorically used for the leaf of thin metal placed beneath a precious stone to give 
it greater brilliancy; and quotes as a similar instance a passage in Rich. IIT: V, iii, 
250, where, however, ‘foil’ is a different word, meaning the setting of a ring,— 
not the tin-foil placed beneath the jewel.—Ep.] 

138. note of it] Coxtrer (ed. ii.): We may suspect a misprint in the word 
‘note..—Hupson: ‘Note’ seems a rather strange word for this place. Perhaps it 
should be worth.—Scumupt (Lex.): That is, of the crown.—Ontons: Distinction, 
importance, eminence. 

139. Hilding] Murray (N. E. D.): 1. Of obscure origin. 2. A contemptible, 
worthless person of either sex; a good-for-nothing. [The present instance quoted.] 

139. for a Liuorie, a Squires Cloth] Matone: Only fit to wear a livery, 
and serve as a laquey.—Murray (N. E.-D., s. v. Cloth, III, 13): The distinctive 
clothing worn by the servants or retainers of a master. [A quotation which 
aptly applies to the present phrase, ‘a Squire’s Cloth,’ follows from Flo- 
rio’s Epistle Dedicatorie, in his Worlde of Wordes, 1598: ‘The retainer doth some 
seruice, that now and then but holds your Honors styrrop, or lendes a hande 
ouer a stile . . . or holds a torch in a darke waie: enough to ware your Honors 
cloth,’ p. 3.] 

140. A.Pantler] Murray (N. E. D.): Apparently an altered form of Panter. 
? after Butler. Equivalent to Panter, which Murray thus defines: ‘originally 


AGDEIT SG ite] CYMBELINE 143 


Imo, Prophane Fellow : 141 
Wert thou the Sonne of Jupiter,and no more, 
But what thou art befides : thou wer’t too bafe, 
To be his Groome : thou wer’t dignified enough 
Euen to the point of Enuie. If ’twere made 145 
Comparatiue for your Vertues, to be ftil’d 
The vnder Hangman of his Kingdome; and hated 
For being prefer’d fo well. 


Clot. The South-Fog rot him. 149 
141. Fellow] fellow! Pope. Han. 
143. befides:| besides, Rowe et seq. 147. under Hangman] Ff, Rowe, 
143, 144. wer’t] Ff. wert Rowe. Pope, Cap. wunder-hangman Theob. et 
145. Enuie. If] Envy, If F. Envy, cet. 

if F3F,, Rowe et seq. Kingdome] realm Pope,+. 
146. Vertues, to] vertues to Pope, 149. South-Fog| South Fog F,. 


meaning “ baker,” but in Mid. Eng. usually applied to the officer of a household 
who supplied the bread and had charge of the pantry. Thus in Falstaff’s descrip- 
tion of Prince Hal “‘a ’would have made a good pantler, a ’would ha’ chipped 
bread well,” 2 Hen. IV: II, iv, 258.’ [In the Verner & Hoods Reprint, in Booth’s, 
in Craig’s there stands a period between ‘A’ and ‘Pantler.’ It is not found in 
Staunton’s Photolithograph, nor in my own copy of Fr; nor has the Cam. Ed. noted 
it. Note the descending degrees of Cloten’s contempt: first, the livery of a 
gentleman’s servant; next the cloth of a squire, and last a menial servant. ‘Not 
so eminent’ must be one of those ‘bursts of speaking’ which left an impression so 
ineffaceable in Belarius’s mind that the lapse of twenty years had not blurred it; 
see note IV, ii, 148. This characteristic is lost without the semicolon of the 
Folio.—Ep.] 

146. Comparatiue for your Vertues] MALone: If it were considered as a 
compensation adequate to your virtues, to be styled, etc.—INcLEBy: That is, if it 
were a question of your virtues as compared with his. Scumipr (Lex.): That is, 
serving as a comparison, to express the respective value of things.—Br. NICHOLSON 
(Ingleby, Revised Ed.): If your post were made in any way comparable to your 
abilities for it—Murray (NV. E. D., s.v. 5): Serving as a means of comparison. 
But perhaps [it should be] comparable, worthy to be compared.Hupson: If 
your dignity were made proportionable to your merits, you were honoured enough 
in being styled the under-hangman of his kingdom; and even that place would be 
so much too good for you as to make you an object of envy and hatred. [This free 
paraphrase seems to me to convey the full meaning.—Ep.] 

149. South-Fog] ‘Windes be twelue, foure of them, are called Cardinales, chife 
winds, and eight Collaterals, side windes. . . . The third Cardinall and chiefe 
winde is Auster, the Southerne winde: and he ariseth vnder the South starre, that 
is called Polus Antarticus. . . . And this Southerne winde is hot and moyst, and 
maketh lightning and grose aire and thick, and norisheth myst with heate. .. . 
Also he openeth the pores of bodyes, and letteth vertue of feelyng, and maketh 
heauiness of bodie, as Ipocras sayth. . . . For Southerne winds vnbind humours, 
& moue them out of the inner parts outwarde, & they cause heauinesse of wits & 


144 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Tmo. 
To be but nam’d of thee. 


FACT II, SC. iil. 


He neuer can meete more mifchance,then come 150 
His mean’{t Garment 


That euer hath but clipt his body; is dearer 
In my refpeét, then all the Heires aboue thee, 
Were they all made fuch men : How now Pi/anio? 


_ Enter Pifanio, 155 

Clot. His Garments? Now the diuell. 

Imo. To Dorothy my woman hie thee prefently. 

Clot. His Garment ? 

Imo. 1am fprighted with a Foole, 159 

151. mean’ ft] Sing. meaneft Ff, et Dyce i. ‘His garment’! Glo. Cam. 
cet: Dyce ii, iii. His Garment? Ff et cet. 

152. body; is] body,’s Pope,+. body, 156. ‘eiaeil divell. F,. devill. F;. 
is Ff, et cet. Devil. F,, Rowe, Pope. devil— Theob. 


153. Heires] haires F2. hairs F3F,. 

154. How now Pifanio?] How now, 
Pifanio? F,, Clot. How now? Imo. 
Pisanio! Han. Ho, now, Pisanio! Huds. 
How now? [missing the bracelet] Pisa- 
nio! Anon. ap. Cam. 

155. Enter...] Before line 154. Cap. 
After men: Dyce. 

156. His Garments?] His garment! 


EL Cer. 

157. prefently.] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. 
presently— Theob. ii, Var. ’73, Glo. 

ii, ili . presently,— Dyce i, Cam. 

presently: — Gan ret eet. 

158. His Garment?] ‘His garment!’ 

I ne "aoe iadl wend Dyce, Ktly, 
Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. 


of feeling: they corrupt and destroye, they heat, and maketh men fall into sicknesse. 
And they breed the gout, the falling euill, itch, and the ague.—Batman vppon 
Bartholome, 1582, lib. xi, chap. 3.—ED. 

153. Heires aboue thee] That is, the hairs of his head; but SrNGER considers 
it a ‘misprint,’ and adopts in his text ‘about thee,’ wherein he is followed by 
KEIGHTLEY. 

154. How now Pisanio?] HANMER distributes ‘How now’ to Cloten, and 
‘Pisanio’ to Imogen, and with some show of propriety. If Imogen wishes to 
summon Pisanio to her presence, she would hardly call ‘How now!’—WALKER 
(Crit., iii, 319) makes the same distribution, but changes ‘How now’ to How! How! 
—Dyce (ed. ii.) observes ‘we have the same words before [I, vi, 37], and they occur 
afterwards [III, ii, 27]. But qy. are they right here? ‘‘How” (as I have several 
times before observed) is frequently the old spelling of ‘‘Ho,” and we might expect, 
as at [I, vii, 167], “What ho, Pisanio! Enter Pisanio.”’ Dyce overlooks, I think, 
that in the first two instances which he cites Pisanio is already present or just 
entering, and the expression is not a summons, but a greeting —Ep. 

159. sprighted with a Foole] STEEVENS: That is, I am haunted by a fool, 
as by a spright. [Rather a tame paraphrase, it seems to me; and yet it has been 
adopted by every editor who has noted the passage, together with Schmidt (Lex.) 
and Dyce (Gloss.). Can it be paraphrased, ‘I am tormented by a legion of sprights 
with this fool here’? ‘Guiled’ means beset with guiles; ‘delighted’ means bathed 
with delights; may not ‘sprighted’ here imply surrounded by sprights with or from 
this fool? When Imogen adds ‘frighted,’ I doubt that she refers to Cloten. She 
who stood unquailed before Iachimo, could hardly be affrighted by Cloten. She 


ACT II, SC. iil.] CYMBELINE 145 


Frighted, and angred worfe : Go bid my woman 160 
Search for a Iewell, that too cafually 
Hath left mine Arme : it was thy Mafters. Shrew me 
If I would loofe it for a Reuenew, 
Of any Kings in Europe. I do think, 
I faw’t this morning : Confident I am. 165 
Laft night ’twas on mine Arme; I kifs’d it, 
I hope it be not gone, to tell my Lord 
That I kiffe aught but he. 
Pif. ?Twill not be loft. 
Imo. 1 hope fo : go and fearch. 170 
Clot. | You haue abus’d me: 


160. worfe:] worse— Rowe,+. worse. 166. "twas on] it was upon Cap. 


Coll. 

162. Arme:] arm— Rowe,+. 

162. Mafters. Shrew] Ff. master’s. 
Shrew Rowe, Pope. master’s. ’Shrew 
Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. 
master’s: shrew Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 
Dyce. master’s: ’shrew Mal. et cet. 

163. loofe] Fy. 

164. Kings] Fi, Rowei. King Pope, 
+, Var. 773. Kangs Rowe wu, et 
seq. 

165. am.] Ff. am Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Cam. am, ¥, et cet. 

166. Laff night] I saw’t last night 
Vaun. 


conj. 
mine] my F3F,, Rowe,+. 
I kifs’d it,) Fi, Rowe i. J 
kissd it. Rowe ii, Coll. Wh. i. J 
kissed it. Pope,+. For I kiss’d it. 
Ktly. I kiss’d at: Cap. et cet. I 
kiss’d it then or I know I kiss’d it then 
Anon. ap. Cam. 
168. aught] ought F;F,, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. i, Han. Cap. 
he] him Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. Varr. 
Rann, Coll. iii. 
170. [Exit Pisanio. Han. 
171, 172. You...Garment?] One line 
Rowe, Pope. 


is frightened at the thought of the loss of her bracelet, and ‘angered’ worse by both 
it and Cloten combined. For a similar use of a past participle, see ‘fear’d hopes,’ 
II, iv, 9.—Eb.] 

166. ’twas on mine Arme: I kiss’d it,] If we count the syllables in this 
line with our fingers, in the right butter-woman’s rank to market, it is unques- 
tionably deficient, and the Text. Notes show the attempts to supply the gap. To 
my ear, after ‘Last night ’twas on mine arme,’ there is a mora vacua which will 
fulfill every demand of rhythm; and I plead for these mora@ vacue, not in the in- 
terest of bald rhythm, but because in highly wrought emotional scenes, like the 
present, they are positively demanded. Shall not Imogen be allowed to pause 
while her betossed soul recalls every instant of the past hours? Must she say, 
as Malone would have her, ’twas on mine arrum,’ so that she can reel off the line 
like a school miss? Shall we not here and there, and once in a while, trust to the 
delicacy of Shakespeare’s ear, and accept these pauses as gracious openings into the 
mind and heart of his characters?p—ED. 

167,168. I hope... but he] Mrs Jameson (p. 72): It has been well 
observed that our consciousness that the bracelet is really gone to bear false 
witness against her, adds an inexpressibly touching effect to the simplicity and 
tenderness of this sentiment. 


Io 


146 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iii. 


His meaneft Garment ? 172 
Imo. I, 1 faid fo Sir, 

If you will mak’t an Aétion, call witneffe to’t. 
Clot. I will enforme your Father. 175 
Imo. Your Mother too : 

She’s my good Lady; and will concieue, I hope 

But the worft of me, So I leaue your Sir, 


To’th’worft of difcontent. Mktg 
Clot. Mle :bereueng’d :' 180 
His mean’{t Garment ? Well. Exit. 
172, 181. His...Garment?] His...gar- 174. If...to’t.] Call witness to’t, if you 
ment! Dyce i. ‘His...garment’! Glo. will make’t an action Han. 
Cam. Dyce ii, iii. 174. to’t] Om. Steev. conj. 
173. I,] Ay, Rowe. 175. enforme] enform Fy. inform 
173. Sir,] Sir; Theob.+, Cap. Varr. Rowe. 
Rann, Dyce, Glo. Cam. sir. Mal. 178. your Sir,| you, fir, F3F, et seq. 
Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. 179. To th’] To the Cap. et seq. 


181. mean’ fi] meaneft Ff et seq. 


172-177. His meanest . . . good Lady] WALKER rearranges these lines 
so as to give them, what he considers, a better form of rhythm, which by no possi- 
bility could be conveyed to an audience by an actor on the stage. As such arrange- 
ments are solely for the eye, Walker’s feelings could not be hurt, nor his intentions 
thwarted, if his rearrangement be here referred to the eye of the student in the 
third volume of his Criticisms, p. 320.—Eb. 

177, 178. She’s my good Lady...the worst of me] DericHTon: ‘She 
is my good friend (said ironically), and I may reasonably hope that she will think 
nothing worse of me than the very worst.’ 

179. To’th’worst of discontent] CaPeLL (p. 108): The lady’s words, with 
which she takes her leave of her suitor, have a poignancy something disguised; her 
meaning in them is—his own company, for she leaves him alone. 


AGH AIT SCa1V CYMBELINE 147 


Scena Quarta. 


Enter Pofthumus, and Philario. 
Foft. Feare it not Sir : I would I were fo fure 
To winne the King, as I am bold, her Honour 
Will remaine her’s. 5 
Phil, What meanes do you make to him ? 
FPoft. Not any : but abide the change of Time, 
Quake in the prefent winters ftate, and with 


1. Scena Quarta] Scene v. Pope, Han. Philario’s House. Cap. 
Warb. Johns. Act III, Scene 1. Garrick, 8. winters fate] winter-state M. 
Eccles. Mason. winter’s flawe Walker (Crit., 


Rome. Rowe. Rome. A Room in li, 294). 


1. Scena Quarta] For this scene Ecctrs substitutes the First Scene of Act 
III, on the ground that in the last scene (the Third) Cymbeline observes to Cloten: 
‘When you have bid good morrow to your mistress, Attend the Queen and us; we 
shall have need To employ you towards Rome’ (I, iii, 65), etc., and Imogen remarks 
respecting her bracelet,—‘ confident I am last night ’twas on my arm,’ etc. (II, iii, 
165); and, furthermore, Iachimo being interrogated whether ‘Caius Lucius was in the 
Britain court When he was there?’ replies, ‘he was expected then, But not ap- 
proach’d’ (II, iv, 46). Wherefore for these reasons Eccles believes that not 
enough time is given for Jachimo’s journey back to Rome, and a scene should in- 
tervene for this purpose, and with it the Act should close; wherefore he introduces 
the political scene with Caius Lucius.: It is quite unnecessary to attempt any 
refutation. It is sufficient to note that Eccles is a victim of Shakespeare’s leger- 
demain in hurrying forward the action at an intensely exciting point, and then 
retarding it to give our excitement time to subside. To introduce a political 
scene between the theft of the bracelet and the triumph of the villain will find us 
cold at the very crisis of the plot. Eccles decants the champagne and never notices 
that its effervescence and exhilaration are gone. DANIEL marks ‘an Interval’ 
between the preceding scene and the present one, which he holds to be Day 5. 
The sequence of time is here impossible. As we have seen, Eccles boldly transposes 
the scenes, at the cost of breaking the dramatic interest. Daniel more wisely 
accepts the situation and lets our excitement run on to fever heat, as Shakespeare, 
I think, intended it should. Eccles acknowledged that Garrick would not accept 
his arrangement. Garrick was too good a manager, and knew his audience. 
—Ep: 

4. I am bold] Murray (WN. E. D., s. v. Bold. 6.): Confident (in), certain, sure 
(of). [The present line quoted.] 

6. What meanes do you make] Murray (WN. E. D., s. v. Mean. sb’. 13. a.): 
Mediation, intercession; exercise influence to bring about something. [Murray 
refers to sense 9, where examples are given with the sense of ‘One who acts as a 
mediator, “go-between,” or ambassador between others.’ Thus Bacon, Essays, 
Suitors (Arber, 471), ‘Let a man in the choice of his meane rather chuse the fittest 
meane than the greatest meane.’] 


148 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT II, SC. Iv. 


That warmer dayes would come : In thefe fear’d hope 9 
I barely gratifie your loue; they fayling: 
I muft die much your debtor. II 


9. fear’d hope] sear’d hopes Tyrwhitt MS. Knt, Sing. Dyce, C. Clarke, Glo. 
sere hopes Huds. dear hopes Elze. fair hopes Sprenger, Vaun. fair’d hopes. 
Vaun. fear’d hopes Ff et cet. 


g-11. In these... debtor] VAUGHAN (p. 402): If these hopes are hand- 
somely realised, I have barely the means of requiting your love; and if, on the 
other hand, they fail me of realisation, I must die deeply in your debt. 

9. fear’d hope] Ecctes: This signifies, I believe, ‘hopes blended or intermixed 
with fears.—Kwnicut: We have ventured to change the text to ‘sear’d hopes.’ 
‘In the present winter’s state’ the hopes of Posthumus are sear’d; but they still 
exist, and in cherishing them, wither’d as they are, he barely gratifies his friend’s 
love —Co..ieR (ed. ii.): That is, in these hopes which I fear may never be realised. 
The passage has not been understood by those who, in modern times, have printed 
‘sear’d hopes.’—Dyce (ed. ii.): The alteration of ‘fear’d’ to sear’d is proposed by 
Tyrwhitt in his copy of F2, now in the British Museum; and it has been also made by 
Mr Knight. Since most copies of the Folio, in Meas. for Meas., I, iv, 19, have the 
misprint, ‘Growne feard, and tedious,’ I cannot think that the original reading here 
is to be defended on the supposition that ‘fear’d hopes’ may mean ‘fearing hopes’ 
or ‘hopes mingled with fears,’—like Lucan’s ‘spe trepido’ or Petrarch’s ‘paventosa 
speme.’ [Is the single instance, which Dyce adduces of the mistake by the com- 
positor of a long f for an f, quite sufficient to sweep aside all attempts to adhere 
to the only authentic text we have? To understand the following note by Crosby, 
it is to be borne in mind that in regard to the verb A ffeer, Murray (NV. E. D.) 
pronounces it the ‘regular phonetic descendant of late Latin, afforare, to fix the 
price or market value’; and that it is used in Macb., IV, iii, 34, in the sense of con- 
firmed: ‘thy title is affeer’d.’ A weak point in Crosby’s conjecture is that he gives 
no example of ‘affeer’d’ abbreviated to ’feer’d; it is not unlikely that such an ex- 
ample might be found, but it would be well to know that Shakespeare used it 
elsewhere.]|—Crospy (Shakes periana, vol. i, p. 47): It is likely that ’feer’d hopes, 
meaning these hopes, or grounds of hope, that I have given, taken for what they are 
worth. Posthumus does not believe that his hopes are altogether sear’d or blasted; 
for he still has hopes of warmer days to come; he sets them before his friend, such 
as they are, begs him to accept them for what they are worth. [It seems to me that 
Eccles was the first and Ingleby the next to understand ‘fear’d’ aright. In recent 
editions the Folio is almost uniformly followed, albeit the Globe edition, now the 
just and common text of almost all editions, has sear’d,—its editors returned, 
however, to the Folio in the Cambridge edition. I doubt that ‘fear’d’ is even yet ac- 
cepted in what is to me its truly Shakespearian sense. It is not, I think, a past 
participle of the verb éo fear; it is the noun fear with a suffix ed, to make it an 
adjective, and conveys an idea of multitude. In the last preceding scene, where 
Imogen says she is ‘sprighted with a fool,’ she means, I think, that before, behind, 
and on every side she is pestered with folly, as though by imps. When Lear speaks 
of ‘the loop’d and window’d raggedness’ of poor naked wretches, he pictures the 
innumerable loops and windows in their rags. When Scarus, in Ant. & Cleop., 
speaks of ‘the token’d pestilence’ he gives the idea of the plague spots all over the 


ACT it, SC. iv.] CYMBELINE 149 


Phil. Your very goodneffe, and your company, 12 
Ore-payes all I can do. By this your King, 
Hath heard of great Augu/tus : Caius Lucius, 
Will do’s Commiffion throughly. And I think 15 
Hee’le grant the Tribute : fend th’Arrerages, 
Or looke vpon our Romaines, whofe remembrance 
Is yet frefh in their griefe. 
Poft. 1 do beleeue 
(Statift though I am none, nor like to be) 20 
That this will proue a Warre; and you fhall heare 
The Legion now in Gallia, fooner landed 
In our not-fearing-Britaine, then haue tydings 


Of any penny Tribute paid. Our Countrymen 24 
13. By this] By this, Pope et seq. 17. Or] E’er Theob.+, Cap. 
14. Caius] Caius, F;. 21. will] shall Theob. ii, Warb. 
15. do’s] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce, Johns. 

Sta. Glo. Cam. do his Cap. et cet. 22. Legion] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Coll. 
16. Tribute:] tribute, Han. Cap. et legions Theob. et cet. 

seq. 23. not-fearing-Britaine] Ff. not 


th’ Arrerages] F.F;. th’ Arrear- fearing Britain Warb.  not-fearing 
ages Fy,+, Dyce. the arrearages Cap. Britain Rowe et cet. 
et cet. 24. any] a Ingl. 


body. Thus, in the present case, ‘fear’d hopes’ conveys the meaning of something 
more, I think, than hopes blended with fear or mingled with fear—it seems to 
mean hopes so encompassed with fears that the hopes are almost lost. Ingleby 
says that adjectives ‘similar’ to ‘fear’d’ ‘occur passim in Shakespeare.’ I doubt. 
I have found but comparatively few of them. Adjectives formed from nouns are, 
of course, common enough.—Eb.] 

15-18. And I think... in their griefe] VAucHAN: The right inter- 
pretation is this: ‘I think that your King will both grant the tribute and send 
the arrearages, rather than face our Romans, the very memories of whom in their 
power of producing annoyance are still fresh.’ 

17. Or looke] THeopatp (Nichols, Jilust., ii, 266): Surely, you [i. e., War- 
burton] say, this should be not. I have long since cured it with a less 
change: ‘Fre lock.’ [In his edition Theobald observes that in a note in 7%. 
And. he showed, ‘from Chaucer, and the old Glossaries, that ‘““Or” was formerly 
used for e’er, before; but this usage had become too obsolete in Shakespeare’s 
days.’] 

20. Statist] That is, a statesman; used only here and in Hamlet, V, ii, 33, 
according to Bartlett. 

22. The Legion] THEOBALD: Posthumus is saying that the Britons are much 
strengthened since Czsar’s attack upon them; would then the Romans think now 
of invading them with a single legion? [Theobald thereupon changes it to Legions, 
and quotes the following passage, where the plural is found: HI, viii, 6 and 
16; IV, ii, 414; IV, iti, 30.] 


150 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iv. 


Are men more order’d, then when Julius C@/far ac 
Smil’d at their lacke of skill, but found their courage 
Worthy his frowning at. Their difcipline, 


(Now wing-led with their courages) will make knowne 28 
25. men] now Walker (Crit., iii, will Anon. ap. Cam. 

320). 28. wing-led] Var. ’73. mingled Ff 
27, 28. difcipline, (Now...will] disci- et cet. 

pline Now, winged with their courages, | courages] courage Dyce, Sta. 


26. their lacke of skill] Boswrtt-STONE (p. 8, foot-note 2): Holinshed says 
(ii, The first inhabitation of Ireland, 51/1/14) . . . ‘the British nation was then 
vnskilfull, and not trained to feats of war, for the Britons then being onelie vsed 
to the Picts and Irish enemies, people halfe naked, through Jacke of skill easilie 
gaue place to the Romans force.’ 

27. Worthy his frowning at] VAUGHAN (p. 405): The frown, as appears by 
Henry the Fifth’s advice to his soldiers, is the proper condition of brow and face 
with which to meet a dangerous enemy. ‘Worthy his frowning at’ does not, there- 
fore, express disapprobation, but the collection of all his spirit and vigour to repel 
such adversaries. See Hen. V: III, i, 9-13. 

28. (Now wing-led with their courages)] STEEVENS: This may mean their 
discipline borrowing wings from their courage, 7. e., their military knowledge being 
animated by their natural bravery—MAtoneE: The same error that has happened 
here being often found in these plays, I have not hesitated to adopt the emenda- 
tion which was made by Mr Rowe. [Here is revealed how small was the attention 
paid even by Malone to the Folios. See Text. Notes.] Thus in the last Act of 
King John we have ‘wind’ for mind; in Ant. & Cleop., ‘winds’ for minds; in Meas. 
for Meas., ‘flawes’ instead of flames, etc-—Kwnicut: [Malone’s] reason is not very 
strong, for those who have watched the progress of printers’ errors know that an 
uncommon word is not ordinarily substituted for a common one. We would 
restore ‘wing-led’ to the text because the phrase conveys one of those bold images 
which are thoroughly Shakespearian; but we feel that the speaker is deliberately 
reasoning, and does not use the language of passion, under which state Shakespeare 
for the most part throws out such figurative expressions. The simple word mingled 
is most in harmony with the entire speech.—Dantet (p. 85) would punctuate and 
read: ‘Their discipline (Now winged) with their courages will,’ etc. That is, now 
fledged—CarTWRIGHT (p. 39) proposes the same change——Hupson: Mingled 
agrees with the context, as it gives the idea that the Britons had courage before, and 
now discipline has been added to courage. But for this latter consideration I 
should certainly read winged; as it seems to me nothing could well be more in the 
Poet’s style than the figure of courage adding wings to discipline —TuIsELTON 
(p. 21): ‘Wing-led’ is a magnificent image derived from the acies sinuata—a dis- 
position under which the wings of an army opened the attack (see Clement Ed- 
monds’ Observations on Cesar’s Commentaries, I, 19). For ‘courages,’ cf. ‘which 
great and haughtie courages have often attempted’ (Smith’s The Common- 
wealth of England, I, v.). . . . In the present passage the metaphor (‘wing-led’) 
makes the plural (‘courages’) very appropriate; and there may also be a suggestion 
that discipline has, as it were, doubled in effect the courage of the Britons.— 
DowbEN: ‘Wing-led’ may be right. Mr Craig notes that in Q: of Rich. IIT: 


ACT 11, SC. iv. CYMBELINE I5I 


To their Approuers, they are People, fuch 
That*mend vpon the world. Enter Lachimo. 30 
Pla. See Lachimo. 
Poft. The fwifteft Harts haue pofted you by land; 
And Windes of all the Corners kifs’d your Sailes, 
To make your veffell nimble. 
Phil. Welcome Sir. 35 
Pof?. I hope the briefeneffe of your anfwere, made 
The fpeedineffe of your returne. 


fact. Your Lady, 38 
30. That] As Pope, Theob. Han. 32. The fwifteft] Sure the swift Pope, 
Watrb. =ae 
Scene vi. Pope, Han. Warb. Harts] hearts FF,. 
Johns. 35. Phil. Welcome] Post Welcome 


31. See Iachimo.] Ff. (Jachimo F,), Theob. ii. (misprint?) Warb. 
Rowe, Pope, Han. See, Iachimo 36. Poft. I hope] Phil. I hope Theob. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. See! ii. (misprint?), Warb. 


Iachimo? Coll. Sing. See! Iachimo! anfwere,] answer Theob. et seq. 
Cap. et cet. 37-39. The...Is| One line Ingl. 
[Surprised. Coll. iii. 38. Lady,] lady Theob. et seq. 


TI, i, 88, we find ‘a wingled Mercury.’ If ‘wing-led’ be right, ‘courages’ may 
possibly mean ‘gallants.’ In Hamlet, I, iii, 65, Q: and Q, read ‘each new-hatched, 
unfledged courage,’ meaning ‘gallant,’ and other examples are cited in NV. EL. D. 
‘Wing-led with their courages’ may mean ‘led in wings or divisions (a disciplined 
formation) by their gallant commanders.’ Compare I, iii, 9, where the ‘wings’ 
of Cymbeline’s army are mentioned.—[Had the word in F, been ‘wingled’ instead 
of ‘wing-led,’ then the assertion of many editors that wingled was the mere sub- 
stitution by the compositor of a w for an m, would have been unassailable, but it is 
‘wing-led,’ and, as Knight truly says, an uncommon word is not usually substi- 
tuted for a common one, thereby merely paraphrasing the sound scholastic rule of 
durior lectio preferenda est. I do not like the tame expression of ‘mingling disci- 
pline with courage’—it is inert, and dead, and unShakespearian. If it be the true 
text, then I doubt that Shakespeare wrote the line. Dowden, it seems to me, has 
given the best possible paraphrase of the text. The Misses PorTER and CLARKE 
suggest that Posthumus is thinking of the Roman eagle, as now transferred, by 
discipline, to the Briton ranks.—Ep.] 

29. Approuers] WARBURTON: To those who try them. 

30. mend vpon the world] Scummnt (Lex., s.v.. 2): Equivalent to get the upper- 
hand of the world. [Schmidt refers to ‘Begin you to grow upon me?’—As You Like 
It, I, i, 91, where, as well as in the present passage, it is possible that the meaning 
is what Schmidt gives. And yet ‘To get the upperhand’ is, I think, a little too 
strong; in mending is there not implied a steady progress or LU e upon what 
the world had hitherto found them?—Eb.] 

33. Windes of all the Corners] Murray (WN. E. D., s.v. Corner. 8.): A 
extremity or end of the earth; a direction or quarter from which the wind blows. 
[The present line and Much Ado, II, iii, 103, quoted.] 


152 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 11, SC. iv. 


Is one of the fayreft that I haue look’d vpon 
Pof. And therewithall the beft, or let her beauty 40 
Looke thorough a Cafement to allure falfe hearts, 
And be falfe with them. 
Tachi. Heere are Letters for you. 
Poft. Their tenure good I truft. 
Tach, ’Tis very like. 45 
Poft. Was Caius Lucius in the Britaine Court, 
When you were there ? 
Tach. We was expected then, 
But not approach’d. 
Poft. All is well yet, 50 
Sparkles this Stone as it was wont, or is’t not 
Too dull for your good wearing ? 


Tach. If T haue loft it, 53 
39. one of the] of the Pope,+, Cap. tenour Theob. et cet. 
Var. ’73. one the Steev. Var. 03, 713. 44. [Taking them. Coll. iii. 
fayreft] feyreft F2 fair’st Cap. 46. Poft.] Phil. Cap. Mal. et seq. 
(Errata). 47. [Posthumus reads. Coll. ii. 
that} Om. Anon. ap. Cam. 49. not] was not yet Han. 
that I haue] that ever I Rowe ii. 50. All...yet] As an aside, Anon. 
I eer Pope,+. that I’ve Dyce ii, iii. ap. Cam. 
vpon| upon. Fy. wpon,— Ingl. yet,| yet. Rowe ii. et seq. 
40. beft,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 51. wont,] wont? Cap. et seq. 
Cam. best; Theob. et cet. 53- I haue loft it] I’ve lost it Pope,+. 


41. thorough] through Rowe ii. et seq. I had lost it Sing. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
44. tenure] Ff, Rowe, Pope. tenor Coll. iii. I had lost Coll. ii. (MS.). 


39. vpon] Does the persistent absence, through the first three Folios, of any 
period after this word betoken a hasty interruption by Posthumus? I think not. 
It is merely an instance of that ‘nature of things’ that Porson was wont to damn.— 
Ep. 

40-42. or let her beauty ... And be false with them] The best explana- 
tion of the meaning of this brutal speech will be found in Timon, IV, iii, 115, 116. 
Does Shakespeare wish to create in us, at the outset, an aversion to Posthumus, 
so that at the close of this scene our hearts will be duly hardened to endure the sight 
of his miseryPp—Ep. 

46. Post.] CAPELL (p. 108): No thinking person will ever be of opinion that 
Posthumus could be the asker of such a question as this. He has that in his hand 
which engages him wholly; and his eagerness to know the contents of it appears in 
his very hasty perusal even now that he is eased of this speech, for the time allowed 
is so short that we must conceive it helped by the action. [The credit of this just 
change was assumed by STEEVENS; it was attributed to him by Matone.] 

46. Britaine] See I, vii, 72, for Walker’s discrimination between Briton and 
Britaine. 

53. If I haue lost] Dyce (ed. i, reading, ‘If I had lost’): Though some passages 
occur in our old writers where ‘have’ seems to be equivalent to had, the present one 


ACTP IL; SCs iv. | CYMBELINE 153 


I fhould haue loft the worth of it in Gold, 
Ile make a iourney twice as farre, t’enioy 55 
A fecond night of fuch fweet fhortneffe, which 
Was mine in Britaine, for the Ring is wonne. 
Poft, The Stones too hard to come by. 
Lach. Not a whit, 
Y our Lady being fo eafy. 60 
Poft. Make note Sir 
Your loffe, your Sport: I hope you know that we 
Muft not continue Friends. 
Lach. Good Sir, we muft 
If you keepe Couenant : had I not brought 65 
The knowledge of your Miftris home, I grant 
We were to queftion farther; but I now 
Profeffe my felfe the winner of her Honor, 
Together with your Ring ; and not the wronger 
Of her, or you hauing proceeded but 70 
By both your willes. 


54. Gold,] gold; Rowe,+. gold. Cap. 65. Couenant:] covenant. Johns. Var. 
et seq. 73, Coll. Dyce, Ktly, Glo. Cam. 

55. Venioy] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce 67. farther] Ffi,+, Cap. Coll. Sing. 
li, ili. to enjoy Cap. et cet. Sta. Ktly, Cam. further Var.’73 et cet. 

58. Stones] stone’s Rowe. 70. her, or you] her or you, Dyce, Sta. 

61. note] not Ff. Glo. Cam. her, or you, Ff. et cet. 


cannot, I think, be considered as belonging to that class. (In Coriolanus, IV, vii, 
12, the Folio has, ‘Yet, I wish Sir [I meane for your particular] you had not Ioyn’d 
in Commission with him; but either hawe borne The action of your selfe, or else to 
him, had left it soly.’)-Wutre (ed. i.) disagrees with Dyce, and thinks ‘haue ’ was 
not intended as an equivalent to had; ‘the difference made in the sentence by “‘have” 
and “had” is not merely in grammatical form, but in thought. Jachimo says, “If 
IT have lost it now, that loss is the consequence of my having then lost the weight 
of it in gold.” We do not use this form of thought now-a-days.’ [In his second ed. 
White has, apparently, forgotten all about this ‘form of thought’; he there prints 
‘had’ without comment.—Ep.]—Cottter (ed. ii.): Mr Singer introduces had, [see 
Text. Notes], merely observing that ‘the Folios read have.’ Whence did he procure 
had? From the MS. which most provokingly anticipated Mr Singer’s emenda- 
tion. Perhaps, therefore, it is no wonder that he takes it to himself, and says noth- 
ing about the correspondence of the ‘MS.’ with his notion. The ‘MS.’ omits ‘it’ 
after ‘lost,’ for it is clear that Iachimo would not have lost the ring, but ‘the worth 
of it in gold.’ Posthumus would have lost the ring; and to make Iachimo say 
‘If I had lost’ renders the whole dialogue consistent. 

66. knowledge] To any one familiar with the Old Testament any reference to 
the meaning of this word is superfluous. 


154 THE TRAGEDIE OF ., [AcT II, SC. iv. 


Poft. Vf you can mak’t apparant 72 
That yon haue tafted her in Bed; my hand, 
And Ring is yours. If not, the foule opinion 
You had of her pure Honour; gaines, or loofes, a5 
Your Sword, or mine, or Mafterleffe leaue both 
To who fhall finde them. 
Tach. Sir,my Circumftances 
Being fo nere the Truth, as I will make them, 
Mutt firft induce you to beleeue; whofe ftrength 80 
T will confirme with oath, which I doubt not 
You’! giue me leaue to fpare, when you fhall finde 
You neede it not. 
Poft. Proceed. 
Tach. Firft, her Bed-chamber 85 
(Where I confeffe I flept not, but profeffe 
Had that was well worth watching) it was hang’d 
With Tapiftry of Silke, and Siluer, the Story 
Proud Cleopatra, when fhe met her Roman, 


And Sidnus fwell’d aboue the Bankes, or for go 
72. mak’t] F.F,. make it Varr. Mal. 75. loofes] lofes Fy. 
Rann. make’t F; et cet. 76. your Sword, or mine] My sword or 
apparent] apparent F,. yours Vaun. 
73. yon] Fy. leaue] leaves Rowe et seq. 
Bed;| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 79. nere] near F,. 
Han. Warb. bed, Johns. et cet. 81. oath] Ffi,+. oath; Cap. et seq. 
73,74. hand, And Ring] Fi, Rowe,+, 84. Proceed.] Proceed, sir Anon. ap. 
hand And ring Dyce, Ktly, Glo. Cam. Cam. 
hand, and ring, Cap. et cet. 86. not,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
74. ts] are Coll. MS. Johns. Coll. Cam. not; Theob. et cet. 
yours.] yours; Johns. et seq. 88. Tapiftry] tapestry Rowe. 
Tf not,|] If not F;F;. Silke, and Siluer] silver and silk 
75. pure] poor F;F,, Rowe, Pope. Pope. silver’d silk Han. 
provd Warb. (Nichols, Illust., ii, go. Sidnus] Cidnus Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
266). Cydnus Theob. 


76. Masterlesse leaue] ‘Leave’ is here, I think, a plural by proximity. 

87. well worth watching] STEEvENS: That is, that which was well lying 
awake for. [STAUNTON takes ‘watching’ as the term in falconry for taming the 
haggards by keeping them awake. That Shakespeare does use this term of fal- 
conry we all know (Desdemona says of Othello, ‘I’ll watch him tame bute L 
think it doubtful that it is so used here. Is it not sufficient to take it as a mere 
equivalent of ‘not sleeping.’ Furthermore, is there not an absorption of the in 
the th of ‘worth’: ‘Had that was well worth ’ [the] watching ’?—Ep.]| 

90. And Sidnus] Caprtt changed ‘And’ to On, and complacently observes: 
The lovers of Shakespeare will not be displeas’d to see his diction a little improved, 
when it can be done at so trifling a change as is [here made]: and if one as trifling 


ACT RIG SGML.) CYMBELINE 155 


The preffe of Boates, or Pride. A peece of Worke gl 
So brauely done, fo rich, that it did ftriue 

In Workemanfhip, and Value, which I wonder’d 

Could be fo rarely, and exaétly wrought 


wince the true life on’t was ——— 95 
o1. Pride.] Johns. Var. ’73. pride,— *twas. Coll. ii, iii. (MS.). on’t was not— 
Warb. Pride: Ff et cet. Walker (Crit., iii, 320). on it was Ktly. 
93. Value,] value; Pope et seq. outdone "twas. Vaun. was out on’t 
95. Since] such Mason, Sing. Anon. ap. Cam. 
ow t was ] owt was. Han. on’t 


as this can give sense to a passage that never had it before (which, it was appre- 
hended, was the case of one at the end of this speech), they will perhaps be in- 
clined dare manus libenter.. [The ‘case’ just referred to is line 95, ‘the true life 
on’t was—’; this Capell changed, needlessly, into ‘the true life was in it.’] 
go. aboue the Bankes] Eccites: The expression would have been neater had it 
been ‘his’ or ‘its banks.’ [That word ‘neater’ deserves letters of beaten gold.] 
90, 91. or for The presse of Boates, or Pride] WARBURTON: That is, an 
agreeable ridicule on poetic exaggeration, which gives human passions to inanimate 
things; and particularly upon what he himself writes in the foregoing play on 
this very subject:—‘And made the water, which they beat, to follow faster, As 
amorous of their strokes.’ But the satire is not only agreeably turned, but very 
artfully employed; as it is a plain indication that the speaker is secretly mocking 
the credulity of his hearer, while he is endeavouring to persuade him of his wife’s 
falsehood.—JoHNSON quotes Warburton in full, and then remarks: It is easy to sit 
down and give our author meanings which he never had. Shakespeare has no 
great right to censure poetical exaggeration, of which no poet is more frequently 
guilty. That he intended to ridicule his own lines is very uncertain, when there 
are no means of knowing which of the two plays was written first. The commen- 
tator has contented himself to suppose that the foregoing play in his book was 
the play of earlier composition. Nor is the reasoning better than the assertion. 
Tf the language of Iachimo be such as shows him to be mocking the credibility of 
his hearer, his language is very improper, when his business was to deceive. But 
the truth is, that his language is such as a skilful villain would naturally use, a 
mixture of airy triumph and serious deposition. His gayety shews his seriousness 
to be without anxiety, and his seriousness proves his gayety to be without art. 
92,93. it did striue In Workemanship, and Value] Scumipt (Lew., s. v. Strive, 
5.) quotes this passage under the head ‘to emulate, to vie,’ and happily para- 
phrases it: ‘it was doubtful which of the two, workmanship or value, was greater.’ 
95. Since the true life on’t was——] For Capell’s reading, see line 90.— 
Sraunton: To any of the proposed emendations we should prefer: ‘Since the 
true life on’t has.’ But what necessity is there for change? The speech is evidently 
intended to be interrupted by Posthumus.—INcLeBy in his text reads, ‘Since 
true life was not—’ and explains that the conclusion of the sentence is ‘represent- 
able in silk and silver’—TutsELtToN: As a dash naturally arouses curiosity, I 
would suggest that Iachimo, if he had not been interrupted, would have proceeded 
to describe ‘the Chimney piece,’ and that the minute detail that the Chimney 
was south the chamber was inserted as an afterthought in order to increase the 


156 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT I, SC. iv. 


Poft. This is true : 96 
And this you might haue heard of heere, by me, 
Or by fome other. 
Tach. More particulars 
Mutt iuftifie my knowledge. 100 
Poft. So they mutt, 
Or doe your Honour iniury. 
Tach. The Chimney 
Is South the Chamber, and the Chimney-peece 
Chafte Dian, bathing : neuer faw I figures 105 
So likely to report themfelues ; the Cutter 
Was as another Nature dumbe, out-went her, 
Motion, and Breath left out. 


Poft. This is a thing 109 
96. This] Why, this Han. Vaun. cutting Anon. ap. Cam. 
true] most true Coll. ii. (MS.) 107. Nature dumbe, out-went] Ff, 
104. Chamber,| Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. Rowe, Pope, Johns. Ktly. ature, 
Glo. Cam. chamber; Theob. et cet. dumb, out-went Theob. Var. ’73. 
105. Chafte] chaft F;F,, Rowe,+, nature, dumb out-went Han. nature; 
Cap. Vari773- dumb, out-went Cap. nature, dumb; 
106. Cutter] cutten Anon. ap. Cam. out-went Warb. et cet. 


particularity of the description, when he finds Posthumus is not sufficiently im- 
pressed by his relation. 

98. Or by some other] TurseLtton: This is a self-correction by Posthumus, 
as he realises the unlikelihood of having given the information himself to Jachimo. 

104. Chimney-peece] Murray (N. £. D., s. v. Piece in the artistic sense): 
1. A picture, piece of sculpture, or of tapestry, placed as an ornament over a 
fireplace. [The present passage is the earliest recorded.] 

106. So likely to report themselues] JoHNsSoN: So near to speech.— 
CaPELL (p. 109): That is, expressive of the passions intended; so much so as not to 
need an interpreter, the figures speaking themselves. [HANMER reads, instead of 
‘likely,’ lively. DOWwDEN says, ‘and perhaps he was right.’ VAUGHAN suggests the 
same change.] 

106, 107. the Cutter Was as another Nature dumbe] WARBURTON: 
This nonsense should, without question, be read and printed thus: ‘Has as another 
nature done; out-went her, Motion,’ etc., 7. e., has worked as exquisitely, nay, has 
exceeded her, if you will put motion and breath out of the question —Jounson: 
This emendation I think needless. The meaning is this, The Sculptor was as nature, 
but as nature dumb; he gave everything that nature gives but breath and motion. 
In breath is included speech——CaPELt: The cutter, another nature; nay, outgoing 
her works, if we but suppose them divested of speech, motion, and breath.—J. 
BEALE (WN. & Q., V, viii, 182) informs us that the ‘best sense’ he ‘can make is to 
read: “The cutter Was another nature; [the] dumb out went her, Motion and 


breath left out”; that is to say, the mute statuary or dead art was made to surpass 
Speechless humanity or dead nature.’ 


ACTS IINSC. iv. || CYMBELINE 157 


Which you might from Relation likewife reape, 110 
Being, as it is, much fpoke of. 

lach. The Roofe o’th’Chamber, 
With golden Cherubins is fretted. Her Andirons 
(I had forgot them) were two winking Cupids 
Of Siluer, each on one foote ftanding, nicely 115 
Depending on their Brands. 


110. reape,| F2. read F;F,, Rowe, +, Varr. Ran. 


Pope. reap; Theob. et cet. 113. 75] Om. Walker. 

111. much fpoke of] much spoke fretted.] fretted; Theob. Warb. 
Vaun. et seq. 

112. oth’ o’the Cap. et seq. Her| Th’ Pope ii,+, Varr. Rann. 


113. Cherubins] cherubims Rowe ii, 114. winking] winged Coll. MS. 


113. With golden Cherubins is fretted] SrreEveNs: The same tawdry image 
occurs in Hen. VIII: I, i, 23: ‘their dwarfish pages were As cherubins, all gilt.’ 
The sole recommendation of this Gothic idea, which is tritically repeated by modern 
artists, seems to be that it occupies but little room on canvas or marble; for chubby, 
unmeaning faces, with ducks’ wings tucked under them, are all the circumstances 
that enter into such infantine and absurd representations of the choirs of heaven.— 
Douce (ii, tor): Shakespeare is not accountable for the fashions or follies of his 
age, and has, in this instance, given a faithful description of the mode in which 
the rooms in great houses were sometimes ornamented. [Apparently, according 
to the authorities quoted by Murray (NV. £. D.), no manner of spelling the word, 
whether ‘cherubins’ or ‘cherubims,’ or even the use of ‘cherubim’ as a singular, 
can be condemned as wrong or without authority.] 

113. Andirons] Murray (WN. E. D.): An adoption of Old French andier (modern 
French Jandier, i. e., Pandier). Its remoter history unknown. In English the ter- 
mination was at an early date identified with the word yre, yren, iron, whence 
the later illusive spelling, and-zron. 

114. winking Cupids] CoLirer (ed. ii.) informs us that his MS. changes 
‘winking’ to winged. ‘It certainly seems unlikely, he remarks, ‘that Iachimo, by 
that dim light, should have observed whether the Cupids were “‘ winking,” although 
he could have seen that they were winged. We believe winged to be right, but we 
are not so sure of it as to warrant a desertion of what has always been considered 
the text.—STAUNTON: That is, blind Cupids, Cupids with closed eyes. 

115,116. nicely Depending on their Brands] Murray (WN. E. D.) quotes this 
line as an illustration of his definition (3, c.) of Brand, which is ‘the torches of 
Cupid and the Furies.’ It is hardly worth while to expend much time over de- 
scriptions of furniture, like the present, but it is worth while to have whatever 
image is presented to the mind clear and distinct.—STEEVENS acknowledges that 
he is not sure that he understands this passage. ‘Perhaps,’ he says, ‘Shakespeare 
meant that the figures of the Cupid were nicely poized on their inverted torches, one 
of the legs of each being taken off the ground, which might render such a support 
necessary.’—Poized may be, possibly, accepted as a paraphrase of ‘depending,’ 
but I should much prefer (as nearer to the Latin, dependeo) hanging on or leaning 
on. In inverting the torches, however, Steevens is, I think, wholly wrong. Ac- 
cording to ancient symbolism, as portrayed on many monuments, an inverted and, 


158 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT II, SC. iv. 


Poft. This is her Honor : Li, 
Let it be granted you haue feene all this (and praife 
Be giuen to your remembrance) the defcription 
Of what is in her Chamber, nothing faues 120 
The wager you haue laid. 

Tach. Then if you can 


Be pale, I begge but leaue to ayre this Iewell : See, 123 
117. This...Honor:] Ff. (honour 118, 119. and praife Be giuen] Praise 

F;F,), Rowe, Pope i. What's this ther be Pope,+. 

honour? Theob. Pope ii, Han. Warb. 122. [Pulling out the Bracelet. 

This...honour? Johns. Cap. This... Rowe. Producing the bracelet from its 

honour.— Coll. This is mere rumour case. Coll. iii. 

Anon. ap. Cam. This...honour! Var. 122,123. can Be pale, I| Fi, Rowe,+, 

a7 al etacels Knt. i. can Be pale; I Var. ’73. can, 
118. Let it be] Be it Cap. Be pale; I Cap. et cet. 


Let...this] One line Pope,-+-. 123. See,] see/— Rowe et seq. 


therefore, extinguished torch represented death. Cupid’s hymeneal torch was, on 
the contrary, held aloft and burning. The little Cupids stood on one foot because 
the legs were crossed; and, by that same symbolism, crossed legs represented 
sleep, which was also indicated, possibly, by the winking eyes. The Cupids were 
diminutive and the hymeneal torches were tall, so that the Cupids could very 
properly lean or ‘depend on’ them. This seems to me the true interpretation of 
Tachimo’s description.—Eb. 

117. This is her Honor:] THeosBatp: I think there is little question but we 
ought to restore the place thus: ‘What’s this ?her Honour?’ I proposed this 
emendation in the Appendix to my Shakespeare Restor’d, and Mr Pope has thought 
fit to embrace it in his last edition.—UPrTon (p. 230): But why may it not be read 
[sic] without altering it one word, only by an easy transposition, ‘Zs this her 
honour?’ or perhaps he speaks ironically, ‘This is her honour!’—Jounson: [This 
emendation of Theobald] has been followed by both the succeeding editors, but I 
think it must be rejected. The expression is ironical. Iachimo relates many 
particulars, to which Posthumus answers with impatience: ‘This is her honour.’ 
That is, And the attainment of this knowledge is to pass for the corruption of her 
honour.—CaPELL (p. 109): This line wants nothing but the tone of the utterer 
to give it the force of ‘What’s this t’her honour?’ [as proposed by Theobald]. 

122, 123. Then if you can Be pale] JoHNson: If you can forbear to flush 
your cheek with rage——BosweELL: I rather think it means, If you can controul 
your temper, if you can restrain yourself within bounds. To pale is commonly used 
for to confine or surround. Thus in Ant. & Cleop., ‘Whate’er the ocean pales, or 
sky enclyps.’—II, vii, 74. [Poor Boswell—Ep.]—Knicut: We follow the punctua- 
tion of the original [in preference to Capell’s]; Iachimo has produced no effect upon 
Posthumus up to this moment; but he now says, if you can be pale, I will see what 
this jewel will do to make you change countenance.—Dycr (Remarks, p. 255): 
I have no doubt that the punctuation given by Mr Collier [i. e., Capell’s] is right; 
and that the passage means, ‘Then, if you can (ji. e., if anything has power to make 
you change colour) be pale (become pale at the sight of this), I beg,’ etc. [To 
me the punctuation of the Folio is the better. Dyce’s (and, of course, Capell’s) 


ACT II, SC. iv.] CYMBELINE 


159 


And now ’tis vp againe : it muft be married 
To that your Diamond, Ile keepe them. 
Loft we loue 
Once more let me behold it : Is it that 
Which I left with her ? 
Zach. Sir(1 thanke her) that 
She ftript it from her Arme : I fee her yet : 
Her pretty Action, did out-fell her guift, 
And yet enrich’d it too : fhe gaue it me, 
And faid, fhe priz’d it once. 
Poft. May be, fhe pluck’d it off 
To fend it me. 
fach. She writes fo to you? doth fhee ? 
Poft. Ono,no,no, ’tis true. Heere, take this too, 


125 


130 


135 


137 


Steev. Varr. Knt, Dyce, Sing. Ktly, 
Glo. 
134. May be,| Om. Han. 
Knt, Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
off | Om. Vaun. 


125. Diamond,] Ff. diamond. Rowe, 
+. diamond; Cap. et cet. 
them.] them— Ed. conj. 
126. Ioue ] Jove! Rowe et seq. 
129. that] Ff, Rowe i. that. Johns. 


May be 


Ktly. that: Rowe ii. et cet. 


130. her yet:| her yet Fi. her yet, 
Rowe +. 
131. Action, did] action did Rowe,+. 
guift] F.. 


132. too:] Om. Steev. conj. 
132, 133. And yet...faid,] One line 


136. you? doth fhee?] you, doth she? 
Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 

137. no, ’tis] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
no. “Tis Johns. nol “Tis Var- 73, 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. no; ’tis Theob. et cet. 

too,| too; Theob. Warb. et seq. 
[Gives the ring. Johns. 


interpretation seems to imply that Posthumus is so utterly brazen-faced that noth- 
ing less than a cataclasm can make him change colour; it almost necessitates an 
emphasis and action on Jachimo’s part that verges on the theatrical, whereas it 
was Iachimo’s cool, mocking assumption of triumph that was so intensely galling to 
Posthumus. According to the Folio, he may be imagined as uttering these words 
with a courteous bow and a mocking smile.—Eb.] 

123. See] Exze (p. 310), for the sake of metre, would have this form ‘a most 
energetic interjectional line.’ 

125. Ile keepe them] Wyatt: ‘I’ll keep them,’ though your mistress and you 
have parted with them so easily,—a perfectly Satanic thrust! [Admirably said! 
and yet such is the hurricane in the victim’s brain that I doubt he heeds it.—Ep.] 

131. out-sell] Scummr (Lex.): That is, exceeded it in value. See where 
Cloten speaks of Imogen and of her superiority above other women, ‘and she of 
all compounded Out-sells them all.’—II], v, 93. 

136. She writes so to you ?] This letter of Imogen is still an unknown source 
of danger to Iachimo. He knows well enough that all his scheming may be yet 
in vain and his wager lost if Imogen has revealed to Posthumus the false reports 
with which his interview with her began, or the foiled attempts to beguile her, and 
the fabricated story of regal presents in a trunk which she had guarded in her very 
bed-chamber. An inkling of the truth might dawn from this letter on Posthumus, 


160 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


It is a Bafiliske vnto mine eye, 


[ACT II, SC. iv. 


138 


Killes me to looke on’t : Let there be no Honor, 
Where there is Beauty : Truth, where femblance : Loue, 140 


Where there’s another‘man. 


The Vowes of Women, 


Of no more bondage be, to where they are made, 
Then they are to their Vertues, which is nothing : 


O, aboue meafure falfe. 


Phil. "aue patience Sir, 145 
And take your Ring againe, ’tis not yet wonne : 
It may be probable fhe loft it : or 
Who knowes if one of her women, being corrupted 148 


139. on’t:] on’t. Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Cam. 

139, 140. Honor,...Beauty :...fem- 
blance: Loue,| Honor,...beauty,...sem- 
blance, love Rowe. 

141. man.] Ff, Rowe,+, Ktly. man: 
Cap. et cet. 

141-143. Women,...be,...made,...Ver- 
tues,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. women. 


women...be,...made,...virtues; Cap. et cet. 
142. they are] theyre Pope,+, Dyce 
144. falfe.] false! Rowe et seq. 
146. againe,| again; Rowe et seq. 
148. knowes if] knows, Pope,+. 
knows, if Var. ’73, 778. 
knowes...women] knows, if one, 
her women Coll. i. knows, if one, her 


...be...made,...virtues, Han. women... woman Coll. ii. 
be,...made,...virtues, _ Warb. Johns. one...her] one o’ her Dyce. one 
women,...be...made,...virtues; Knot. of her Ff et cet. 


and, for aught Iachimo could tell, Posthumus in his blind fury might cut him down 
onthe spot. This reference to the letter sprang, therefore, from deep cunning —ED. 

138. Basiliske] Murray (NV. £. D.): 1. A fabulous reptile, also called a cocka- 
trice, alleged to be hatched by a serpent from a cock’s egg; ancient authors stated 
that its hissing drove away all other serpents, and that its breath, and even its look, 
was fatal. [The interested student will find in Wint. Tale, I, ii, 449 (of this ed.), a 
note wherein are quoted the accounts of this creature derived from Holland’s 
Plinie, Bk xxix, Cap. iv; Batman vppon Bartholome, p. 350, verso; and Topsell’s 
History of Serpents, p. 119. Wherein it is to be especially noted that it is not the 
sight of the basilisk, but the sight from the basilisk which proves fatal; and Leontes 
in Wint. Tale thus correctly refers to it. But here Posthumus reverses the fatal 
process.—Eb.] 

141-143. The Vowes of Women... to their Vertues] Jonnson: The 
love vowed by women no more abides with him to whom it is proved than women 
adhere to their virtue——VAuGHAN (p. 411): Johnson interprets as an aphorism 
that which is a prayer or imprecation. . . . As ‘let there be’ commences, so ‘be’ 
continues under a different form of the imperative mood, thus: ‘Let there be no 
honour,’ etc., and ‘let women’s vows have no more efficacy,’ etc. 

147. It may be probable] Murray (WN. E. D., s. ». Probable. 1.): Capable of 
being proved, demonstrable, provable. 

148. if one her women] Cottier, probably unwilling to harm the metre by 
adopting the ‘of’ in F2, accepted, in his ed. i, ‘one, her women’ as elliptical, and 
‘the same as ‘“‘one of her women.”’’—Whereupon, Dycr (Remarks, p. 255) asserts 
that Collier adopts ‘from the Folio an error in defence of which no one ever dreamed 


AGTHII, SC) 1V.) CYMBELINE 161 
Hath ftolne it from her. 
Poft. Very true, 150 


And fo I hope he came by’t : backe my Ring, 
Render to me fome corporall figne about her 
More euident then this : for this was ftolne. 
fach. By ITupiter, I had it from her Arme. 
Poft. Hearke you, he fweares : by Iupiter he fweares. 155 
*Tis true, nay keepe the Ring ;’tis true: I am fure 
She would not loofe it : her Attendants are 
All {worne, and honourable : they induc’d to fteale it ? 158 


149. Hath ftolne] Ff. might stoln 
Pope. might not have stol’n. Han. Hath 
stoln or stol’n Rowe et cet. 

her.| her? Han. Knt, Coll. Dyce, 


Glo. Cam. her chamber? Anon. ap. 
Cam. 

151. by’t:] byt. Coll. Dyce, Glo. 
Cam. 


backe] back, Coll. iii. 
Ring,| ring. Coll. ring; Theob. 
et seq. 
[Restoring it to his finger. Coll. 
iii. 
152. corporall] corporrl F,. 
153. was ftolne] Cap. wat ftole F.. 


156. ’Tis true,] Ff, Cap. Dyce. ’Tis 
true— Rowe,+. ’Tis true; Var. 73 
eticet: 

Ring,] Ff. ring, Dyce. ring— 
Rowe et cet. 

tis true:] ’tis true. Coll. 

[Offering the ring. Coll. iii. 


oe eee 


157. would] F,. Jfhould F;F,. could 
Rowe,+, Varr. Ran. 
loofe} lofe F 4. 
158. /worne, and] sworn and Rowe ii, 
Johns. Dyce, Ktly, Glo. Cam. Om. 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 


158. fteale it?) Ff, Cap. Coll. ii. steal 


was ftole F;F,, Rowe,+. was stolen or it! Rowe et cet. 


stol’n Var. ’73 et cet. 


of saying a word. Such an ellipsis is impossible. We have had before in the present 
play: ‘I will make One of her women lawyer to me.”’—II, iii, 80.—Thereupon, 
Cox.ieR relinquished his ellipsis, and says with assurance that ‘the true emenda- 
tion is evidently to put ““‘women” in the singular, to which there can be no reason- 
able objection’; he recalls that Imogen had a woman ‘Helen,’ and that hereafter 
there will be a ‘Dorothy,’ and just before her flight there is an unnamed one who is 
to ‘feign sickness.’ His second text, therefore, reads, ‘if one, her woman, being,’ 
etc. But his conscience was evidently uneasy; in his ed. iii. his text, without a note, 
reads: ‘if one of her women, being,’ etc.—STAUNTON considers the expression ‘as 
awkward without the preposition, unless we read, “if one, her women being 
corrupted,” etc.’ 

154. By Iupiter] FLETCHER (p. 62): It should here be borne in mind that this 
form of obtestation, in the age and country wherein this scene is laid, was a very 
different matter from swearing ‘by Jove’ now-a-days; the oath by the father of the 
gods had a real and awful solemnity; and it is worthy of remark that the dramatist, 
with subtle propriety, has made even the unscrupulous Iachimo employ it only this 
once, and in support of an assertion which, though not substantially, is literally 
true. [The propriety of Fletcher’s remark is proved by Posthumus’s exclamation 
in response. It is this oath of bighest sanctity that convinces Posthumus, and 
forces him to say ‘’Tis true.’—Ep.] 

158. All sworne] Percy: It was anciently the custom for the attendants on our 


ed 


162 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT I, SC. iv. 


And by a Stranger? No, he hath enioy’d her, 
The Cognifance of her incontinencie 160 
Is this : fhe hath bought the name of Whore, thus deerly 
There, take thy hyre, and all the Fiends of Hell 
Diuide themfelues betweene you. 

Phil. Sir, be patient : 
This is not ftrong enough to be beleeu’d 165 
Of one perfwaded well of. 

Poft. Neuer talke on’t : 
She hath bin colted by him, 


Tach. Wf you feeke 169 
159. Stranger?] Ff, Cap. Mal. Ran. 161. deerly] deerely F.2. dearly; 
Steev, Var. ’03, ’13, Coll. ii. stranger! Theob. Warb. Johns. dearly. F;F, 
Rowe et cet. et cet: 
her,| her. Pope, +. her: Cap et 162. hyre,| hire; Cap. et seq. 
cet. 163. you.] you! Theob. et seq. 
161. this:] Ff. Rowe ii, Pope, Theob. i. [Giving the ring. Coll. i. 
Coll. this; Rowe i, Theob. ii, Han. 166. well of.] Ff, Dyce. well of — 
Johns. this,— Cap. et cet. Theob. Warb. well of— Rowe et cet. 
She hath\ sh’ hath Pope, Han. 168. bin] been F3Fy. 


nobility and other great personages (as it is now for the servants of the King) 
to take an oath of fidelity on their entrance into office. In the household book of 
the 5th Earl of Northumberland (compiled A. D. 1512) it is expressly ordered (p. 
49) that ‘what person soever he be that commyth to my Lordes service, that in- 
contynent after he be intred in the chequyrroull [check-roll] that he be sworn in the 
countynge-hous by a gentillman-usher or yeman-usher in the presence of the hede 
officers.’ Even now every servant of the King’s at his first appointment is sworn in, 
before a gentleman usher, at the lord chamberlain’s office. 

160. Cognisance] JoHNSON: That is, the badge; the token; the visible proof. 
—CapeLL: An heraldic term properly, signifying the crest; by translation, any 
badge or mark that is used to distinguish; the great value of the wager which the 
speaker has lost is (says he) ‘the cognisance’ which distinguishes the ‘incontinency’ 
of she [sic] we are talking of from that of all other women.—Mourray (NV. E. D., 
s. v., IIL, 5.): Specifically, in Heraldry, a device or emblem borne for distinction 
by all the retainers of a noble house, whether they bore ‘arms’ or not. (The 
chief sense in Middle English, and still frequent.) [The colon after ‘this,’ in the next 
line, gives rise to some obscurity, to me at least. Possibly, TaistETON or SIMPSON 
would interpret it as merely marking an emphatic pause, and this may be right, 
yet, all the same, the colon is sometimes used, as we and the Germans now use it, in 
the sense of namely; and it is possible for it to bear this sense here. But I think not. 
I prefer the emphatic pause, and that ‘this’ refers to the ring, which may also be 
Capell’s meaning, obscured though it be in a mist of words.—Ep.] 

166. Of one perswaded well of] IncreBy: That is, of one whom we are 
persuaded to think well of. [If the sentence be complete, Ingleby’s paraphrase is 
just, but if the sentence be broken off, which a large majority of the editors seem 


to believe, then DowbDEN suggests ‘her truth’ as the words Philario would have 
added.] 


ACEI SC iv: | 


CYMBELINE 163 


For further fatisfying, vnder her Breaft 170 
( Worthy her preffing) lyes a Mole, right proud 

Of that moft delicate Lodging. By my life 

I kift it, and it gaue me prefent hunger 


To feede againe, though full. 
This {taine vpon her ? 


Poft. 


I, and it doth confirme 


You do remember 


175 


Another ftaine, as bigge as Hell can hold, 


Were there no more but it. 
Lach. 


Will you heare more ? 


Poft. Spare your Arethmaticke, 180 
Neuer count the Turnes : Once, and a Million. 


tach. Mle be fworne. 
Poft. No {wearing : 


If you will fweare you haue not done’t, you lye, 
And I will kill thee, if thou do’ft deny 185 


Thou’ft made me Cuckold. 
Lach. Ile deny nothing. 


Poff. O that I had her heere, to teare her Limb-meale: 188 


171. her] Fi, Cap. Ran. the Rowe et 
cet. your Anon. ap. Cam. 

172. Lodging.] lodging: Cap. et seq. 

173. kift it,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 


CCL. 

176. I,] Ay Rowe. 

180. 181. Spare...Turnes] One line 
Han. Cap. et seq. 

180. Arethmaticke,] Arithmeticke, F>. 
Arithmetick, F;F,. arithmetick. Rowe ii, 
+. arithmetick; Cap. et seq. 

181. Neuer count] Count not Pope,+. 
Ne’er count Var. ’73. 

Million.] Ff, Rowe, Han. Cap. 


million! Pope et cet. 

182. fworne.] sworn— Rowe et seq. 

183. /wearing:] swearing. Steev. Varr. 
Knt, Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 

184. done’t, you] done’t you Cam. 

you lye] you'll lie Ingl. 

185. do’ft] F;F,. doft F.. 

186. Thou’ fi] Thou hast Cap. Varr. 
Mal. Rann, Steev. Varr. Knt. 

187. Ile] F2. le F;. VUE, I will 
Cap. Varr. Ran, Steev. 
188. her] Om. Cap. 
Errata.) . 

meale:| meal! Theob. et seq. 


(Corrected in 


171. Worthy her pressing] CAPELL: ‘Her’ is most improperly alter’d to the 
in all modern editions; defacing a very delicate complement to put in one that is 
gross. [Collier’s MS. has the, and Collier remarks that ‘Iachimo can scarcely mean 
that it was worthy Imogen’s pressing.’ Why not? It is, I think, exactly what he 
does mean. ‘THISELTON: defends ‘her,’ and suggests rightly, as I think, that it 
refers to the mole as ‘worthy’ to be pressed by Imogen’s breast. Iachimo’s admira- 
tion of the mole may then be, possibly, a reminiscence of Boccaccio’s story, where 
Ambroginolo detects a mole under the left breast, ‘about which were sundry little 
hairs as red as gold.’—Eb.] 

188. Limb-meale] Brapiey (N. E. D.): Old English limmdelum. Limb from 
limb, limb by limb. 


164 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT II, SC. iv. 


I will go there and doo’t, i’th’Court, before 

Her Father. Ie do fomething. Exit. 190 
Phil, Quite befides . 

The gouernment of Patience. You haue wonne : 

Let’s follow him, and peruert the prefent wrath 

He hath againft himfelfe. 


Tach. With all my heart. Exeunt. 195 
189. doo’t, i’th’] F. dot ith’ F;. Cap. something— Rowe et cet. 
do’t ith’ F,, Rowe,+. do’t; i’the Cap. 191, 192. befides The] befides. The 
et cet. Ff. 
Court], court; Cap. et cet. 192. Patience.] patience! Pope et 
190. Father.| Ff, Coll. father— seq. 
Rowe,+. father: Cap. et cet. 193. peruert| prevent Heath, Mason. 


fomething.| Ff. something: divert Cap. conj., Jervis. 


190. Ile do something] Compare Lear: ‘I will have such revenges on you both, 
That all the world shall,—I will do such things,—What they are, yet I know not; 
but they shall be The terrors of the earth.’—II, iv, 283. 

193, 194. peruert the present wrath He hath against himselfe] CAPeLt: 
It seems as if the Poet, instead of ‘pervert,’ was about to write divert; but seeing 
instantly something unfit in it, put the former word down, giving it the sense of the 
latter MALONE: That is, turn his wrath to another course.—STEEVENS: To 
‘pervert,’ I believe, only signifies to avert his wrath from himself, without any idea 
of turning it to another person. To what other course it could have been diverted 
by the advice of Philario and Iachimo, Mr Malone has not informed us.—MALonE: 
If they turned the wrath he had against himself to patience or fortitude, they 
would turn it to another course; I had not said a word about turning it against 
any other person.—THISELTON: Posthumus’s wrath is not ‘against himself’ in the 
ordinary sense, but against Imogen. We must, therefore, either take ‘against 
himself’ as equivalent to contrary to his better nature or irrationally; or construe the 
phrase in close connection with ‘pervert,’—we must influence the wrath which is now 
his servant to desert his service. The former alternative seems to me the more _ 
natural. 

195. Exeunt] FLETCHER (p. 52): The truth is that Posthumus, under the 
first shock and provocation of this revolting encounter, behaves both modestly 
and patiently—‘as calm as virtue,’ according to Iachimo’s penitent admission. 
He does not propose the wager: it is forced upon him by the scoffs and taunts of the 
Italian; and is accepted at last with a view to punish them,—first, by the repulse 
which his addresses are sure to sustain,—secondly, by the loss of his property, — 
and thirdly, by the duel which is to follow. They who have so violently objected 
against the husband’s procedure on this occasion have judged of it according to the 
cool, calculating habits of feeling belonging to the modern time,—ignorant of or 
overlooking the real character of that chivalric love, that truly religious faith and 
devotion of the heart, which Shakespeare found it here his business to paint. 
Iachimo, in his repentance, gives the right version of the matter,—for, according 
to the code of chivalry, so far from its being regarded as an insult and profanation 
on the husband’s part, to permit such an experiment to be made upon the con- 
stancy of his wife, it was looked upon as the highest proof of his confidence in her 


ACT It, Sc, iv. ] CYMBELINE 165 


Enter Pofthumus. 196 

Pot. Is there no way for Men to be, but Women 
Muft be halfe-workers? We are all Baftards, 198 
196. Scene vil. Pope, Han. Warb. 198. We...Baftards,] We are bastards 
Johns. Scene v. Cap. et seq. The same. all, Pope,+, Steev. Var. ’03, 13. We... 
Another Room in the same. Cap. bastards; all: Cap. Walker. We are, all 
Enter] Re-enter Theob. Warb. of us, bastards; Ktly. Now we...bas- 

Johns. tards. Vaun. 


virtue, and, therefore, as the most decided homage he could pay to it; and the at- 
tempting seducer, in such a case, was afterwards to be called to account by the 
husband, not so much for the attempt itself, as for the disbelief in the lady’s fidelity 
which it implied. 

196. Enter Posthumus] In designating Scenes, Pope’s rule was, apparently, 
to consider that as a new Scene whenever change took place in the group of char- 
acters on the stage; and he numbered the Scenes accordingly. If any characters, 
or even if a single character, left the stage, straightway a new Scene was marked. 
If any character entered, the Scene was equally new and so numbered. Herein 
he was followed, apparently without thought, by Hanmer, WARBURTON, and 
JOHNSON. THEOBALD, in the same circumstances, marked a new Scene, but did 
not number it. Thus in the present instance Pope and his followers, just men- 
tioned, marked the entrance of Posthumus as Scene vii. THEOBALD marks no 
change, but merely reads: ‘Re-enter Posthumus.’ Eccies, who has changed the 
division even of the Acts, marks it as Act ITI, Scene ii. Caprti marks it as Scene 
v. and has been herein followed by all subsequent editors down to the present time; 
and all of them follow him substantially by adding: ‘Another Room in the same,’ 
[z. e., Philario’s House]. It is all a matter of trifling moment, yet I cannot but think 
that by deserting the Folio, and marking a new Scene in another apartment, we lose 
a fleeting glimpse into the depths of Posthumus’s misery. He has dashed from the 
shot of triumphant eyes, and wandered aimlessly and unconsciously from room to 
room, until he again finds himself alone in the apartment, now deserted, from which 
he had flung himself, and can at last unpack his heart.—Ep. 

197. Is there no way, etc.] FLETCHER: Here we must observe how seriously 
the acting play is mutilated by entirely omitting this soliloquy of Posthumus. 
Shakespeare’s dramatic purpose in it is evident and essential: to lay clearly open to 
us that stormy desolation, those volcanic heavings of a noble heart, our full con- 
ception of which can alone make us tolerate the purpose of sanguinary vengeance 
which is to be formed and pursued by his hero. [I must reluctantly disagree. 
This soliloquy is, I think, only for the closet, and, possibly, of doubtful propriety 
even there —Ep.]—V. FRIESEN (iii, 475): After an experience such as Posthumus 
has just undergone this wonderfully beautiful monologue is in entire harmony 
with the state of a noble mind enraged to the very highest degree. It is the mood 
in which the very noblest dispositions are most violently and irresistably impelled 
to inhuman resolutions. 

198. halfe-workers] For similar sentiments STEEVENS refers to Paradise Lost, 
Bk x, [888-895]; Euripides, Hippolytus, [616-626, ed. Dindorf]; Rodomont’s invec- 
tive against women, Orlando Furioso, Bk xxvii, stanzas 96, 97. 

198. Bastards] Murray (N. £. D.): Bast, subs”, adopted from old French 
bast, packsaddle (used as a bed by muleteers in the inns), in phrases fils (homme, 


166 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Acr 11, 8C. iv. 


And that moft venerable man, which I 

Did call my Father, was, I know not where 

When I was ftampt. Some Coyner with his Tooles 
Made me a counterfeit : yet my Mother feem’d 

The Dian of that time : fo doth my Wife 

The Non-pareill of this. Oh Vengeance, Vengeance! 
Me of my lawfull pleafure fhe reftrain’d, 205 
And pray’d me oft forbearance : didit with 

A pudencie fo Rofie, the fweet view on’t 

Might well haue warm’d olde Saturne ; 

That I thought her 

As Chafte as vn-Sunn’d Snow. Oh, all the Diuels! 210 
This yellow Zachimo in an houre, was’t not ? 

Or leffe; at firtt? Perchance he fpoke not, but 

Like a full Acorn’d Boare,a Iarmen on, 

Cry’de oh, and mounted ; found no oppofition 214 


200 


200. Did] Dih F-. 

201. flampt.] stamped; Coll. 
Cap. et seq. 

204. this.| this— Rowe,+. 

206. me oft] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Var. ’73, Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. me, 
oft, Theob. et cet. 

206-208. forbearance: did...Saturne;] 
forbearance, (did...Saturn), Vaun. 

208. Saturne;] Saturn— Rowe,+. 

208, 209. Might...her| One line Pope 
et seq. 

211. houre, was’t not?| hour—was ’t 
not?— Rowe et seq. (subs.) 

212. leffe; at firft?] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb.  less—at first? 
Johns. Varr. Mal. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 


stampt; 


less: at first: Cap. less?—at first: Coll. 
ii. less?—at first— Ktly. less?)—at 
first, Ingl. less,—at first: Ran et seq. 

212. he| Om. F;F,, Rowe. 

213. full Acorn’d] full-acorn’d Pope, 
Theob. ii. et seq. 

a Iarmen on] F2. a Jarmen on 
FjF;,. a-churning on Pope, Warb. 
a foaming one Coll. ii, iii. (MS.). 
a briming one Sing. a Iachimo Herr. 
a human one Phin. alarum’d on or 
alarum on Thiselton. a@ German one 
Rowe et cet. 

214. Cry’de oh,| F2. Cry’d oh, F3Fy, 
Rowe. cry’d, oh, Cap. Cried ‘Ol! 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. Cry’d oh! Pope et 
cet. 


etc.), de bast, literally ‘packsaddle child,’ as opposed to a child of the marriage bed. 
BastarD, adopted from Old French bastard, modern bétard, equivalent to fils de 
bast, ‘packsaddle child,’ formed on bast + the pejorative suffix -ard. 

201. stampt] MaLonE: We have again the same image in Meas. for Meas., II, 
iv, 44-46. 

213. a Iarmen on] Dyce (Strict., p. 16): Since The Sec. Part of Henry IV: II, i, 
the Quarto of 1600 has ‘the Jarman [i.e., German] hunting in water-worke,’ etc., I 
am perfectly convinced that ‘a Iarman on’ is (as Rowe saw) the old spelling for ‘a 
German one.’—Dowpen: I am not at all sure that ‘Iarman’ does not here mean 
german, germane. ‘Jarman’ is an obsolete form of german (occurring, for ex- 
ample, in Hamlet, Qz), and several early examples of german, meaning genuine, 


true, thorough, are cited in the V. E. D.; ‘a german one’ may thus mean a genuine 
one. 


Acreit, SC. iy. ] CYMBELINE 167 


But what he look’d for, fhould oppofe, and fhe 215 
Should from encounter guard. Could I finde out 

The Womans part in me, for there’s no motion 

That tends to vice in man, but I affirme 

It is the Womans part: be it Lying, note it, 

The womans : Flattering, hers ; Deceiuing, hers : 220 
Luft, and ranke thoughts, hers, hers : Reuenges hers : 
Ambitions, Couetings, change of Prides, Difdaine, 


Nice-longing, Slanders, Mutability ; 223 

215. Bui] From Han. Warb. 221. Lujt...Reuenges hers} Om. Var. 
for, fhould| for should Pope et ’03, 713, ’21 (misprint?). 

seq. 223. Nice-longing] Fi, Rowe. nice- 
217. me,] me— Pope,+. me/ Johns. longings Pope. nice longing Cap. Dyce, 

et seq. Glo. Cam. nice longings Theob. et cet. 
219. be it] be’t Pope,+, Varr. Mal. Mutability;| mutability, Cap. et 

Ran, Dyce ii, iii. seq. 


216, 217. Could I finde out The Womans part in me] It is interesting, I 
think, to note passages wherein we, native born to Shakespeare’s tongue, perceive 
no difficulty whatsoever, which, nevertheless, present to foreigners an almost in- 
soluble obscurity. Certainly the proficiency, as an English scholar, is undoubted, 
of Herzberg, who was among the very earliest to announce the chronological value 
of the rhyme test, etc., and yet Herzberg acknowledges that in its present con- 
nection he cannot understand this sentence. ‘Perhaps,’ he says, ‘ Posthumus means 
to say: “If I could only bring myself to be just as faithless and wanton as Imogen!’’’ 
And then, after quoting Schmidt’s correct paraphrase, namely, ‘if I could only 
find out what in me comes from woman that I might tear it out and cast it from 
me,’ Herzberg adds ‘non liquet.’-—Eb. 

222. change of Prides] WuiTeE (ed.i.): Here ‘change’ is used as in Cor., II, i, 
214: ‘I have received not only greetings, But with them change of honours.’ In 
both cases it clearly means variety, severalty, as in the phrase ‘changes of raiment.’ 
{I am not sure that the quotation from Coriolanus is exactly parallel with the 
present passage. Coriolanus means, I think, that the Senate has sent him not only 
salutations, but exchanged his present honours for higher ones. Nor does ‘changes 
of raiment’ exactly correspond to ‘change of prides,’ which means, I think, merely 
to change without reason from one kind of pride, whatever it may be, to another. 
IncLEBY says that ‘prides’ are ‘sumptuous dresses,’ and a passage quoted by 
DowveEN from Henry VITT: I, i, 25, seems to bear him out: ‘the madams’ almost 
‘sweat to bear The pride upon them,’ that is, says Dowden, ‘proud attire,’ but it 
may, equally well, mean gold and jewels. Scammut (Lex.) well paraphrases the 
present passage: ‘That is, one excess is changed for another.’—Ep.] 

223. Nice-longing] Murray (JN. E. D., s. v. Nice): The precise development 
of the very divergent senses which this word acquired in English is not altogether 
clear. In many examples from the 16th to 17th centuries it is difficult to say in 
what particular sense the writer intended it to be taken. [‘Nice’ in the present 
passage has been defined by various editors as fanciful, whimsical, capricious, 
squeamish, fastidious; but not one of these adjectives indicates a fault worthy of 
Hell’s knowledge. Something is required more vigorous than these. It is found, I 


168 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[AcT II, SC. iv. 


All Faults that name, nay, that Hell knowes, 

Why hers, in part, or all: but rather all For euen to Vice 9225 
They are not conftant, but are changing full ; 

One Vice, but of a minute old, for one 

Not halfe fo old as that. Ile write againft them, 

Deteft them, curfe them : yet ’tis greater Skill 

In a true Hate, to pray they haue their will : 230 


The very Diuels cannot plague them better. 


224, 225. All...hers,] One line Mal. 

224. that name,| Mal. that have a 
name, Dyce conj., Ingl. that man 
Daniel. that man can name or that man 
may name Walker (Crit., ii, 258). that 
men do name Ktly. that have that name 
Nicholson (N. & Q., VI, v, 424). that 
name may name Vaun. that may be 
named Ff et cet. 

225. all For] all. For Ff, Rowe, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. all—for Pope, 


Exit. 


Han. all In every part by turns, for 
Vaun. all: For Cap. et cet. 

225. For...Vice] One line Cap. Varr. 
Ran. et seq. For...Vice to which they 
are so prone Ktly conj. 

226, 227. ftill; One] still One Johns. 
Var. ’78 et seq. 

229. curfe them:] curse them— Rowe, 


+. curse them;— Johns. curse them. 
Coll. 


think, in Murray’s division 2, with the meaning ‘wanton, lascivious.’ The hyphen, 
possibly, indicates that ‘nice,’ whatever be its meaning, enters so closely into 
‘longing’ as to become identified with it, and form one complex idea. There is a 
good illustration of this latter meaning of ‘nice’ in Love’s Labor Lost: ‘These are 
humours; these betray nice wenches, that would be betrayed without them, —III, 
i, 24.—Eb.] 

229. Detest them] WALKER (C7it., ii, 311): In the writers of that age ‘detest’ 
is used in the sense which as then it still retained from its original, detestari, being 
indicative of something spoken, not of an affection of the mind; compare attest, 
protest, which still retain their etymological meaning. So understand [the present 
passage. See Ant. & Cleop., IV, xiv, 69, 70 (of this ed.), where the NV. E. D. is quoted 
to prove that Walker’s observation is a little too restricted.—Ep.] 

230. In a true Hate, to pray they haue their will]. SreeveNs: So in Sir 
Thomas More’s Comfort against Tribulation: ‘God could not lightly do a man more 
vengeance, than in this world to grant him his own foolish wishes.’ [Do we not all 
remember Pope’s ‘Atossa, cursed with every granted prayer’?—Ep.] 

231. The very Diuels ... better] DANreL (p. 86): Qy. is this last line the 
cynical note of some reader of the MS. play, accidentally foisted into the text? 
The sense and sentence are complete without it, and the speech should surely end 


with the rhyming couplet. [Oxen and wainropes cannot hale me to the belief that 
this line is Shakespeare’s.—Ep.] 


INCH 18, BE Ve] CYMBELINE 169 


Actus Tertius. Scena Prima. 


Enter in State, Cymbeline, Queene, Clotten, and Lords at 2 
1. Actus Tertius. Scena Prima.] 2. Enter in State...Lords] Enter... 
Act II, Scene rv. Eccles. Lords and others: Cymbeline takes 
Scene. A Palace. Rowe. A State his Throne; after which, enter Lucius... 
Room in Cymbeline’s Palace. Cap. Cap. 


1. Actus Tertius. Scena Prima] Inasmuch as in II, iii, 58, the arrival 
of the Ambassadors from Rome is announced, and Cymbeline bids Cloten attend 
the audience with them after he has said good morrow to Imogen, Ecctes trans- 
poses this present scene, Act ITI, sc. i, and numbers it Act II, sc. iv. This he does 
in order to give time to Iachimo to return to Rome, especially since on his arrival 
there, in answer to Philario’s question, his reply is that when he left the Roman 
ambassadors were expected at the British court, but had not yet arrived. ‘In the 
next scene,’ says Eccles [that is, in the next scene, after Imogen has discovered the 
loss of her bracelet], ‘we find Iachimo returned to Rome, and in the first scene of 
Act the third, according to the original arrangement, Lucius appears for the first 
time to be introduced into the presence of Cymbeline in his public character; now, 
as a considerable interval of time, perhaps not less than two or three weeks, at the 
least, must pass while Iachimo was performing his journey, the same portion of 
time must also intervene before Lucius is admitted to his public audience; notwith- 
standing that, as we have seen, Cymbeline speaks of this latter as a circumstance 
that was immediately to take place. In order then to remedy this obvious incon- 
sistency, I have transposed the scenes and placed Scene the First of Act the Third 
immediately after Scene the Third of Act the Second, as Scene the Fourth, and made it 
also conclude the Act. The scene in which Iachimo enters to Philario and Posthu- 
mus will be the beginning of the following act, and a pause left for the journey.’ 
It is hardly worth while to defend the original arrangement, or to show that Eccles 
was the victim of Shakespeare’s legerdemain when dealing with time, letting it 
run on hot-foot ahead of due sequence through exciting scenes, and then, while the 
hot blood is cooling, gently leads us back over the lost ground, until we find our- 
selves calmly resuming a thread which seems never to have been broken. Eccles’s 
rearrangement was unnoticed in his own day, much, apparently, to his surprise and 
chagrin. On page 118 he remarks that ‘Mr Garrick, or whoever adapted this play 
for representation,’ does not seem ‘to have attended to the necessity of the trans- 
position now adopted.’—Ep.—Daniet (p. 243): The time of this scene [Act III, 
sc. i] is so evidently that of Day No. 4, that I am compelled to place it here [in 
Day No. 5] within brackets, as has been done in other cases where scenes are out of 
their due order as regards time. 

2. Enter in State, Cymbeline, etc.] Boswerti-Stone: In the following 
passages Holinshed has given an untrustworthy account of Cymbeline, mixed 
with genuine information touching the circumstances of the Empire and Britain 
during the reign of Augustus: HotrnsHep (The Third Booke. The historie of 
England, p. 32, col. 2): Kymbeline or Cimbeline the sonne of Theomantius was of 
the Britains made king after the deceasse of his father, in the yeare of the world 
3944, after the building of Rome 728. and before the birth of our Sauiour 33. This 
man (as some write) was brought vp at Rome, and there made knight by Augustus 


170 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT Uf, SC. 1 


one doore, and at another , Caius, Lucius , 3 
and Attendants. 


Cym. Now fay, what would Augufius Ce/far with vs? 5 
Luc. When Julius Cefar (whofe remembrance yet 

Liues in mens eyes, and will to Eares and Tongues 

Be Theame, and hearing euer) was in this Britain, 8 


3. Caius, Lucius,] Caius Lucius, Rowe. 8. this] Om. Pope, Han 


Cesar, [see lines 77, 78, post.], vnder whome he serued in the warres, and was in such 
fauour with him, that he was at libertie to pay his tribute or not. . . . Touching 
the continuance of the yeares of Kymbelines reigne, some writers doo varie, but the 
best approoued affirme, that he reigned 35 years and then died, & was buried at 
London, leauing behind him two sonnes, Guiderius and Aruiragus. 

But here is to be noted, that although our histories doo affirme, that as well this 
Kymbeline, as also his father Theomantius liued in quiet with the Romans, and 
continuallie to them paied the tributes which the Britains had couenanted with 
Julius Cesar to pay, yet we find in the Romane writers, that after Julius Cesars 
death, when Augustus had taken vpon him the rule of the empire, the Britains 
refused to paie that tribute; whereat as Cornelius Tacitus reporteth, Augustus 
(being otherwise occupied) was contented to winke; howbeit, through earnest 
calling vpon to recouer his right by such as were desirous to see the vttermost of 
the British kingdome; at length, to wit, in the tenth yeare after the death of Julius 
Cesar, which was about the thirteenth yeare of the said Theomantius, Augustus 
made prouision to passe with an armie ouer into Britaine, & was come forward 
vpon his iournie into Gallia Celtica; or as we maie saie, into these hither parts of 
France. 

5. Now say... with vs] STEEVENS: So the first line of King John: ‘Now, 
say, Chatillon, what would France with us?’ 

6. Luc. When Iulius Czsar, etc.] For this hostile embassy, and demand 
for the tribute, ‘lately left vntender’d,’ Shakespeare has no authority, nor did he, 
probably, care for any. Boswell-Stone’s thorough sifting of Holinshed discovered, 
in the Historie of Scotland (p. 45), a statement that ‘there came vnto Kimbaline 
king of the Britains an ambassador from Augustus’; his mission, however, so far 
from being a demand for the arrears of tribute, was one of thanks for having kept 
his allegiance to Rome. It was Cymbeline’s son, Guiderius, who, ‘being a man 
of stout courage,’ according to Holinshed (Hist. Eng., i, 33), refused to pay this 
tribute.—Eb. 

7,8. Liues in mens eyes... hearing euer] VAUGHAN (p. 415): That is, 
the remembrance of whom now consists in the memory of something actually 
seen, and will consist hereafter and for ever in the memory of something spoken of 
and ‘heard.’ [Vaughan speaks of ‘the inversion of the due order of words “theme 
and hearing,” which would correctly be “hearing and theme.”’ There is here no 
inversion of the due order, it is exactly in accordance with the use and wont not 
only of Shakespeare, but of many a writer in English, Greek, and Latin. It is 
simply an instance of what Corson named ‘respective construction,’ a happier name 
than the pedantic, chiasm, although the latter expresses the construction somewhat 
more vividly; for instance, let ‘Ears and Tongues’ be written above ‘Theame and 


AGTEITT ESC lel CYMBELINE 171 


And Conquer’d it, Cafidulan thine Vnkle 

(Famous in C@/ars prayfes, no whit leffe 10 
Then in his Feats deferuing it) for him, 

And his Succeffion, granted Rome a Tribute, 

Yeerely three thoufand pounds ; which (by thee) lately 

Is left vntender’d. 


Qu. And to kill the meruaile, 15 
Shall be fo euer. 

Clot. There be many Ce/ars, 17, 

9, 37, 47- Caflibulan] Caffibelan Ff 14. wntender’d.] untender’d— Ingl. 
et seq. ; 15. Rill] fill Lloyd ap. Cam. 

11. it) for] it for Rowe. it, for Johns. meruaile] mervaile F,. mervail F;. 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. (subs.) it,) for Mal. marvail Fy, Rowe,+. marvel Johns. 
Steev. Varr. Knt. et seq. 


hearing,’ and lines joining ‘ears’ and ‘hearing’ and ‘Tongues’ and ‘Theame’ will 
form the Greek letter Chi. Instances of this construction abound in Shakespeare. 
It occurs in II, iv, 75, 76, where Posthumus says, ‘The foule opinion . . . gains or 
looses Your sword or mine,’ 7. e., gains my sword or loses yours. And Vaughan made 
there the same mistake and suggested that the order was inverted.—Eb.] 

9. Cassibulan thine Vnkle] See I, i, 42. 

Io. no whit lesse] DowpEn: Did Shakespeare err, as elsewhere, in using the 
word ‘less’ with a negative, and does the sense require ‘more’? Or does Lucius 
mean that Cassibelan was not only deserving of praise but also received praise equal 
to his merits? [Or, may it not mean, that exalted as were Cesar’s praises, Cassi- 
belan’s deeds were in no way inferior to the praises he deservedly received? which 
is hardly different from Dowden’s alternative. In paraphrases it is generally 
fortunate that we have the original at hand to elucidate them.—Eb.] 

13. three thousand pounds] VERPLANCK: The computation of the amounts of 
plunder, tribute, wealth of conquered kings, etc., not in Roman sesterces, or the 
foreign money of account, but in pounds of gold or silver, is of such frequent occur- 
rence in ancient writers, that it is not ascribing any great Jearning or antiquarian 
accuracy to Shakespeare, who was well read in the translations at least of several 
of the classics, to understand him here, just as we should Knowles or Miss Baillie, 
in any similar case, as speaking not of pounds sterling, but of pounds weight of 
coin, as a Roman would have estimated the tribute-money of a subject foreign’ 
prince. 

14. Is left vntender’d] BoswELL-STONE (p. 9): This pretension to tribute arose 
when Cesar, after defeating Cassibelan, blockaded the residue of the British levies, 
so that—[Hol. i. H. E. 30]}—‘Cassibelane in the end was forced to fall to a com- 
position, in couenanting to paie a yearlie tribute of three thousand pounds.’ 

ts. to kill the meruaile] DowpeEn: The idea is that wonder [‘astonishment,’ 
Schmidt, Lex.] at the unpaid tribute will cease when the non-payment has estab- 
lished itself as the constant rule. 

17. There be many Czsars] Warspurton (MS. NV. & Qu, VII, iii, 263): 
Read: There’ll be—there will be (for there was but one yet come when Cloten made 
this answer). 


172 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[scr IT, SC. 4. 


Ere fuch another /a/izs : Britaine’s a world 18 
By it felfe, and we will nothing pay 


For wearing our owne Nofes. 
Qu. That opportunity 


20 


Which then they had to take from’s, to refume 

We haue againe. Remember Sir, my Liege, 

The Kings your Anceftors, together with 

The naturall brauery of your Ifle, which ftands 25 


18. Tulius:] Julius. Var. ’73 et seq. 
Britaine’s| F.. Britain's F3F4, 

Rowe. Britain is Pope et seq. 

18, 19. a world...pay| One line Pope 
et seq. 

19. By it felfe] it self Pope, Han. 
by’t self Theob. Warb. Johns. Whole 
by itself Anon. ap. Cam. reading line 


22. from’s] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. from us Cap. et cet. 

23. Remember Sir,| F2 remember, 
Sir Pope, Han. remember, Sir, F3F, 
et cet. 

24. Anceftors,| Ff, Rowe, Var. 773, 
Coll. Ktly, Glo. Cam. ancestors; Pope 
et cet. 


18 as in F,. 


18, 19. Britaine’s a world By it selfe] To prove how general was this idea 
that Britain is a separate little world, THEOBALD quotes from Virgil: ‘et penitus 
toto divisos orbe Britanos.’—Edl., I, 67; [Holinshed, in his Description of Britaine, 
quotes this also]; from Florus (referring to Ceesar’s conquests): ‘et, quamvis toto 
orbe divisa, tamen, qui vinceret, habuit Britannia.’-—Epitome, III, cap. x.; from 
Claudian: ‘Hispana tibi Germanaque Tethys Paruit, et nostro diducta Britannia 
mundo.’—De Mallii Theodori Consulatu Panegris, line 50; from Horace: ‘Serves 
iturum Cesarem in ultimos Orbis Britannos.—Carminum, I, xxxv. Theobald 
wisely concludes that, after all, Shakespeare might have had ‘none of these classical 
passages in view, but be alluding to what is recorded of Cassibelan in the Chron- 
icles. When Comius of Arras came to him with a message from Julius Cesar, in 
which homage and subjection and a Tribute were demanded, Cassibelan replied: 
“That the ambition of the Romans was insatiable, who would not suffer Britaine, 
a new world, placed by Nature in the Ocean, and beyond the bounds of their 
Empire, to lie unmolested.”’ [To quote a passage from ‘the Chronicles’ is ex- 
tremely vague; I have not succeeded in finding this valiant speech of Cassibelan’s 
in Holinshed, and, apparently, it has also escaped the keen sight of Boswell-Stone, 
who quotes several other extracts therefrom, which may have caught Shakespeare’s 
eye, all of them containing a panegyric of Britain’s splendid isolation.—Eb.] 

20. For wearing our owne Noses] That is, for being ourselves. 

21, etc. That opportunity, etc.] BoswreLt-SToNE (p. 12, foot-note): It is 
possible that before writing the Queen’s harangue,—the aim of which is to show 
how Casar’s prosperity deserted him in Britain,—Shakespeare glanced at Cesar’s 
remark upon the unforeseen lack of cavalry to pursue the retreating Britons, after 
the legionaries had effected their landing. ‘And this one thing seemed onelie to 
disappoint the luckie fortune that was accustomed to follow Cesar in all his other 
enterprises.’—Hol., i, Hist. Eng., 25. 

25. naturall brauery] That is, the naturall state of defiance. Anthony says: 


‘if Fortune be not ours today, it is Because we brave her.’—Ant. & Cleop., IV, 
iv, 4. 


ACTEIIT, SC. 15] CYMBELINE 173 


As Neptunes Parke, ribb’d, and pal’d in 26 
With Oakes vnskaleable, and roaring Waters, 

With Sands that will not beare your Enemies Boates, 

But fucke them vp to’th’Top-maft. A kinde of Conqueft 

C@/ar made heere, but made not heere his bragge 30 
Of Came, and Saw, and Ouer-came : with fhame 

(The firft that euer touch’d him) he was carried 


From off our Coaft, twice beaten : and his Shipping 33 
26. As...ribb’d and pal’d| Ff, Rowe i. cet. 
As the great...ribb’d and pal’d Cap. 28. Sands] Sand F,, Rowe, Pope, 
As...ribb’d...paled Coll. ii. As...ribbed Han. 
and paled Rowe ii. et cet. 30. Cefar] Cefars F,. 
27. Oakes] F.. Oaks F;F,, Rowe, 31. Ouer-came] Overcome F-. 
Pope, Theob. rocks Seward, Warb. et 33. beaten:] beaten? F,. 
25, 20. your Isle, which stands ...ribb’d, and pal’d in] IncrEsy (ed. i.) 


divided line 25 at ‘isle,’ and retained in line 26 the contracted ‘ribb’d’ and pal’d’ 
of the Folio. In the edition revised by Ingleby’s son, this division and reading are 
withdrawn, and the text follows that of Rowe ii. 

26. Parke] Murray (JN. EL. D.): In Law, a park is distinguished from a forest, 
or chase, by being enclosed. 

27. Oakes vnskaleable] In Hanmer’s edition, the first to amend ‘oakes’ 
to rocks, the emendation is attributed to Warburton. In Warburton’s edition, 
which followed Hanmer’s, the emendation is attributed to Hanmer—an instance 
of mysterious altruism highly creditable to each editor in these evil days. The solu- 
tion of the mystery is, however, that the emendation belonged to neither. It was 
communicated to Hanmer by SEWARD, who, in a note on Beaumont and Fletcher’s 
The Mad Lover, V, i, p. 281, remarks, in reference to the present line, that ‘oaks’ 
‘appeared very absurd, as the Britons were not then famed for large ships; I there- 
fore had the honour of communicating the emendation [rocks] to Sir Thomas 
{Hanmer], and find that the ingenious Mr Warburton concurred with me in it.’— 
DowbeEN asks, ‘Can any Elizabethan example be found of ‘‘oaks”’ used metaphor- 
ically for ships of war?’ As we have just seen, Seward uses it for ‘large ships’—but 
this was in 1740.—Ep.—PortTerR and CLarkE [retaining ‘oakes’]: The sea is made 
by the figure of speech here a Parke, and the rocks are made the fence of oaks that 
pale it in. To change one of the terms of the Poet’s metaphor is an unworthy prosing 
bit of editing that should no longer be retained. It is like substituting an explana- 
tory note for a part of the text. 

30, 31. his bragge Of came, and Saw, and Ouer-came] See As You Like It: 
‘“Cesars thrasonicall bragge of I came, saw, and ouercame.’—V, li, 35. 

32, 33. he was carried ...and his Shipping, etc.] BoswELL-STONE: 
‘The next day [this was on Czsar’s second expedition], as he had sent foorth such 
as should haue pursued the Britains, word came to him from Quintus Atrius, that 
his nauie by rigour of a sore and hideous tempest was greeuouslie molested, and 
throwne vpon the shore, so that the cabels and tackle being broken and destroied 
with the force of the vnmercifull rage of the wind, the maisters and mariners were 
not able to helpe the matter.’ —Holinshed, i, H. E., 28/2/2. 

33. twice beaten, etc.] Boswett-Stone: ‘Thus according to that which 


174 THE TRAGEDIZ- OF FacT 111, SC, 1. 


(Poore ignorant Baubles) on our terrible Seas 

Like Egge-fhels mou’d vpon their Surges, crack’d 35 
As eafily ’gainft our Rockes. For ioy whereof, 

The fam’d Caffibulan, who was once at point 

(Oh giglet Fortune) to mafter C¢/ars Sword, 


Made Luds- Towne with reioycing-Fires bright, 39 

34, 35. Seas ... Egge-fhels ... Surges,] Dyce ii, iii. giglot Mal. Steev. et cet. 
Seas...fhels,...Surges F2F3. Seas...sheels, 38. Fortune] fortune! Rowe et seq. 
Surges Fy — seas,...shells,...Surges, 39. Luds-Towne] Lud’s-Town F,. 
Rowe.  seas,...shells...surges, Pope et Luds Town Rowe ii. 


cet. reioycing-Fires] Ff, Rowe i, Ingl. 
38. giglet] Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. Varr. Dowden. rejoicing fires Rowe ii. et cet. 


Cesar himselfe and other autentike authors haue written, was Britaine made 
tributarie to the Romans by the conduct of the same Cesar. But our histor[iJes 
farre differ from this, affirming that Cesar comming the second time, was by the 
Britains with valiancie and martiall prowesse beaten and repelled, as he was at 
the first, and speciallie by meanes that Cassibellane had pight in the Thames great 
piles of trees piked with yron, through which his ships being entred the riuer, were 
perished and lost. And after his comming a land, he was vanquished in battell, 
and constrained to flee into Gallia with those ships that remained.’—Holinshed, i, 
H. E., 30/2/9. : 

34. ignorant] JOHNSON: That is, unacquainted with the nature of our boisterous 
seas. 

37, 38. once at point... to master Czsar’s Sword] BoswELit-STONE 
(p. 13): According to the Historia Britonum, Cesar actually lost his sword during 
the battle in which he met with the first of those defeats whereof the Queen reminds 
Caius Lucius. ‘The same Historie [Historia Britonum] also maketh mention of 
. . . Nenius brother to Cassibellane, who in fight happened to get Cesar’s swoord 
fastened in his shield by a blow which Czsar stroke at him.’—Holinshed, i, Hist. 
Eng., 27/1/40. The Queen’s expression, ‘at point to master Cesar’s sword?’ 
implies that his sword was nearly wrested from him by force, not caught by acci- 
dent; and she has, it will be observed, attributed to Cassibelan the honour of this 
partial success. Czsar’s sword was placed by Cassibelan in a sarcophagus, with 
the body of Nennius, who died fifteen days after the battle from a wound inflicted 
by this weapon. 

38. giglet] Murray (N. E. D.): Of obscure origin. a. A wanton woman. 
b. A giddy, laughing, romping girl. 

39. Luds-Towne] WALKER (Vers., 234, and also Crit., ii, 140): Such combi- 
nations as Lud’s Town (compare Newtown, &c.), Heaven’s Gate (compare Kirkgate, 
Ludgate, &c.), and others of the same kind are pronounced as if they were single 
words, with the accent on the first syllable. [See also ‘Lud’s Town,’ IV, ii, 135; 
V, v, 567. Also ‘Swannes-nest,’ III, iv, 158; and Heaven’s gate, II, iii, 22.]— 
Ho.tnsHep (Hist. of England, Bk III, p. 23): ‘After the decesse of the same 
Helie, his eldest son Lud began his reigne, in the yeere after the creation of the 
world 3805, after the building of the citie of Rome 679, before the comming of 
Christ 72, and before the Romanes entred Britaine 19 yeeres. This Lud proued 
a right worthie prince, ammending the lawes of the realme. . . . but speciallie he 
delited most to beautifie and inlarge with buildings the citie of Troinount which 


ACTAII, SC.ri. | CYMBELINE 175 


And Britaines ftrut with Courage. 40 
Clot, Come, there’s no more Tribute to be paid : our 

Kingdome is ftronger then it was at that time : and (as I 

faid) there is no mo fuch C@/ars, other of them may haue 

crook’d Nofes, but to owe fuch ftraite Armes, none. 
Cym. Son, let your Mother end, 45 
Clot. We haue yet many among vs, can gripe as hard 

as Ca/ffibulan, I doe not fay I am one: but I haue a hand. 

Why Tribute? Why fhould we pay Tribute? If Ce/ar 

can hide the Sun from vs with a Blanket,or put the Moon 

in his pocket, we will pay him Tribute for light: elfe Sir, 50 


40. Britaines| Britons Theob. ii. et Mal. Sta. Sing. Ktly, Cam. 


seq. ; 44. owe] own Pope, Theob. Warb. 
41. paid:| paid? F,. paid. Rowe,+, Johns. Var. 773, ’78. 
Coll. 46-51. Six lines of verse, ending: 


41-44. Five lines of verse, ending: hard...one:...pay Tribute?...Blanket,... 
paid:...time:...Cesars,...but...none. Ktly. Tribute...now. Kily. 

43. mo] moeGlo.Cam. more Ff et cet. 47. Caffibulan,| Caffibelan, Ff, 

44. crook’d] crooked Var. ’03, ’13,’21, Rowe, Pope. Cassibelan; Theob. et cet. 


he compassed with a strong wall made of lime and stone, . . . and in the west 
part of the same he erected a strong gate, which he commanded to be called after 
his name, Luds gate, and so vnto this daie it is called Ludgate, (s) onelie drowned 
in pronunciation of the word, . . . he builded for himselfe not farre from the 
said gate a fine palace, which is the bishop of Londons palace beside Paules at this 
daie, as some thinke. . . . By reason that King Lud so much esteemed that 
citie before all other of his realme, . . . and continuallie in manner remained 
there, the name was changed, so that it was called Caerlud, that is to saie, Luds 
towne: and after by corruption of speech it was named London.’ [This deriva- 
tion of London from Luds-town does not satisfy Richard Verstegan (whose English 
name was Richard Rowlands, according to the D. N. B., wherefrom we also learn 
that he was a scholar of note and an early student of Anglo-Saxon). In his Resti- 
tution of Decayed Intelligence (p. 134) he thus argues: ‘As touching the name of our 
most ancient chief and famous citie, it could neuer of Luds-lown take the name 
of London, because it had neuer anciently the name of Luds-town, neither could it, 
for that town is not a britifh, but a Saxon woord, but yf it took any appellation 
after king Lud it muft then haue bin called Caer-lud & not Luds-town, but con- 
fidering of how litle credit the relations of Geffrey of Monmouth are, who from Lud 
doth deryue it, it may rather bee thought that hee hath imagyned this name to 
haue come from king Lud because of some nearness of found, for our Saxon ances- 
ters hauing diuers ages before Geffrey was borne, called it by the name of London, 
he not knowing from whence it came, might ftraight imagin it to haue come from 
Lud & therefore ought to bee Caer-Lud, or Luds-town, as after him others called it, 
& fome alfo of the name of London, in britifh found made it L’hundain, both 
appellations as I am perfwaded, beeing of the britans, firft taken vp and vfed after 
the Saxons had giuen it the name of London.’—Eb.] 
50. Sir] Dowprn: Cloten addresses the King. 


176 ' THE TRAGEDIE OF 


no more Tribute, pray you now. 


Cym. You muft know, 


[ACT 111, SC: 1. 


51 


Till the iniurious Romans, did extort 


This Tribute from vs, we were free. 


Ce/ars Ambition, 


Which fwell’d fo much, that it did almoft ftretch 55 
The fides o’th’World, againft all colour heere, 

Did put the yoake vpon’s; which to fhake off 

Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon 


Our felues to be, we do. 


52. Cym.] Queen. Elze (p. 310). 
53. Romans,] F.F;. Roman Theob. 


ii, Warb. Johns. Varr. Ran. Romans 
F, et cet. 
54. Tribute] Om. Vaun. 
from vs] Om. Han.  from’s 


free.| Ff, Rowe,+. free: Cap. 
et seq. 
56. The fides] To th’ sides Daniel. 
o’th’| o’the Cap. et seq. 
colour heere,| F2. colour here, 
F;F,, Rowe. colour here Pope, Han. Glo. 
Cam. colour, here Theob. et cet. 
57. vpon’s] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. upon us Cap. et cet. 
58, 59. whom...Cefar,] Ff. whom we 
reckon Ourselves to be: we do. Say then 


Say then to C@/ar, 59 


Ran, Ecl. (which we reckon Our selves to 
be) to do. Say then to Cesar, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. such as we Reckon our- 
selves to be. Say then to Cesar, Han. 
which we reckon Ourselves to be. We do. 
Say then to Cesar, Johns. whom we 
reckon Ourselves to be. We do say, then, 
to Cesar, Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. 
i, Sing. Ktly, Wh. i, Ingl. ii. whom 
we reckon Ourselves to be. Clo. We do. 
Cym. Say then to Cesar, Coll, ii. iii. 
(MS.), Dyce, Wh. ii. whom we reckon 
Ourselves to be. Say then, we do, to 
Cesar. Sta. whom we reckon Ourselves 
to be. Clot. and Lords. We do. Cym. 
Say then to Cesar, Glo. Cam. whom 
we reckon Ourselves to be. We dol! 
say then to Cesar, Ingl. i. 


to Cesar, Rowe, Cap. Var. ’73, ’78, 85, 


53. iniurious] Murray (NV. E. D. 2.): Wilfully hurtful or offensive in language; 
contumelious, insulting. ‘Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune!’—Cor. 
III, iii, 69. [See ‘Thou iniurious Theefe,’ IV, ii, 117, post.] 

56. against all colour] Jonson: Without any pretence of right. 

58, 59. whom we reckon Our selues to be, we do. Say then] CoLiier 
(Notes, etc., p. 516): The clumsy contrivance of making Cymbeline use the 
expression [‘we do. Say then’] has proceeded from a blunder on the part of the 
copyist, who made one of Cloten’s impertinent interjections a portion of the 
speech of Cymbeline. This part of the dialogue in the MS. is divided as follows: 
Cymbeline ends,—‘ whom we reckon Ourselves to be. Cloten. We do. Cym. Say 
then, to Cesar,’ etc. This interruption by Cloten is most consistent with his 
character and conduct, and we have no doubt such was the mode in which the line 
was distributed, before the corruption crept into the early editions. [This note 
Collier repeated substantially in his edition, adding in conclusion that ‘it is quite 
in character for Cloten to interpose his “‘We do” just after Cymbeline has de- 
clared that the Britons reckon themselves to be a warlike people.’]}—Dvcer at 
once adopted this reading, and (what is remarkable) adhered to it through his 
three editions.—WuirE, in his Shakespeare’s Scholar, asserted that ‘there cannot 
be a doubt that this [Collier’s reading] is the proper distribution of the text.’ 
Six years later, in his ed. i, he pronounced it ‘very plausible,’ and added, ‘But the 


INGSE iL, SES Tk] CYMBELINE 177 


Our Anceftor was that Madmutius, which 60 


60. which] who Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 


emphatic form, “We do say,” etc., is specially appropriate here in the mouth of 
Cymbeline; and the original text cannot be safely disturbed. He ‘disturbed’ it, 
however, in his ed. ii, and silently adopted Collier’s reading —STauNTON ac- 
knowledged that the reading is ‘ingenious,’ ‘It is pleasant,’ he says, ‘and gener- 
ally safe to agree with Mr Dyce; but we cannot help thinking the words in question 
[“We do”] belong to the King’s speech, but were transposed through the negli- 
gence of transcriber or compositor.’ Staunton’s own reading, which differs from 
all others (see Text. Notes), Dyce condemned as ‘not happy.’ The CAMBRIDGE 
Eprrors, in the Globe edition, to justify, I suppose, the plural ‘we,’ give the ex- 
clamation ‘We do’ to ‘Cloten and Lords.’-—W. W. Lioyp (NV. & Qu., VII, ii, 24, 
1886), after reviewing the various readings, says, ‘It is agreeable for once to get 
back to the dear corrupt old Folio, and find that the editors might have spared 
themselves their trouble in tinkering. The phrase, “Whom we reckon ourselves 
to be, we do,” is but a form of emphatic pleonasm, which continues familiar enough 
colloquially. This I believe to be the true explanation, I do; the critics mistake if 
they think otherwise, they do; though I am well aware that they reckon themselves 
sometimes infallible, they do.’ This light and airy treatment of the question 
did not please Dr Br. Nicwotson, who (NV. & Qu., VII, ii, 164) replied, ‘Quite 
allowing that we do may be taken as a pleonasm, I would say that it is a horribly 
sounding one, and an unpleasant vulgarism. One can, I think, be safely challenged 
to find such a phrasing in any classic of that day, or even in any cultivated writer. 
Can Mr Watkiss Lloyd read over his imitations of this would-be pleonasm without 
first, laughter, and then the feeling that it is unaccustomed and strange English? 
Dr Johnson’s change of the comma to a period has, I take it, this effect,—it makes 
“we do” equivalent to ‘we do [shake off the yoke]” (line 57). This it is clear 
gives excellent sense; but I must say that—perhaps from being more accustomed 
to it—I prefer Malone’s “we do say.’”’’ Nicholson’s challenge is far-sweeping 
and bestirs the memory. Dickens may not be a classic, but he can bardly be 
called an uncultivated writer, and, I think, on one occasion, in Pickwick, Master 
Tommy Bardell says, ‘I’m going too, I am!’ 

As for the reading of Collier’s MS. annotator,—it seems judicious; it breaks a 
long monologue, and is possibly in harmony with a new and unexpected phase 
of Cloten’s character. More compunction might be felt in deserting the Folio if 
there were traces of Shakespeare’s hand in the scene, which barely rises, if at all, 
above mediocrity,—so it seems to me.—EpD. 

60. Mulmutius] BoswELL-STONE (p. 14): Among the great deeds of Mulmutius 
there are recorded: ‘He also made manie good lawes, which were long after vsed, 
called Mulmucius lawes, turned out of the British speech into Latine by Gildas 
Priscus, and long after translated out of latine into english by Alfred King of 
England, and mingled in his statues. . . . After he had established his land, and 
set his Britains in good and conuenient order, he ordeined him by the aduise of his 
lords a crowne of gold, & caused himselfe with great solemnitie to be crowned, 
according to the custom of the pagan lawes then in vse: & bicause he was the first 
that bare a crowne heere in Britaine, after the opinion of some writers, he is named 
the first King of Britaine, and all the other before rehearsed are named rulers, 
dukes, or gouernors.’—Holinshed, i, Hist. of Eng., 15/2/34. 


I2 


178 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. i. 


Ordain’d our Lawes, whofe vfe the Sword of C@/ar 61 
Hath too much mangled ; whofe repayre, and franchife, 
Shall (by the power we hold) be our good deed, 
Tho Rome be therfore angry . Mulmutius made our lawes 
Who was the firft of Britaine, which did put 65 
His browes within a golden Crowne, and call’d 
Himfelfe a King. 
Luc. Yam forry Cymbeline, 
That I am to pronounce Augu/lus Ce/ar 
(Ce/ar, that hath moe Kings his Seruants, then 70 
Thy felfe Domefticke Officers) thine Enemy : 
Receyue it from me then, Warre, and Confufion 
In Ce/ars name pronounce I ’ gainft thee : Looke 
For fury, not to be resifted. Thus defide, 
I thanke thee for my felfe. 75 


61. Lawes,] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. Laws; Cap. et cet. 

61-64. whofe v/e...angry| In paren- 
theses, Steev. Varr. Knt. 

63. Shall (by...hold)] Ff. Shall by... 
hold Rowe, Pope. shall, by...hold, 
Theob. et seq. 

64. Mulmutius.../Jawes] That Mal- 
mutius Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Malmutius Steev. Var. ’03, 713. 


69. Auguftus] Auguctus F,. 

70, 71. (Cefar... Officers)] Czesar ... 
officers, Rowe, Johns. 

70. moe] Cam. more Ff et cet. 

71. Enemy:] Enemy? F.. Enemy. 
F3F,, Rowe,+, Coll. 

72. then.] then: Cap. et seq. 

Warre, and Confufion] Fi, Rowe. 

War and confusion Pope,+, Dyce, Glo. 
Cam. War, and confusion, Cap. et cet. 

74. to be] Om. Vaun. 


64. made our lawes| STEEVENS: I have not scrupled to drop these words; nor 
can suppose our readers will discover that the omission has created the smallest 
chasm in our author’s sense or measure. The length of the parenthetical words 
(which were not then considered as such, or enclosed, as at present, [see Text. 
Notes.], in a parenthesis) was the source of the interpolation. Read the passage 
without them, and the whole is clear: ‘Mulmutius, who was the first of Britain,’ 
etc.—KwnicuT’s patience gives out occasionally over the freedom with which 
Steevens deals with Shakespeare’s text; ‘he walks amidst the luxurious growth of 
Shakespeare’s versification,’ says Knight, ‘like a gardener who has predetermined 
to have no shoot above ten inches long in the whole parterre.’ ‘Is it not evident 
that the oratorical construction of the sentence requires this repetition, after the 
long parenthesis which occurs after the first mention of Malmutius? The skill 
of Shakespeare is shown in repeating the idea, without repeating precisely the 
same words; of which skill’ there is a ‘signal example’ in Love’s Lab. Lost: ‘For 
when would you my Lord, or you, or you,’ etc., IV, iii, 316. [This line is repeated 
as line 339; it is an unfortunate reference for Knight; it is not a repetition of ‘the 
idea without repeating the same words,’ it is a repetition of the identical words.}— 
STAUNTON: This, with the next three lines, was perhaps either a portion of the 
old play upon which Shakespeare founded his ‘Cymbeline,’ or of his own first 
sketch, and were intended to be superseded by the previous clause, [line 60]. 


ACT IM, SC. i.] CYMBELINE 179 


Cym. Thou art welcome Caius, ; 76 
Thy Ce/ar Knighted me ; my youth I fpent 
Much vnder him ; of him, I gather’d Honour, 
Which he, to feeke of me againe, perforce, 
Behooues me keepe at vtterance, I am perfect, 80 
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians, for 


76. Thou art] Thowrt Pope,+, Dyce Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. as he seeks Han. 


ii, iii. him to seek Eccles conj. whoso seek 
Caius,] Caius; Theob.+. Caius. Vaun. 
Cap. et seq. 80. keepe] keep’t Han. 
79. he, to feeke] he to seek Pope,+, viterance] variance Pope. 


77, 78. Thy Czsar Knighted me, etc.] See Holinshed, ITI, i, 2. 

80. at vtterance] THEOBALD: Holinshed tells us that at the Coronation of 
Richard III, Sir Robert Dimock, the Champion, made proclamation: ‘Whoever 
shall say that King Richard is not lawful King, I will fight with him at the utter- 
ance,’ 7. e., to the hazard of death.—STEEVENS: That is, to keep at the extremity 
of defiance.—MALONE: So in Macbeth: ‘come, fate, into the list, And champion 
me to the utterance.’—II], i, 72.—WuirteE (ed. i.): That is, he attempting to take 
away by force the honor which he gave me, it behooves me to keep it to the utter- 
most.—Hupson: A very elliptical passage. The meaning appears to be, ‘Of him 
I gather’d honour; which, he being now about to force it away from me, J am 
bound to maintain to the last extremity.’ ‘At utterance’ is to the uttermost defiance. 
[To this unanimity of interpretation, Ingleby, among editors, offers the only excep- 
tion in the following note: ‘‘‘at utterance” — ready to be put out, or staked, like 
money at interest, and, therefore, ready to be championed and fought for. Cf. 
A Poste with a Packet of Mad Letters, Book II, No. 43.—Nicholas Breton, 1637 
(Grosart, IT, p. 45): “‘Usurers are halfe mad for lack of utterance of their money.” 
The phrase, which admits of no doubt, has been confounded by Steevens and Malone 
with a very different “epithet of war,” viz., “to the utterance,” which is a transla- 
tion of the French @ outrance.’ This note is, unhappily, too brief. Had the critic 
only explained one or two points, he might have gained adherents. It would be 
well to know how money at interest can be more readily fought for than money 
in bank. Again, the similarity is not quite clear between a usurer half mad because 
his money is not in circulation and a knight who had gathered honour which it be- 
hooved him to keep. In truth, it seems that it is Ingleby, and not ‘Steevens and 
Malone,’ who has misinterpreted the phrase. Breton is not needed as an authority; 
at this day we speak of ‘uttering counterfeit money,’ and a man is condemned for 
its ‘utterance.’-—Ep.}—Under ‘utterance,’ WHITNEY (Cent. Dict.) gives the defini- 
tion: ‘A putting forth, disposal by sale or otherwise, circulation. ‘What of our 
commodities have most vtterance there, and what prices will be given for them?” 
—Hakluyt, Voyages, i, 300. ‘But the English have so ill utterance for their warm 
clothes in these hot countries.’”—Sandys, Travailles, p. 95.’ Here we have ‘utter- 
ance’ whereto the quotation from Breton is appropriate, but in this connection 
I doubt that ‘at utterance’ can ever have been used.—ED.] 

80. I am perfect] Staunton: That is, I am well assured. 

81. Pannonians and Dalmatians] THEOBALD: This circumstance is 
again repeated by a Roman Senator, in this Act, Sc. viii, line 5. From this par- 


180 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Ac 11, Sc. i. 


Their Liberties are now in Armes : a Prefident 82 
Which not to reade, would fhew the Britaines cold : 
So Ce/ar thall not finde them. 
Luc. Let proofe fpeake. 85 
Cot. His Maiefty biddes you welcome. Make pa- 
82. Prefideni] Precedent F, et seq. 86-91. Seven lines of verse, ending: 
83. Britaines] F.. Britains F;F,, with vs...seek vs...finde vs...beate vs...fall 


Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, Cap. Britons in...you...end. Ktly. 
Theob. ii. et cet. 


ticularity we may precisely fix the suppos’d date of this War on Britaine, for the 
recovery of tribute in arrear to Rome; and, at one view, see how our Author has 
jumbled facts against the known tenour of Chronology. In the tenth year after 
the assassination of Julius Cesar (Anno U. C. 719) Augustus had a design of mak- 
ing a descent on Britaine: but was diverted from it by an insurrection of the Pan- 
nonians and Dalmatians, in order to shake off their subjection to Rome. Now this 
period of time was coincident with the 13th year of Tenantius’s reign, who was the 
father of Cymbeline: and Tenantius reign’d 9 years after this. Again, we find, from 
the very opening of our play, that Cymbeline had been at least 23 years on the 
throne: for it was twenty years since his two sons were stoln, and the eldest of 
them then was at least 3 years old. Now the 23rd year of Cymbeline falls in with 
the 42nd of Augustus, the very year in which Christ was born. So that our Author 
has confusedly blended facts at 32 years distance from each other. Whether he was 
aware of, or neglected, this discordance in time, it has contributed to another 
absurdity. It is said more than once in our play, ‘That the remembrance of the 
Romans is yet fresh in the Britains’ Grief,’ 7. ¢., that they still felt the smart of their 
overthrow. Now Julius Caesar subdued Britaine, 11 years before his assassination, 
in the year of Rome 698. This war on Cymbeline cannot be before the 42nd year 
of Augustus: (U. C. 751) so that here is an interval of 53 years, a time sufficient to 
erase the memory of the most dreadful enemy; especially in a people who are boast- 
ing of the strength they have acquir’d since their defeat—Ho.msuep (Third 
Booke, the historte of England, p. 32): But here receiuing aduertisements that the 
Pannonians, which inhabited the countrie now called Hungarie, and the Dalmatians 
whome now we call Saluons had rebelled, he thought it best first to subdue those 
rebells neere home, rather than to seeke new countries, and leaue such in hazard 
whereof he had present possession, and so turning his power against the Pannonians 
and Dalmatians, he left off for a time the warres of Britain,—whereby the land 
remained without feare of anie inuasion to be made by the Romans, till the yeare 
after the building of the citie of Rome 725, and about the 19 yeare of King Theo- 
mantius reigne, that Augustus with an armie departed once againe from Rome to 
pass ouer into Britaine, there to make warre. . . . But whether this controuersie 
which appeareth to fall forth betwixt the Britains and Augustus, was occasioned by 
Kymbeline, or some other prince of the Britains, I haue not to auouch: for that by 
our writers it is reported, that Kymbeline being brought vp in Rome, & knighted 
in the court of Augustus, euer shewed himselfe a friend to the Romans, & chieflie 
was loth to breake with them, because the youth of the Britaine nation should not 
be depriued of the benefit to be trained and brought vp among the Romans, whereby 


they might learne both to behaue themselues like ciuill men, and to atteine to the 
knowledge of the feats of warre. 


NCI 106, GOr stil] CYMBELINE 181 


{time with vs, a day or two, or longer : if you feek vs af- 87 
terwards in other tearmes, you fhall finde vs in our Salt- 
water-Girdle : if you beate vs out of it, it is yours: if you 


fall in the aduenture, our Crowes fhall fare the better for 90 
you : and there’s an end. 
ILDie. AS Se ig, 


Cym. I know your Matters pleafure, and he mine: 
All the Remaine, is welcome. Exeunt. 04 


Scena Secunda. 


i) 


Enter Pifanio reading of a Letter. 
Pif. Wow? of Adultery ?) Wherefore write you not 
What Monfters her accufe ? Leonatus : 4 


87. vs, a@ day] us a day Rowe et 
seq. 

88. in other] on other Pope,+. 

88, 89. Salt-water-Girdle] salt-water 
girdle Rowe. 

94. the Remaine, is] the remain is, 
Theob. et seq. that remains— Daniel. 

welcome] ‘Welcome.’ Glo. Cam. 

Daniel. 


Another Room in the Same. Cap. 
2. Pifanio] Pifania F.F;. 
of] Om. Pope et seq. 

4. Monjflers her accufe| Ff, Rowe, 
Johns. Varr. Coll. i, iti, Ktly. have 
accus’d her Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
monster's her accuser Cap. et cet. 

accufe? Leonatus:] accuser, Leo- 
natus? Elze. 


Leonatus:| Ff. O Leonatus! 
Leonatus! Rowe et cet. 


1. The scene continued. Rowe, 


Theob. Scene tv. Eccles. Ktly. 


1. Scena Secunda] EccreEs: Pisanio has just received a letter from Posthumus; 
between this scene, therefore, and that wherein Posthumus speaks the soliloquy 
full of invective against women so much time must be imagined to pass as was 
sufficient for the conveyance of the letter from Rome to the British court. The 
time may be supposed the morning.—Wyatt: The whole of this scene, after the 
entrance of Imogen, is a prolonged example of tragic irony.—DaNIEL (Sh. Soc. 
Trans., 1877-79, P- 243): DAY 6. Cymbeline’s Palace. Pisanio receives a letter 
from Posthumus. Imogen arranges with Pisanio to set out at once. 

4. Monsters her accuse] Matone: The order of the words, as well as the 
single person named by Pisanio [‘false Italian’], fully support [Capell’s] emenda- 
tion— Dyce (Remarks, etc., p. 256): The reading [of the Ff] must be wrong; be- 
cause, in the first place, we cannot suppose that Shakespeare would have em- 
ployed here such an awkward inversion as ‘her accuse’; secondly, because we have 
in the next line but one ‘What false Italian,’ etc., and, thirdly, because it leaves 
the metre imperfect. [For very many examples where final e and final ev have 
been confounded, see WALKER (Crit., ii, 52).] 

4. Leonatus] THISELTON (p. 25): This is the only occasion on which Pisanio 
employs ‘the Sur-addition.’ It may be gathered it was the more familiar name, 
as between Posthumus and Imogen, from the signature of the letter in I, vii, 


182 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT III, SC. il. 


Oh Mafter, what a ftrange infection 5 
Is falne into thy eare? What falfe Italian, 

(As poyfonous tongu’d ,as handed )hath preuail’d 

On thy too ready hearing ? Difloyall ? No. 

She’s punifh’d for her Truth; and vndergoes 

More Goddeffe-like, then Wife-like; fuch Affaults fe) 
As would take in fome Vertue. Oh my Matter, 


6. eare] Ff. heart Han. Cap. et seq. 
4. (As...handed)| Ff, Sing. As... 9. Truth;] truth, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
handed, Rowe et cet. (subs.) undergoes| undergoes, Cap. et seq. 
poyfonous tongwd]  pois’nous- 10. -like, ... -like;] Ff. —1tke, ... 
-tongw’d Theob. Warb. Johns. Dyce, like, Rowe, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. —like ...—like, Pope, Han. Cap. et 
8. hearing?] ear! Pope, Han. seq. 
No.) Ff. No, Rowe,+. Wo: 11. take in] take-in Cap. 


when no doubt of Imogen had arisen in Posthumus’s mind, and from Imogen’s 
‘my Lord Leonatus’ a little later in the present scene (line 29). . . . The letter 
in this scene is signed ‘Leonatus Posthumus,’—a signature which cannot be so 
warm as the previous ‘Leonatus,’ and, likely enough, intended as an unconscious 
indication of a change that Posthumus is unable entirely to suppress, though 
Imogen, in her eagerness for reunion, fails to notice it. The name ‘Leonatus’ is 
here very appropriately used by Pisanio; they must be Monsters indeed who can 
by their slanders bring it about that Imogen is thought ill of by her Leonatus, 
and, at the same time, the name, as equivalent to Lion-born, suggests that im- 
pulsiveness of nature upon which Pisanio forthwith proceeds to comment. [Be it 
remembered that the ‘sur-addition, Leonatus,’ was given to the father of Posthumus.| 

6. false Italian] JoszepH HUNTER (ii, 293): We have a good deal in this play 
of the skill of the Italians in mixing potions. The opinion of their great skill in 
the art of poisoning prevailed in England in the time of Elizabeth, and there was 
one nobleman very near her person who lay under strong suspicion of dealing un- 
lawfully with Italians skilled in this art, when people saw falling around him, by 
strange diseases, persons who stood in the way of his ambition. Even the life of 
the Queen was more than once, as was supposed, attempted by poison prepared 
in some skilfull manner by an Italian. The author of the book entitled Leycester’s 
Common-wealth thus writes: ‘Neither must you marvaile though all these died in 
divers manners of outward diseases, for this is the excellency of the Italian art, for 
which this Chyrurgian and Doctor Julio were entertained so carefully, who can 
make a man dye, in what manner or shew of sicknesse you will: by whose in- 
structions no doubt his Lordship [Leicester] is now cunning,’ etc., [ed. 1641, p. 23. 
In the paragraph preceeding Hunter’s quotation we are told that the ‘ Chyrurgian,’ 
whose name is not given, ‘then was newly come to my Lord from Italy: a cunning 
man and sure in operation.’ It is hardly necessary to remind the reader that it is 
from this same book that we obtain the account of the death of Amy Robsart.— 
Ep.] 

9. vndergoes] VAUGHAN (p. 422): That is, bears without yielding. Thus in 
The Tempest, ‘Which rais’d in me An undergoing stomach to bear up Against what 
‘should ensue.’—, ii. 

11. take in] Jonson: To ‘take in’ a town is to conquer it. 


INCH Till, SE, |) 


Thy mind to her, is now as lowe, as were IZ 


CYMBELINE 183 


Thy Fortunes. How ? That I fhould murther her, 

Vpon the Loue, and Truth,and Vowes;which I 

Haue made to thy command? I her ? Her blood? 15 
If it be fo ,to do good feruice, neuer 


Let me be counted feruiceable. 


How looke I, 


That I fhould feeme to lacke humanity, 
So much as this Faét comes to ? Doo’t :!The Letter, 
That I haue Sent her by her owne command, 20 


Shall giue thee opportunitie. 


12. her,| Ff, Rowe. hers Han. Warb. 
her Pope et cet. 

13. murther] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Cap. Knt. murder Warb. et 
COU. 

her,| her? Pope et seq. 

14. Loue, and Truth,} Jove and truth 
Pope,+, Glo. Cam. 

Loue, and...Vowes] vows of love 
and truth Coll. conj. 

Vowes;] Ff. 
vows, Rowe et cet. 

16. fo,] so Pope et seq. 


vows Glo. Cam. 


Oh damn’d paper, 


1g. [Reading. Rowe et seq. Om. 
Knt. Herford. 

Doo’t: The Letter.) Fi, Cap. 
Do’t—the letter (in italic or as quota- 
tion) Rowe, Pope, Han. Do’t—the 
letter, Theob. Warb. Johns. Do’t.— 
The Letter, Var. ’73. Do’t: The letter 
Var. ’78, et cet. 

20. command] Ff, Rowe, Cap. com- 
mand Pope et cet. 
21. thee] the F,, Rowe. 

paper,| Ff, Cap. paper! Rowe 

et cet. 


12. Thy mind to her] MALonE: That is, thy mind compared to hers is now as 
low as thy condition was compared to hers.——VAUGHAN (p. 423) justly corrects 
Malone: ‘“her”’ has still been misunderstood,’ he remarks, ‘to be the possessive 
with “mind” understood, whereas it means herself.’ 

19. Fact] Murray (N. E. D., s. v. 1. c.): An evil deed, a crime. In the 16th 
and 17th centuries the commonest sense; now obsolete except in to confess the fact 
and after, before the fact. [I think there is no exception in Shakespeare to this 
‘commonest sense.’—Eb.] 

20, 21. That I haue ... opportunitie] Matone: The words here read 
by Pisanio from his master’s letter (which is afterwards given at length and in 
prose) are not found there, though the swbstance of them is contained in it. This 
is one of the many proofs that Shakespeare had no view to the publication of his 
pieces. There was little danger that such an inaccuracy should be detected by the 
ear of the spectator, though it could hardly escape an attentive reader.—KNIGHT 
[after quoting Malone’s note]: Now, we would ask, what can be more natural,— 
what can be more truly in Shakespeare’s own manner, which is a reflection of 
nature,—than that a person, having been deeply moved by a letter which he has 
been reading, should comment upon the substance of it without repeating the exact 
words? The very commencement of Pisanio’s soliloguy— How! of adultery?’— 
is an example of this. The word aduJtery is not mentioned in the letter upon which 
he comments. . . . Really, a critic putting on a pair of spectacles to compare 
the recollections of deep feeling with the document that has stirred that feeling, 
as he would compare the copy of an affidavit with the original, is a ludicrous exhi- 


184 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 111, SC: i. 


Blacke as the Inke that’s on thee : fenfeleffe bauble, 22 
Art thou a Feedarie for this Act; and look’ft 
So Virgin-like without ? Loe here fhe comes. 
Enter Imogen. 25 
I am ignorant in what I am commanded. 
Imo. How now Pifanio? 


Pif. Madam, heere is a Letter from my Lord. 28 
22. thee:] Ff, Rowe,+. thee. Coll. 23. and] F2. thou F;F,, Rowe. that 
Ktly. thee! Cap. et cet. Pope, Han. 
bauble,| bauble! Rowe,+, Var. 25. Enter...] After line 26, Sing. ii, 
85. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
23. Fedarie] feodary Cap. et seq. 26. [ am ignorant] I’m ignorant 


Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. 


bition —Dvyce, after quoting Malone’s note, without dissent, adds: ‘Mr Knight 
has contrived to persuade himself that Pisanio is not reading the letter, but only 
commenting upon its substance.’ [Notwithstanding Dyce’s covert sneer at Knight, 
the tendency of modern comment is, I think, to accept, in the main, Knight’s 
view, rather than to accuse Shakespeare of palpable negligence. We must also 
bear in mind that, except the personal pronouns, the only indication in the Folio 
that these words are quoted is the Italic type, and that our only authority is Rowe 
for the assertion that Pisanio reads them. It may well be that as he glances at the 
letter a second time, and catches sight of ‘Letter,’ ‘give thee opportunity,’ he 
weaves the very words into his own construction of them, just as he changes 
the phraseology of the letter into ‘adultery’ and ‘disloyal,’ and amplifies 
the two words ‘thy faith’ into ‘the love, and truth, and vows which I have 
made at thy command.’ Any interpretation or explanation is preferable to the 
thought that what was hidden from William Shakespeare was patent to Edmund 
Malone.—Eb.] 

23. Foedarie] Brapiry (NV. E. D., s. v. Fedarie): [A variant of fedary, feudarvy, 
but used by Shakespeare in a sense due to erroneous association with Latin fedus. 
The form federarie, which would be a correctly formed derivative of fedus, but 
occurs only in a single passage of the First Folio [Wint. Tale, II, i, go], is perhaps a 
misprint or a scholarly correction, as the usual form, fedarie, suits the metre better. 
The Second Folio and most subsequent editors read fedarie-y in all the passages.] 
A confederate, accomplice. ‘Else let my brother die, If not a foedary, but only he 
Owe and succeed thy weakness.’—Meas. for Meas., II, iv, 121; ‘She’s a traitor and 
Camillo is A federary with her.’—Wint. Tale, II, i, 89. [And the present passage 
in Cymbeline. Mr Bradley is, I fear, a little too hasty in asserting that ‘the Second 
Folio and most subsequent editors read fedarie-y in all the passages.’ In the 
passage from The Winter’s Tale my copies of the Second, Third, and Fourth Folios 
follow the First in reading Federarie, and so also do all subsequent editors, save only 
Collier, Dyce, and Hudson.—Ep.] 

26. I am ignorant ... commanded] SrrEvens: That is, I am unpractised 
in the art of murder.—JosrpH HunTER (ii, 294): I do not take this line in the sense 
given to it in the notes. It seems to me to express, ‘I must appear as if these 
instructions had not been sent to me.’ [Hunter is, I think, unquestionably right, 
and Pisanio himself verifies it in action —Ep.] 


ACT It, Sc. 11. | CYMBELINE 185 
Imo. WNho,thy Lord? That is my Lord Leonatus? 
Oh, learn’d indeed were that Aftronomer 30 


That knew the Starres, as I his Chara¢ters, 


Heel’d lay the Future open. 


You good Gods, 


Let what is heere contain’d, rellith of Loue, 
Of my Lords health, of his content : yet not 


That we two are afunder, let that grieue him; 35 
Some griefes are medcinable, that is one of them, 
For it doth phyficke Loue, of his content, 37 


29. Who, thy Lord?] Who! thy Lord? 
Ff. 

Lord Leonatus?] Ff, Rowe, Han. 
lord Leoanatus: Pope, Theob. Warb. 
Lord Leonatus. Johns. Jord: Leonatus. 
Coll. lord,—Leonatus? Dyce, Ktly. 
lord, Leonatus! Sta. Glo. lord» Leo- 
natus! Cam. Jord? Leonatus? Cap. et 
cet. 

30. A fironomer] 
Johns. Var. ’73. 

34. health,...content:| health:...con- 
tent: Ff. health,...content;— Theob.+. 
health,...content, Rowe, et cet. 

34-37. yet not...Loue] In parentheses, 
Theob. Pope ii. 


astrologer Watrb. 


35. afunder|] a funder F,. 
HB. 

36, 37. Some...Louwte] In parentheses, 
Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Ran. Var. ’21, 
Sta. 

36. medcinable|  medicinable Fy, 
Rowe,-+, Var. ’73, ’78, 785, Coll. Cam. 
med’cinable Cap. Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Knt, Sing. Dyce. Wh. Sta. Ktly, 
Glo. 


a-funder 


that is] that’s Walker (Crit., i, 
186). 

37. Loue,| Ff, Rowe. love Pope i. 
love) Pope ii, Cap. Var. 778, ’85, Ran. 
love;— Johns. love;) Theob. et cet. 
(subs.) 


29. thy ... my] Dowpen: I think that ‘thy’ and ‘my’ are to be pronounced 
with an emphasis—as if Imogen felt wronged by Posthumus being claimed as 
Pisanio’s lord. 

33. Let ... rellish of Loue] CAPELL (p. 110): ‘Let it relish’ must be car- 
ried forward, and prefixed to ‘of his content’ in line 37. [THEOBALD, in his Shake- 
speare Restored, endeavoured to make this same construction manifest by enclosing 
in a parenthesis ‘yet not That physicke Loue,’ and this reading was adopted by 
Pope in his second edition. It is a little surprising that Capell did not also follow 
it; his comment seems to imply the need of such a large parenthesis, and yet he 
enclosed only a portion of lines 36 and 37. See Text. Notes.] 

34, 35. content: yet not That we, etc.] Tyrwuirr: I should wish to read: 
‘of his content,—yet no; That we two are asunder, let that grieve him!’—M. 
MASON (p. 328): The passage is right as it stands, and there is nothing wanting to 
make it clear, but placing a stop longer than a comma after ‘asunder.’ The sense 
is this: ‘Let the letter bring me tidings of my lord’s health, and of his content; 
not of his content that we are asunder—let that circumstance grieve him; but of 
his content in every shape but that.’ [Mason’s interpretation does not prove 
Tyrwhitt’s emendation wrong. The meaning is not changed.—Ep.] 

36. medcinable] Here used in an active sense. See WALKER (Cyit., i, 186). 

37. it doth physicke Loue] JouHNson: That is, grief for absence keeps 
love in health and vigour.—STEEVENS: Thus, ‘it is a gallant child; one that, indeed, 
physicks the subject, makes old hearts fresh. —Wint. Tale, I, i, 40. 


186 THE TRAGEDIE OF (Act iii; 6Cru: 


All but in that. Good Wax, thy leaue : bleft be 38 

You Bees that make thefe Lockes of counfaile. Louers, 

And men in dangerous Bondes pray not alike, 40 

Though Forfeytours you caft in prifon, yet 

You clafpe young Cupids Tables : good Newes Gods. 42 
38. All...that] In all but that. Han. 40. alike,| alike. Ff, Rowe,+. alike; 

leaue:] leave— Pope, Han. leave. Cap. et seq. : 

Theob. i, Johns. Coll. Ktly, Glo, Cam. 41. Forefeytours] ¥F2. Forfeitours 

leave, Theob. ii, Warb. F,F,. forfeitures Rowe,+. forfeiters 
38, 39. be You Bees] be, You bees,Cap. Han. et cet. 

Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 42. Tables:] tables. Johns. et seq. 

Coll. i, ii, Sing. Newes Gods.) news, Gods. Fy, 
39. counfaile.] F2.  counfel. F3;F,, Rowe. mews, gods! Pope et seq. 

Rowe. counsel! Pope et seq. [Reading. Rowe. 


38, 39. blest be You Bees] Capell’s text reads ‘Blest be, you bees’; the Text. 
Notes reveal how very generally be has been followed by subsequent editors, who 
never looked, apparently, at Capell’s Errata, where he changed this reading to 
‘Blest be you, bees.’ I am not sure that this change is not for the better.—Eb. 

39. Lockes of counsaile] That is, you bees that make these locks on secret 
confidences of love,—as in line 59 ‘Loues Counsailor’ means Love’s confidant. 
In The Winter’s Tale Leontes reminds Camillo that he had entrusted him with 
his ‘Chamber-councels,’ that is, with his private affairs—DowpbEN appositely 
quotes from Jonson’s Cynthia’s Revels, II, i: ‘Who’s your doctor, Phantaste?’ 
and Phantaste replies, ‘Nay, that’s counsel,’ 7. e., that’s a secret. Gifford, in a 
foot-note on this passage, says that ‘the expression is very common in this sense,’ 
and refers to Massinger’s The Duke of Milan, III, i, where Charles says, ‘nay, it 
is no counsel, You may partake it.—Ep. 

40. men in dangerous Bondes] Portia, referring to Shylock, asks Antonio, 
‘you stand within his danger, do you not?’ where ‘danger’ does not of necessity 
mean peril, but merely ‘you stand within his debt.’ Thus ‘these dangerous bonds’ 
here means, I think, simply bonds of indebtedness, where peril, though not ex- 
cluded, is not necessarily included. Such bonds contain promises of repayment, 
but these promises are not like the prayers of a lover. Of course the bonds bore 
seals of wax (Shylock says to Antonio, ‘seal me there a merry bond’), and if for- 
feited, it was this wax that cast the makers into prison, yet the selfsame wax 
clasped in young Cupid’s tablets —VERPLANCK remarks that the ‘seal was essen- 
tial to the bond, though a signature was not.’—Ep. 

41, 42. Forfeytours you cast... You claspe] JoHNson: Here seems 
to be some corruption. Opening the letter, she gives a benediction to the bees with 
whose wax it was sealed, then nakes a reflection; the bees have no such grateful 
remembrance from men who have sealed bonds which put their liberty in danger, 
and are sent to prison if they forfeit; but wax is not made terrible to lovers by 
its effect on debtors. I read, therefore: ‘Though forfeitures them cast in prison, 
yet We clasp young Cupid’s tables.’ You and vm are, in the old angular hand, 
much alike. [This note was not repeated in the subsequent Variorums; we may 
suppose, therefore, that it was withdrawn.] 


42. good Newes Gods] For a similar adjuration, see ‘Such a Foe, good 
Heauens.’—II], vi, 20. 


NER iit, SC, ste] CYMBELINE 187 


Vitice, and your Fathers wrath ( fhould he take me in his 43 
Dominion) could not be fo cruell to me,as you: (oh the dee- 
rest of Creatures)would euen renew me with your eyes. Take 45 


43,44. (fhould...Dominion)] Ff, Sing. you, Knt, Jervis. me, as you, Ff. et cet. 


should...dominion, Rowe et cet. 45. would] would not Cap. Mal. 
44. me, as you:] me, but you Pope, Steev. Varr. 
Theob. Warb. me, but you, Han. euen] Anon. Jervis. you not now 


me; as you, Johns. Var. ’73. me, an Daniel. 


44, 45. cruell to me, as you: ... would euen renew mel] Eccrzs: 
The quaint, affected style of this letter may be accounted for from the state of 
Posthumus’s mind, and the dissimulation which he thinks it necessary to practice. 
—M. Mason (p. 328): This passage, which is probably erroneous, is nonsense, 
unless we suppose that the word ‘as’ has the force of buf. ‘Your father’s wrath 
could not be so cruel to me, but you could renew me with your eyes.’ MALONE: 
The word not was, I think, omitted at the press after ‘would.’ [Capell supplied 
it; but then Malone ignored Capell.] By its insertion a clear sense is given. 
Justice and the anger of your father . . . could not be so cruel to me, but that 
you ... would be able to renovate my spirits, etc—KnicuT: This sentence is 
very difficult; but it does not appear to be mended by the departure from the orig- 
inal reading. . . . It is evident [in the original] that the printer has mistaken the 
sense in his ‘could not have been so cruel to me, as you’; and when printers have 
a crotchet as to the meaning of a sentence, they seldom scruple to deviate from the 
copy before them. The ‘so’ required, therefore, from them its parallel conjunction 
‘as.’ But if we alter a single letter we have a clear meaning without any forced 
construction. Az is often used familiarly for 7f by Shakespeare. . . . Let us, there- 
fore, read the sentence thus: ‘could not be so cruel to me am you . . . would even 
renew me,’ etc. ‘Even’ is here used in the old sense of equally, even-so, and is op- 
posed to ‘so cruel. —SINGER: Posthumus means to say that ‘Justice . . . could not 
be so (i. e., very) cruel to him, as what he might suffer would be amply compensated,’ 
etc.—CoLuier (ed. i.): The change [‘would not’], as Mr Amyot remarks, hardly 
seems required, the apparent sense being that Justice and the wrath of Cymbeline 
could not do Posthumus any cruelty but such as might be remedied by the eyes of 
Imogen. [Collier in his ed. ii. makes no comment whatever on Posthumus’s letter; 
and Dyce merely rehearses a few of the emendations that have been proposed.] 
—Wuite (ed. i.): I think that there has been no worse corruption than a transposi- 
tion of ‘so’ by accident, or, perhaps, sophistication, [‘could not be cruel to me so as 
you,’ etc.]. The passage with this alteration needs no explanation. Perhaps ‘even’ 
is a misprint for ever.—Isw (ed. ii.): This confused sentence stands, I am now per- 
suaded, as Shakespeare wrote it, intending a comparison between the power of 
Imogen’s father’s wrath and her power to compensate and restore.—STAUNTON: 
Was it not intended to be enigmatical?—The CowpENn-CLarkKEs: The phraseology 
is purposely obscure and enigmatical, and conveys a double idea,—the more 
obvious one (to Imogen who is addressed); and a secondary one (perceptible to the 
reader of the play) ‘could not be as cruel to me as you’ (in the supposed wrong she 
has done him who writes to her).—Dr1cHrTon finds it difficult to understand why 
these words should be intended to be enigmatical, seeing that the rest of the letter 
is so plain in its meaning—Hvupson: Various changes have been proposed; but 


188 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acTr. X11, SC. it. 


notice that I amin Cambria at Milford-Hauen : what your 406 
owne Loue,will out of this aduife you, follow. So he wifhes you 


47. owne Loue,] own, love, Rowe i. 47. So] Ff, Pope, Han. Sta. Glo. 
own love Rowe ii. et seq. Cam: So; Theob- et cet: 


Pope’s is the simplest and the best. [See Text. Notes.|\—INGLEBY: ‘That is, 
‘Justice and your father’s wrath,’ etc., are not capable of as much cruelty to me as 
you yourself; for you can refuse to meet me. Should not the relative who be under- 
stood before ‘would’?—Iniw (Revised ed.): A fine example of the condensed lan- 
guage so characteristic of Shakespeare, which may be matched with V, v, 147, 148. 
Paraphrase: ‘Justice and your father’s wrath could not harm me so much as you 
would do me good, even by casting your eyes upon me.’ . . . But even this para- 
phrase does not fully interpret the language, for it is implied that Imogen’s cruelty 
would outweigh both the law and her father’s cruelty if she refused to come 
and meet Posthumus.—VAUGHAN (p. 425): I find a sense in [the Folio text] legit- 
imately derived, to this effect: If I were taken by your father, justice and his 
wrath would not have such power to torment me’ (‘would not be so cruel to me’) 
‘as, if I were seen by you, your eyes would have power even to renovate me.’— 
THISELTON, accepting the punctuation of the Folio as a main reliance in all cir- 
cumstances in the interpretation of the text, believes that the colon after ‘you’ 
indicated that ‘what follows is of the nature of an explanation, or of an extension, 
of what precedes.’ Accordingly, he observes that “the subject of “ would even renew 
me” is “Justice, and your Father’s wrath”; and “‘with your eyes” is equivalent 
to “if accompanied with the sight of your eyes.’’’ ‘This,’ he goes on to say, ‘is 
the only interpretation of the text as it stands that gives adequate force to “even.” 
Imogen has the opportunity of being more cruel to Posthumus than the Law or her 
Father’s wrath by not meeting him at Milford, for the harm that they could do him 
would not count if at the same time he could see Imogen again—that is the im- 
pression Posthumus intends to convey.’—DowpeEn: I take the reading of the 
Folio to mean: Justice and your Father’s wrath could not cause me to suffer more 
pain than your eyes would make amends for by giving me even new life. . . . I 
am not sure we ought not to keep the colon [after ‘you’] and interpret: You, dear- 
est, are, by being absent, a greater cruelty to me than justice and your father’s 
wrath could be; these (justice, etc.) would even renew me with a sight of you. 
[I cannot believe that there was in Posthumus’s mind, in writing this dastardly 
letter, any other thought than that of decoying Imogen to some remote region in 
order that Pisanio might kill her; and for this remoteness he had to give some excuse 
such as fear of Jusiice, etc., and with it must be coupled some tender words of love 
which his false heart hoped that, without stopping to criticise or mistrust, Imogen 
would believe; that she so accepted them we know from her exuberant joy. As 
she accepted them, so must we—be her father cruel as he will, she must believe, on 
his word that at the sight of her even life itself would be renewed. What cared she 
for colons, or commas, or constructions? A horse with wings for her. What we in 
cooler blood may question, if we dare, is, how Posthumus, having lost every atom of 
faith in the fidelity of Imogen, could suppose that she still had left enough love for 
him to take a long and perilous journey, and, a King’s daughter, with but one male 


attendant, merely to see, for a passing hour, a husband, to whom she knew in her 
heart she had proved unfaithful —Ep.] 


ACTIN SC) i, | 


CYMBELINE 189 


allhappineffc,thatremaines loyall to his Vow, and your encrea- 48 


Jing in Loue. 


Leonatus Pofthumus . 


Oh for a Horfe with wings: Hear’ft thou Pi/anio ? 50 
He is at Milford-Hauen : Read, and tell me 


How farre ’tis thither. 


If one of meane affaires 


May plod it in a weeke, why may not I 

Glide thither in a day ? Then true Pi/anio, 

Who long’ft like me, to fee thy Lord; who long’ft 55 
(Oh let me bate )but not like me: yet long’ft 


But in a fainter kinde. 


Oh not like me: 


For mine’s beyond, beyond : fay,and fpeake thicke 58 


48. remaines] remanies F,. 

48, 49. and your...in Loue.] F.. 
and your increafing in Love. F;, Var. 
73. and your increafing in Love, F,, 
Rowe, Pope. (love; Theob. Warb. 
Johns. love Cap.) and you; increas- 
ing in love, Johns. conj. and your, in- 
creasing in love, Tyrwhitt, Var. ’78 et 
Cet; 


Knut, Coll. Sta. (subs.) 
56. (Ok...bate)|] Oh...bate, Rowe. 
bate] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, 
Han. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. bate 
Theob. ii. et cet. 


57. kinde.| Ff. kind— Rowe,+. 
kind: Cap. et seq. 
58. beyond, beyond:] Ff. beyond, 


beyond— Rowe,+. beyond, beyond,) 


48. your] your’s Han. Cap. Var. 778, ’85, Mal. Ran. beyond 
50-58. Mnemonic lines Warb. beyond, Ritson, Steev. et seq. 
55-58. Who...beyond] In parentheses, thicke] Ff, Rowe i. thick: Rowe 


Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. li,-, Sing. 

48, 49. and your encreasing in Loue] Tyrwuitt: We should, I think, 
read thus: ‘and your, increasing in love, Leonatus Posthumus,’—to make it plain, 
that ‘your’ is to be joined in construction with Leonatus, and not with ‘increasing’; 
and that the latter is a participle present, and not a noun.—THISELTON (p. 27): 
That is, your advancement or prosperity in Love: and may be taken either as 
governed by ‘to’ or as a second object to ‘wishes.’ 

52. one of meane affaires] ‘Mean’ does not here signify low, degraded, but 
of the average, everyday affairs. 

56. let me bate] Murray (WV. E. D., s. v. Bate. v [aphetic form of Abate]: s. 
To mitigate, moderate, assuage, diminish. 

58. beyond, beyond] Rirson: The comma, hitherto placed after the first 
‘beyond,’ is improper. The second is used as a substantive; and the plain sense is, 
that her longing is further than beyond; beyond anything that desire can be said to 
be beyond.—Knicut: The Scotch have a saying, ‘at the back of the beyont.’ 

58. speake thicke] STEEVENS: That is, crowd one word on another, as fast as 
possible. So: ‘And speaking thick, which nature made his blemish, Became the 
accents of the valiant.’—2 Hen. IV: Il, iii, 24. [See in All’s Well, where the 
Clown wishes the Countess to ply him faster with questions: ‘O Lord, Sir! Thick, 
thick, spare not me.’—II, ii, 47. In connection with the quotation just given by 
Steevens, from 2 Henry the Fourth, BERNAYS (p. 110) recalls the fact that Schlegel 
misunderstood this phrase ‘to speak thick,’ and translated it to stutter (stottern); 
wherefore all German actors who thereafter personated Hotspur sedulously 


thick, Cap. et cet. 


190 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act 111, Sc. il. 


(Loues Counfailor fhould fill the bores of hearing, 
To’th’{mothering of the Senfe)how farre it is 60 
To this fame bleffed Milford, And by’th’way 

Tell he how Wales was made fo happy, as] 

T’inherite fuch a Hauen. But firft of all, 

How welmay fteale from hence: and for the gap 

That we fhall make in Time, from our hence-going, 65 
And our returne, to excufe : but firft, how ger hence. 


59, 60. (Loues ... Senfe)| Love's ... et cet. 
sense, Rowe,+. 63. Hauen.| haven: Cap. et seq. 

60. To’th’] To th F;3F,, Rowe,-+. 64. we may] F. may we F;F,, Rowe, 
To the Cap. et seq. aoe 

61-70. Mnemonic lines, Warb. hence:| Ff. hence? Pope,-+. 

61. Milford.] Ff, Rowe i. Milford? hence, Glo. 
Rowe ii, Pope. Milford: Theob. et 65. hence-going| hence going Rowe 
cet. ii, +. 

by’th’] F.. by th F;F,, Rowe,+. 66. And our] Till our Pope,+, Varr. 

by the Cap. et seq. Ran. Huds. To our Cap. 

62. happy,] happy Dyce, Sta. Glo. to excufe:] to excuse— Rowe. 
Cam. Vexcuse— Pope,+. to excuse? Var. 

63. T’inherite] Fi, Rowe,+, Coll. 73, Pexcuse: Dyce il, iii. 
Dyce, Sing. Ktly. To inherit Cap. * yer] Fy. 


stuttered; and so enshrined in popular affection had this stuttering Harry Percy 
become that it was only with difficulty that actors could be induced to abandon 
what has been for so many years a favourite and captivating characteristic.— 
Ep.] 

59, 60. Loues Counsailor ... smothering of the Sense] CAPELL 
(p. 110): The justness of this maxim is well exemplified by the speaker herself 
in this speech, if we consider her as what she really is,—her own ‘counsellor,’—that 
is, contriver of expedients to gratify a desire so extreme she has not words to 
express it by; for her thoughts are turned every way; to going, to what will follow 
her going, to the method and quickness of it, and the huddle of her ideas is such as 
leaves no time for correctness; at the beginning of line 64 the words Tell me are 
wanting; and again at the end of it; in which sentence ‘to excuse’ must have the 
sense of—what excuse shall we make; and ‘or e’er begot,’ the line after it, means— 
before the matter to be excused has existence. 

65, 66. from our hence-going ... how ger hence] Hupson [reading 
‘how to get hence’): As hence is emphatic here, to seems fairly required; and ‘get’ 
is evidently in the same construction as ‘excuse,’ To be sure, the insertion of to 
makes the verse an Alexandrine; but the omission does not make it a pentameter. 
The omission was doubtless accidental. The original also has ‘And’ instead 
of Till. The correction is Pope’s. ‘And’ makes ‘from’ equivalent to between; a 
sense, surely, which the word cannot bear. [Hudson here quotes from Coriolanus: 
‘He cannot temporately support his honours From where he should begin and end.’ 
II, i, 215,—the very passage which here Malone also quotes to prove, and I think 
successfully, that ‘from’ followed by ‘and’ (in this passage) means ‘from where 
he should begin to where he should end.’ Here in Cymb. the ing i i 
‘from our hence-going ¢o our return.’—Ep.] TS ee ae 


ACT IT SC: i1.\] 


CYMBELINE IQI 


Why fhould excufe be borne or ere begot ? 67 


Weele talke of that heereafter. 


Prythee fpeake, 


How many {tore of Miles may we well rid 


Twixt houre, and houre ? 


70 


Pi. One fcore ’twixt Sun,and Sun, 
Madam’s enough for you : and too much too. 

Imo. Why, one that rode to’s Excution Man, 
Could neuer go fo flow: I haue heard of Riding wagers, 
Where Horfes haue bin nimbler then the Sands 75 


67. or ere begot] F2. Theob. ii, Warb. 
Johns. Cap. Ktly, Cam. or ere- 
-begot Theob. i. or e’re begot FF. 
or-ere begot Pope, Han. or e’er begot 
Rowe et cet. 

69. flore] fcore Ff. et seq. 

rid| ride Ff. et seq. 
72. you:| you, Coll. i, ii, Dyce, Cam. 


73. to’s] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce, 
Sta. Glo. Cam. to his Cap. et cet. 
Excution’ Man,| Fy. Execution 
man, F,. Execution, man, FF. 
74. I haue] I’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, 
iii. 
Riding] Om. Han. 
wagers] Om. Vaun. 


you: and ...too.| you:  [Aside.] 
and...too. Glo. 


75. bin] been FF,. 


69-71. store . . . score] A good illustration of the ease wherewith c and f 
are confounded, which forms the subject of an article in Walker (Crit., ii, 274). 

69. may we well rid] DowpEen: Mr Craig thinks that ‘rid’ may be right, 
meaning dispose of, clear. The proverbial expression ‘willingness rids way’ 
occurs in 3 Hen. VI: V, iii, 21. So Peele, Arraignment of Paris, III, [iv, ed. Dyce], 
‘my game is quick, and rids a length of ground.’ Cotgrave, under Semelle, has ‘a 
strong foot, and a light head rids way apace.’—Crarc: I think it is nearly certain 
that ‘rid’ is correct. See Dr Dowden’s note [above]. . . . ‘To rid way,’ 7. e., the 
way (cp. ‘to devour the way’) of a runner [qu. of a gentleman on horseback?] in 
2 Hen. IV: I, i, 47] appears to have been a proverbial expression. It is found more 
than once in Cotgrave. [There seems to be no doubt that Craig has vindicated 
the First Folio. The meaning of ‘rid’ which he contends for is given by Whitney 
(Cent. Dict.), and Craigie (N. E. D., s. v. Rid, the verb. 8.) adds other examples of 
‘To rid ground (or space), to cover ground, to move ahead, to make progress’; 
as well as of to rid way. In the former, the earliest example is the passage from 
Peele’s Arraignment of Paris (antecedently quoted by Dowden, as above), 1584; 
and in the latter, the earliest quotation is from 2 Hen. VI, 1593. It was not, how- 
ever, recognised as a ‘proverbial expression’ by the printers of the Second Folio, 
nine years Jater than the First Folio.—Ep.] 

70. Twixt houre, and houre] Hupson: Between the same hours of morning 
and evening; or between six and six, as between sunrise and sunset, in the next 
speech.—Euze (p. 312): Imogen’s longing . . . would not have been satisfied 
with such a slow rate of travelling; what she wishes to know is, how many score 
of miles she may ride from the stroke of one hour to that of the next. Compare 
‘To weep ’twixt clock and clock.’—III, iv, 45. 

73. Excution] DowpEeNn: Imogen’s words are touched with dramatic irony. 
Ts it not, in fact, to execution that she rides? 

74,75. Riding wagers, Where Horses, etc.] It is difficult to decide whether 


THE TRAGEDIE OF [act III, SC. ii. 


192 
That run i’th’Clocks behalfe. But this is Foolrie, 76 
76. run] ran Orger. behalf: Cap. et cet. 
Vth] Ff, Rowe,+. i’the Cap. et seq. 76. Foolrie,|) Ff.  foolery, Rowe. 


behalfe.| Fy. behalf. F;F,, Rowe, fool’ry Pope,+, Coll. Ktly. foolery: 
+, Coll. Glo. Cam. behalf— Ktly. Cap. et cet. 


this refers to horse racing or merely pitting one horse against another. MADDEN 
(p. 274) evidently accepts the latter. ‘The racehorse,’ he remarks, ‘is the only 
horse in whom, and in whose doings, Shakespeare took no interest, and the horse- 
race is the only popular pastime to which no allusion can be found in his writings. 
It is true that the Turf and the thoroughbred are institutions of later date, for 
which we are indebted to the Stuarts, not to the Tudors. . . . The impulse to 
match horse against horse is probably coeval with the subjugation of the animal 
by man. . . . ‘A way our Ancestors had of making their Matches’ is ‘thus de- 
scribed by Nicholas Cox: “The Wild goose chase received its name from the 
manner of the flight which is made by Wild Geese, which is generally one after an- 
other; so the two Horses after the running of Twelvescore Yards had the liberty 
which horse soever could get the leading to ride what ground he pleas’d: the hind- 
most Horse being bound to follow him within a certain distance agreed on by 
Articles, or else to be whit up by the Triers or Judges which rode by, and whichever 
Horse could distance the other won the Match.”—Genileman’s Recreation, 1674. 
There is also a distant recognition of the match or wager, as something heard of 
rather than seen, [in the present passage]. The match or wager between two horses 
is plainly different from the race-horse, in which several competitors strive for the 
mastery. And in the horse-race Shakespeare shows no interest whatever. It 
occupies the unique position of a sport recognized by Bacon and ignored by Shake- 
speare. —BLAKEWAY, in the Var. 1821, quotes a sentence from Fynes Moryson’s 
Itinerary which looks much as though it referred to horse-racing. Moryson is justi- 
fying the ‘putters out of five for one,’ and says he ‘remembered that no meane 
Lord, and Lords sonnes, and Gentlemen in our Court had in like sort put out 
money vpon a horserace, or a speedie course of a horse, vnder themselues, yea 
vpon a iourney on foote.’—Part I, Booke 3, Chap. 1, p. 198; this happened in 
1595. The phrase ‘vnder themselues’ looks much as though it referred to what 
is now understood as a horse-race. The Encyclopedia Brit. (Eleventh ed., s. v. 
Horse-racing, p. 727) says that the first distinct indication of horse-racing in 
England occurs in Fitzstephen’s Description of the City of London, c. 1174. 
There is evidence from the poems of Bishop Hall (1597) that racing was in vogue 
in Queen Elizabeth’s reign, though apparently not patronised by her; indeed, it 
seems then to have gone much out of fashion. James I, however, when he came 
to the throne, greatly patronised it. The weight of evidence, is, I think, in favour 
of the view that Imogen refers to horse-racing rather than to matches between 
unmounted horses.—Ep. 

76. That run i’th’Clocks behalfe] Warspurton: This fantastical ex- 
pression means no more than sand in an hour-glass, used to measure time.— 
CoLLIER (Notes, etc., p. 517) tells us that the MS. reads by half ‘in order to state 
how much faster they run.’ In his subsequent edition, however, Collier acknowl- 
edges that he was ‘in error when he expressed his approbation’ of the change by the 
MS. ‘The old annotator did not understand the passage, and we were here, as in 


a few other places, misled by him.’ The phrase means ‘that run instead of the 
clock, as a substitute for the clock.’ 


ACE. ET, «SC. il. | CYMBELINE 193 


Go, bid my Woman faigne a Sickneffe, fay 77. 
She’le home to her Father ; and prouide me prefently 
A Riding Suit : No coftlier then would fit 


A Franklins Hufwife. 80 

Pifa. Madam,your’re beft confider. 

Imo. I fee before me( Man) nor heere, not heere; 82 

77. faigne} Fo. housewife Rowe ii. et seq. 

Sickneffe,| Fi, Rowe, Theob. i,+, 81. yow re] you’d Pope,+. 
Cam. sickness: Theob. ii. et cet. confider.| consider— Ktly. 

78. to her] t’ her Pope,+. 82. (Man) Ff. man; Cap. Ran. Knt, 
Father;| Father, Rowe. Coll. Dyce, Sta. Sing. Ktly, Glo. 
prefently] present Rowe ii, Pope, Cam. Man, Rowe et cet. 

Theob. Han. Warb. nor heere, not heere;| nor here nor 

79. Suit:] suit, Vaun. here, Pope. nor here, nor there Heath, 


80. Hufwife] Houfwife F,, Rowe i. Ingl. Nor here, nor here, Ff. et cet. 


80. A Franklins Huswife] Jounson: A ‘franklin’ is literally a freeholder, 
with a small estate, neither villain nor vassal. [Imogen probably selects this 
riding suit as one which, while respectable, would be inconspicuous. What a 
Franklin was socially, we may gather with some probability from Sir Thomas 
Overbury’s Characters: ‘A Franklin, His outside is an ancient Yeoman of England, 
though his inside may giue armes (with the best Gentleman) and ne’re see the 
Herauld. There is no truer seruant in the house then himselfe. Though he be 
Master, he sayes not to his seruants, goe to field, but let vs goe; and with his 
owne eye, does both fatten his flocke, and set forward all manner of husbandrie. 
Hee is taught by nature to bee contented with a little; his owne fold yeeld him 
both food and rayment; hee is pleas’d with any nourishment God sends, whilest 
curious gluttonie ransackes, as it were, Noahs Arke for food, onely to feed the riot 
of one meale. Hee is nere knowne to goe to Law; vnderstanding, to bee Law-bound 
among men, is like to be hide bound among his beasts; they thriue not vnder it; 
and that such men sleepe as vnquietly, as if their pillows were stuft with Lawyer pen- 
knives. When he builds, no poore Tennants cottage hinders his prospect; they are 
indeed his Almes-houses, though there be painted on them no such superscrip- 
tion. He neuer sits vp late but when he hunts the Badger, the vowed foe of his 
Lambs; nor uses hee any cruelty but when he hunts the Hare. . . . He allows of 
honest pastime, and thinkes not the bones of the dead anything bruised, or the 
worse for it, though the countrey Lasses dance in the Church-yard after Euen-song. 
Rocke-Monday, and the Wake in Summer, shrouings, the wakeful ketches on 
Christmas Eue, the Hoky, or Seed cake, these he yeerely keepes, yet holds them 
no reliques of Popery. . . . Hee is Lord paramount within himselfe, though he 
hold by neuer so meane a Tenure; and dyes the more contentedly (though he leaue 
his heire young) in regard he leaues him not liable to a couetous Guardian. Lastly, 
to end him; hee cares not when his end comes, he needs not feare his Audit, for his 
Quietus is in heauen.’—Sig. 04, ed. 1627.—Eb.] 

81. you’re best consider] Apporr (§ 230): ‘You’ may represent either 
nominative or dative, but was almost certainly used by Shakespeare as nomi- 
native. 


3, 


194 THE TRAGEDIE OF ACT III, SC. il. 


Nor what enfues but haue a Fog in them 83 
That I cannot looke through. Away, I prythee, 

83. enfues bui] Ff, Rowe i. ensues, 83. haue] they’ve Eccles. Me: 
but Rowe ii,+, Ran. Knt, Coll. Dyce, in them] Ff, Han. Coll. ii. im 
Sta. Glo. Cam. ensues, that Warb. ken, Theob. in them, Rowe et cet. 
ensues; they Ktly, conj. ensues; but 84. through] thorough Rowe ii. 
Capsiet cet. 


82-84. I see before me... cannot looke through] Inasmuch as 
there appears to be no nominative to ‘in them,’ THEOBALD substituted ‘in ken,’ 
which means ‘in prospect, within sight.’ Afterwards Imogen ‘Thou was’t within 
a kenne.’—III, vi, 8. No one adopted the emendation.—WaRBURTON pensively 
remarks of the Folio text that ‘this nonsense is occasioned by the corrupt reading of 
“put have a fog” for “THAT have a fog”; and then all is plain.’ No one adopted 
the emendation.—JoHNSON: The lady says: ‘I can see neither one way or other, 
before me nor behind me, but all the ways are covered by an impenetrable fog.’ 
There are objections insuperable to all I can propose, and since reason can give 
me no counsel, I will resolve at once to follow my inclinationHeratu (p. 479) 
believes that all will be plain if we only put an interrogation mark after ‘man’ 
and read ‘nor here, nor there,’ which yields, he thinks, the following paraphrase: 
Wouldst thou, man, have me consider and distract myself in the search of the 
consequences which may possibly attend the step I am about to take? That would 
be to very little purpose indeed. For whatever step I should take, whether I stay 
here or go thither, the consequences which ‘may attend either are all equally cov- 
ered with such a thick mist of obscurity as it is impossible for me to penetrate; 
and, this being so, it would be folly in me to deliberate further on the subject.— 
CAPELL (p. 110): That is, ‘I have no eyes, man, to look on this side, or that side, 
or upon what is behind me; upon all these there is a fog that I neither can nor would 
penetrate, and have neither eye nor thought that is directed to anything else but 
the way I would go, the way “before me’’; that I can see and that only: ‘nor 
here” is made grammatical by substituting for it, I see neither here, etc.’—M. 
Mason (p. 329): When Imogen speaks these words, she is supposed to have her 
face turned towards Milford; and when she pronounces the words ‘nor here, nor 
here,’ she points to the right and to the left. This being premised, the sense is 
evidently this: ‘I see clearly the way before me; but that to the right, that to the 
left, and that behind me, are all covered with a fog that I cannot penetrate. There 
is no more, therefore, to be said, since there is no way accessible but that to Milford.’ 
—THISELTON, by calling in aid the comma after the first ‘heere,’ which he informs 
us is ‘frequently used to separate sentences in close connection with each other’; 
and the semicolon after the second ‘heere,’ which he also informs us is ‘sometimes 
used to separate clauses or phrases which balance each other’; and then by under- 
standing neither before ‘before me,’ about which he gives us no information, is at 
last enabled to give us Imogen’s meaning, which is: ‘I see neither in front of me, 
nor where Iam. My present situation and the Future are alike for me full of im- 
penetrable fog. Consideration is, therefore, out of the question. My only chance 
of escape from this gloom lies in the direction of Milford. For Milford I must 
make at all costs.’ Thiselton concludes: ‘Regard for the punctuation settles, I 
hope, the interpretation of this passage once for all—and that, too, without im- 
peachment of the Folio text.’ [The greatest difficulty to me in connection with 


ACTVITI, SC. ills] CYMBELINE 195 


Do as I bid thee : There’s no more to fay: 85 
Acceffible is none but Milford way. Lexeunt. 


Scena Tertia. 


Enter Belar ius, Guiderius,and Aruivag us. B 

1. Scena...] Scene m. Rowe. Scene Wales. Pope). A mountainous country. 
v. Eccl. Cap. 

A Forest with a Cave. Rowe. (in 2. Enter...] Enter from a cave, Bel.; 


then, Guid. and Arvir. Cap. 


these lines is to understand how any difficulty can be found in them,—at least 
since the days of Capell and Monk Mason. Dyce, Corimr, WuHITE, and STAUN- 
TON judiciously ignore the necessity of having any note on them whatever.—Eb.] 

86. Milford way] Lady Martin (p. 188): Oh, how I enjoyed acting this scene! 
All had been so sad before. What a burst of happiness, what play of loving fancy, 
had scope here! It was like a bit of Rosalind in the forest. The sense of liberty, of 
breathing in the free air, and for a while escaping from the trammels of the Court 
and her persecutors there, that gave light to the eyes, and buoyancy to the step. 
Imogen is already, in imagination, at the height of happiness, at that ‘beyond be- 
yond’ which brings her into the presence of her banished lord. She can only ‘see 
before her’; she can look neither right nor left, nor to aught that may come after. 
These things have ‘a fog’ in them she cannot look through. We can imagine with 
what delighted haste Imogen dons the riding-suit of the franklin’s housewife! 
Pisanio is barely allowed time to procure horses. Her women hurry on the prep- 
arations, for, as we have heard, they are all ‘sworn and honourable’; Pisanio has 
little to say during the scene; but what may not an actor express by tone, and 
look, and manner? We know his grief for her, his bitter disappointment in her 
husband. These thoughts are in his mind, and give the tone to his whole bearing. 
Had Imogen been less wrapped up in her own happiness, she must have noticed and 
questioned him about his strange unwillingness to obey his master’s orders— 
wondered, too, at his showing no gladness at the thought of seeing him whom she 
believed that he, ‘next to herself,’ most longed to see again. But her eyes are full of 
that ‘fog’ which obscures everything from view but the one bright spot—that 
blessed Milford where her heart is. 

1. Scena Tertia] HunTerR (ji, 295): There are few finer scenes than this, 
breathing of the old innocent world, and the thoughts and feelings of generous 
youth; full also of the wisdom of age, a wisdom applicable to the circumstances 
in which all were placed, but instructive to men in whatever state of society 
they may be. I should class it with the best of the scenes in which Jaques is a 
principal character, with the Flower-scene in The Winter’s Tale, the scene of Olivia 
and Viola in Twelfth Night, and the moon-light scene in The Merchant of Venice. 
—Ecctes: Between the foregoing scene and the present I conceive some part 
of a day, a night, and an entire day and night to have intervened. Let us suppose 
that Imogen was employed during a portion of the day to which the last scene 
belonged in making the necessary preparations for her flight, and that she took her 


196 THE TRAGEDIE OF fAcT 111, SC. m1, 


Bel. A goodly day, not to keepe houfe with fuch, 3 
Whofe Roofe’s as lowe as ours : Sleepe Boyes, this gate 
Inftru€ts you how t’adore the Heauens; and bowes you 5 
To a mornings holy office. The Gates of Monarches 

3-61. Mnemonic, Pope. 4. Sleepe Bovyes,| Sleep, boys? Anon. 

3. day,...houfe...fuch,| Ff, Rowe. (1814) ap. Cam. 
day!...house...such, Pope. day!...house, 5. how P adore] F.F;, Rowe,+, Coll. 
..such Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Dyce ii, iii, Sing. Ktly. how ’t adore 
day...house,...such Cap. et cet. F,. how to adore Cap. et cet. 

4. Sleepe] F.. Sleep F3F,. See, 6. To a] Ff, Rowe, Var. ’21, Knt, 
Rowe,+, Slope Vaun. Stoop Han. Coll. i, ii, Dyce i, Sta. Sing. Ktly, 
eticet. Glo. Cam. To Pope et cet. 


The] Om. Pope,+. 


departure from the palace on the afternoon of the same. Her journey may be 
continued the following day, attended by Pisanio, who is her guardian also during 
the ensuing night. Thus we have the two nights of which she afterwards speaks 
as having ‘made the ground her bed’—through an apprehension, we may reasonably 
imagine, of being discovered in consequence of her endeavouring to procure a better 
lodging. The time is early morning when Belarius and his young men are sallying 
forth to pursue the chase. In the evening of the same day Imogen comes to the 
cave, having parted from Pisanio in the former part of it—DanreEL: This scene 
may be supposed concurrent with the preceding scene ii. Am interval, including one 
clear day. Imogen and Pisanio journey into Wales. 

3. A goodly day, etc.] PorTeR and CLARKE: This is obviously a scene-setting 
speech. It shows the audience, with emphasis, that the rear-stage is now a cave; 
and it may be noticed that the Folio stage-directions for Scena Prima do not place 
that scene in the rear-stage, but outside; for Cymbeline and his train enter at one 
doore, and the Roman with his at another. Scena Secunda is also a fore-stage scene. 
Out-door effects, and the use of the rear-stage as a cave in the woods, are thus 
arranged for the rest of the Play. The simple preparation for this scene, the 
grouping of trees and bushes around the rear-stage, was reinforced by such speeches. 

4. Sleepe] Ma tong, in the Var. 1785, conjectured Sweet, which was adopted by 
Rann, 1789, and reprinted in successive Variorums, until that of 1821, when it 
disappeared, and may be, therefore, considered as withdrawn.—THISELTON: 
The following extracts from Henry Smith’s sermon, A Disswasion from Pride, and an 
Exhortation to Humilitie, are not, I think, without interest: ‘his (i. e., God’s) 
Majestic . . . would not have her (i. e., pride’s) favourites come to Court, unlesse 
they hold downe their Mace, stoope when they enter. But if you can get in with 
Humilitie, and weare the colours of lowlinesse, then you may goe boldly, and stand 
in the king’s sight, and step to his chamber of presence, and put up your petitions, 
and come to honour’; ‘they which will be strouters shall not wank Gatto which 


will . . . say . . . that it becomes them well to jet in their going’; ‘then the rich 
Glutton jetted in surple every day, but now the poor unthrift rele as brave as the 
Glutton’; and ‘As the way to heaven is narrow . . . so the gate is low, and he 


had a, to stoope which entreth in at it.’ The same Sermon has more than one 
mention of Giants. [According to the D. NV. B. ‘silver-tongued Smith’ died in 
T5o1.] 


6. To a mornings] This ‘a’ is one of the very many examples, gathered by 


ANC Win, KER abs | CYMBELINE 197 


Are Arch’d fo high, that Giants may iet through Wf 
And keepe their impious Turbonds on, without 
Good morrow to the Sun. Haile thou faire Heauen, 


We houfe i’th’ Rocke, yet vfe thee not fo hardly 10 
7. tet] jet Fi. walk Wray ap. Cam. 9. Heauen,| heav’n! Pope et seq. 
8. Turbonds| Turbands Ff. Tur- 10. 7th] 7’ the Cap. et seq. 


bants Johns. turbans Sing. 


WALKER (Cyit., i, 90), where this indefinite article is interpolated and sometimes 
omitted in the First Folio. 

6-8. The Gates of Monarches ... Turbonds on] Staunton: Webster 
has happily expressed a similar idea: ‘Yet stay, heaven gates are not so highly 
arch’d As Princes’ pallaces, they that enter there Must go upon their knees.’— 
Duchess of Malfi, IV, ii, Qto, 1623. 

7. May iet through] STEEVENS: That is, strut, walk proudly. So in Twelfth 
Night, Fabian says of Malvolio, ‘how he jets under his advanced plumes.’—II, v, 36. 
—KEcctes: ‘Jet’ has been altered by Hanmer to get. [The Cambridge Editors say 
that ‘this is not the case in either of the editions’ before them, nor is it the case in 
either of my editions.—Eb.] 

8. impious Turbonds] JoHnson: The idea of a giant was, among the readers 
of romances, who were almost all the readers of those times, always confounded with 
that of a Saracen. 

1o. We house i’th’Rocke] J. Hirt (Stratford Herald, quoted in Shake- 
spertana, V, 51, Jan., 1888): Upon a recent visit to Tenby I was much impressed 
with a claim which I found had been advanced that the principal scene in Cymbel- 
ine, the cave of Belarius, was in the immediate vicinity of the town. It will be 
remembered that Shakespeare’s cave was in or near a wood, and also near the main 
road to Milford Haven. Such is the position even to the present day of the cave 
known as Hoyle’s Mouth. An inspection of the cave and neighborhood at once sug- 
gests the fitness and probability of the theory, but on more serious examination it is 
surprising how facts as well as probabilities confirm the impression. The high- 
road from Tenby to Milford Haven is one of great antiquity. It is one of the old 
ridgeways which have existed from the Roman occupation; the only road, in fact, 
which could have been taken. Leaving Tenby, it winds round what was almost the 
sea shore, a vast tract of sea having, in recent times, been reclaimed. About a mile 
from Tenby, and a short distance from the road, still obscured in the wood, and 
still to be found only by some perseverance, is the cave, which, doubtless, was 
originally formed by the washing of the sea. Time has added to the deposit upon 
its floor, and necessitated the removal of portions at various times. But when the 
probability of Shakespeare being intimately acquainted with the cave is examined, 
it will be found that probability becomes almost a certainty. The importance of the 
fortified town of Tenby in Elizabeth’s day (and the walls are in great part still 
standing) leaves no room for doubt that the companies of players would periodically 
proceed thither in their customary travels. This is rendered more certain still 
from the fact that it lay upon the only road to Carew Castle, Pembroke Town, 
Castle Manobier, and other strongholds, and even to St. David’s, Haverfordwest, 
etc. That Shakespeare, therefore, not only visited Tenby, but passed and repassed 
along the old road over the ridgeway with his company few will question, and when 
it is considered that these visits were not of a hurried, flying character, but that his 


198 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iii. 


As prouder liuers do. II 
Guid. Haile Heauen. 
Aruir. Haile Heauen. 
Bela, Now for our Mountaine fport, vp to yond hill 
Your legges are yong: Ile tread thefe Flats. Confider, 15 
When you aboue perceiue me like a Crow, 
That it is Place, which leffen’s,and fets off, 
And you may then reuolue what Tales, I haue told you, 
Of Courts,of Princes; of the Tricks in Warre. 
This Seruice, is not Seruice; fo being done, 20 
But being fo allowed. To apprehend thus, 
Drawes vs a profit from all things we fee: 
And often to our comfort, fhall we finde 
The fharded-Beetle, in a fafer hold 24 


14. yond] yon’ Cap. yon Var. 778, 
8c, Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt. 
yond? Coll. Sing. Ktly. 


hill] F.F;. hill. Var. ’73. full: 

Coll. Glo. hill! Cam. hill, F, et cet. 
17. leffen’s] Fo. 

off,| Ff, Rowe. off; Pope,+, 


Knt, Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. off. 
Johns. et cet. 
17-19. of, And...Warre.] off, (And... 


War,) Vaun. 


19. Courts, of] courts of Vaun, 
Dowden. 

20. This] That Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Ran. Coll. MS. 

.21. allowed] allow’d Rowe et seq. 

22. a] Om. Fy. 

24. fharded-Beetle] F2. sharded Beetle 


F,F, et seq. 


stay would be of sufficient length to enable him to fully investigate the surround- 
ings of this remarkable neighborhood, and fit in its chief features with his historical 
imagination, one cannot but contemplate this remarkable cave with the deepest 
interest—HAaLLIwELL (Outlines, &c., p. 499): It may be just worth notice that a 
cavern near Tenby, that might be passed in a walk to Milford, known as Hoyle’s 
Mouth, has been suggested as the prototype of the cave of Belarius. 

20. This Seruice, is not Seruice, etc.] JoHNSon: In war it is not sufficient to 
do duty well; the advantage rises not from the act, but the acceptance of the act.— 
Matone: ‘This service’ means ‘any particular service.’ The observation relates 
to the court, as well as to war.—VAUGHAN (p. 432): That is, as size is not size in 
itself, but as it is seen, so service is not service in itself, but as it is allowed. 

24. sharded-Beetle] Wurttney (Century Dict., s. v. Shard): In the sense of 
‘shell’ or ‘wing case’ shard may be due in part to Old French escharde, French 
écharde, a splinter = Old Italian scarda, scale, shell, scurf. 3. The wing-cover or 
elytrum of a beetle. [‘Sharded’ is, therefore, furnished with shards or elytra. By 
contrasting the ‘sharded beetle’ with the ‘full-winged eagle, it seems as though 
the author of these lines regarded the shards as hampering the insect’s flight. 
Shakespeare, on the other hand, apparently regarded the shards as assissting the 
flight,—possibly, as being the chief means of flight; Macbeth speaks of ‘The 
shard-borne' beetle.’—II, iii, 57. Again, quite as emphatically, Enobarbus refers 
to Cesar and Antony as the ‘shards’ to Lepidus (in the latter’s opinion), that is, as 
mere instruments to enable him to fly (Ant. & Cleop., III, ii, 24).—Ep.] 


ACT III, Sc. iii. ] CYMBELINE 199 


Then is the full-wing’d Eagle. Oh this life, 25 

Is Nobler, then attending for a checke : 

Richer, then doing nothing for a Babe: ay 
26. checke:| check, Dyce, Glo. Cam. Steev. Varr. Ingl. bauble Rowe,+, 

Jack Bulloch. beck Bailey. Dyce i, Ktly, Glo. Cam. bribe Han. 
27. nothing] nothidg F.. homage Knt, Coll. i, Dyce ii, iii, Sta. Huds. 

Bulloch. Dtn. bob Coll. ii, iii. (MS.). brabe 


for] from Anon. (1814) ap. Cam. Johns. conj. Sing. badge Bulloch. 
Babe] Fi, Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. brave Sing. conj. 


26. attending for a checke] RANwN: A state of abject servility, or subjection 
to the control and caprice of another—Dycr, Scummpt, and others define it as 
‘a reproof, rebuke.’ But see KNIGHT, in next note. 

27. then doing nothing for a Babe] WaArBuRTON [reading ‘bauble’]: 
That is, vain titles of honour gained by an idle attendance at Court. But the 
Oxford Editor [Hanmer] reads, ‘for a bribe.—Jounson: The Oxford Editor knew 
the reason of his alteration, though his censurer knew it not. Of ‘babe’ some 
corrector made bauble; and Hanmer thought himself equally authorised to make 
bribe. I think ‘babe’ cannot be right.—IBw. (Var., 1773): I have always suspected 
that the right reading of this passage is what I had not in my former edition the 
confidence to propose: ‘than doing nothing for a brabe.’ Brabium is a badge of hon- 
our or the ensign of an honour, or anything worn as a mark of dignity. The word 
was strange to the editors, as it will be to the reader; they, therefore, changed it to 
‘babe’; and I am forced to propose it without the support of any authority. 
Brabium is a word found in Holyoak’s [qu. Holyoke?] Dictionary, who terms it a 
reward. Cooper, in his Thesaurus, defines it to be a prize, or reward for any game.— 
CAPELL (p. 111): The word ‘babe’ is made bauble unnecessarily, ‘babe’ having the 
same signification; the Poet’s meaning is—titles, the too frequent reward of worth- 
less services, which he calls ‘doing nothing for them.’—StTrEvENs: It should be 
remembered that bauble was anciently spelt bable; so that Warburton [Rowe], in 
reality, has added but one letter. As it was once the custom in England for favour- 
ites at Court to beg the wardship of infants who were born to great riches, our 
author may allude to it here. Frequent complaints were made that nothing was 
done towards the education of these neglected orphans. [‘Such an allusion would 
hardly have been intelligible to his audience.’—Cortter, i.|—Matone: A ‘babe’ 
and baby are synonymous. A baby being a puppet or play-thing for children. I 
suppose a ‘babe’ here means a puppet. . . . The following lines in Drayton’s 
Owle, 1604, may add, however, some support [‘more than some, I think.’—Dyce, i.] 
to Rowe’s emendation: ‘Which with much sorrow brought into my mind 
Their wretched soules, so ignorantly blinde, When even the greatest things, in the 
world unstable, Clyme but to fall, and damned for a bable.—CuatmeERs: ‘Babe’ 
is merely the babee of the Scots coinage, which Shakespeare introduced here as a 
sly stroke at the Scots coin, which King James had regulated by proclamation. 
. . . The editors have only to change the spelling to Babee, and the player to 
pronounce it trippingly on the tongue, and the whole passage will have a sense 
and smartness which have hitherto been prevented by affectation and obscured 
by ignorance. [‘Rejecting altogether the nonsense of George Chalmers,’ says 
Cuartes Knicut.]—BosweE.t: There was such a word as brave in English, though 
apparently bearing a very different meaning from that which Dr Johnson ascribed 


200 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ili. 


[27. then doing nothing for a Babe] 


to it. Heth is thus explained by Speght in his Glossary to Chaucer: ‘Brabes and 
such like’ Hething, for so Mr Tyrwhitt gives the word, he interprets—conlempt. 
[Cotter (ed. ii.): ‘Speght does not explain heth at all, but hether, and says that it 
means mockery, which was also Hearne’s explanation.’ I can find brabe neither in 
the Century Dict. nor in the N. E. D.—Ep.]—Knicut: We believe that the source 
of the ideas which Shakespeare had in his mind to have been Spencer’s Mother 
Hubberd’s Tale. Belarius begs his boy to ‘revolve what tales I’ve told you Of 
courts, of princes’; and he then goes on to say that their own life ‘Is nobler than 
attending for a check.’ Spencer describes, in one of the finest didactic passages of 
our language, the condition of the man ‘whom wicked fate hath brought to court’: 


‘Full little knowest thou, that hast not tride, 
What hell it is in suing long to bide: 

To loose good dayes, that might be better spent; 
To wast long nights in pensive discontent; 

To speed to day, to be put back to morrow; 

To feed on hope, to pine with feare and sorrow; 
To have thy Princes grace, yet want her Peeres; 
To have thy asking, yet waite manie yeeres; 

To fret thy soule with crosses and with cares; 

To eate thy heart through comfortlesse dispaires; 
To fawne, to crowche, to waite; to ride, to ronne, 
To spend, to give, to want, to be undone. 
Unhappy wight, borne to desastrous end, 

That doth his life in so long tendance spend!’ 


Here we have the precise meaning of ‘attending’ furnished by tendance, and, we 
think, the meaning of ‘cheek,’ which has been controverted, is supplied us by ‘to 
be put back to-morrow.’ The whole passage is, indeed, a description of the alter- 
nate progress and check, which the ‘miserable man’ of Spencer receives. . . . Look- 
ing at the usual course of typographical errors, we should say it is the easiest 
thing possible for ‘babe’ to be printed for bribe, even if the word were bribe in the 
manuscript. [Knight here expounds the intricacy of the printer’s ‘case’ and the 
likelihood of one letter’s being picked up by mistake for another, which I think we 
will all cheerfully concede without the headache which might follow the attempt to 
understand it.|—VrErpLANcK: The sense is good of Hanmer’s bribe: ‘Such a life 
of activity is richer than that of the bribed courtier, even though he pocket his 
bribe without rendering any return.’ Such a thought was perfectly intelligible to 
Shakespeare’s audience, who lived in those ‘good old times’ when the greatest and 
sometimes the wisest were not only accessible to bribes, but expected them; while 
every concern of life was dependent upon the caprice or the favour of those in 
power.—WauITE (ed. i.): This change [bauble] agrees ill with the first and controlling 
word in the line, which implies a more substantial reward than a bauble; and, 
therefore, Hanmer’s emendation is the more acceptable—CortteEr (ed. ii.): The 
MS. instructs us to substitute bob for ‘babe,’ and, in the sense of blow, it is quite 
consistent with what precedes; . . . a ‘check’ is a reproof; and Belarius proceeds 
from a ‘check’ to a blow. . . . It seems to us, therefore, that the emendation, bob, 
is a happy one; and when ‘babe’ was pronounced, as then, with the a broad, it 
would sound not unlike bob. . . . Bod was, in all probability, Shakespeare’s word. 


ACT £11,)SC. iii. | CYMBELINE 201 
Prouder, then ruftling in vnpayd-for Silke : 28 


28. unpayd-for] un-paid-for FF,. 
—Dvyce (ed. ii.): In my former edition I adopted Rowe’s emendation; but I now 
prefer that of Hanmer, which Walker mentions as undoubtedly right.—WaLKER 
(Crit., li, 275): This page [of the Folio], by the way, 381, contains more than the 
usual proportion of errors; which may help to confirm,—were any additional proof 
needed,—the emendation, bribe instead of ‘babe.’ [In a foot-note Letrsom ob- 
serves: ‘In Green’s James IV. (Dyce, vol. ii, p. 112), Sir Bartram says of Ateukin, 
—‘‘But he, injurious man, who lives by crafts, And sells king’s favours for who will 
give most, Hath taken bribes of me, yet covertly Will sell away the thing pertains 
to me.”’ This shows howa man may do nothing, or worse than nothing, for a bribe; 
a feat that seems incomprehensible to the primitive simplicity of the nineteenth 
century.’]—STAUNTON: Of these emendations, the original being, of course, wrong, 
we prefer Hanmer’s bribe; though we have very little confidence even in that.— 
R. M. Spence (NV. & Q., VI, i, 52, 1880): I think it unfortunate that brabe, Dr 
Johnson’s happy correction, has been superseded by bauble. Brabe appears to me 
to have been, on Shakespeare’s part, a designedly chosen word. Té Bpafeior, 
derived from which we find in Medieval Latin ‘brabium vel bravium,’ was the 
prize awarded to the victor in the public games. Courtly services, in the view of 
Brabantius, no more deserved the name of work than did the labours of the athlete. 
To bauble it may be objected that by the possession of a bauble no man is enriched. 
—Deicuton: I think that ‘doing nothing’ indicates some solid remuneration, 
the fact of his making no return for his bribe being a slur upon the receiver, while 
in doing nothing for a bauble or a badge there would hardly be such slur.—VAUGHAN 
(p. 553): I would read bable, which here means an official or Courtly decoration 
displayed on the person, whether ‘chain’ or what else. ‘Babe’ occurs in writers 
of Shakespeare’s age, although as ‘hale’ was probably pronounced ‘haul,’ so 
“‘bable’ may possibly have been sounded as ‘bauble.—TuisELtton: Those who are 
busied with attendance at Court are so occupied with their unserviceable services 
that they,—as well as those whom they serve,—have no time for the duties that 
Nature has imposed upon parents; children are committed to foster-parents so that 
their real parents may not be bothered with them. With such neglect Belarius 
would contrast the care which he and Euriphile have bestowed upon the bringing 
up of Guiderius and Arviragus, counting himself and his reputed sons richer in the 
harvest reaped therefrom than the courtiers and their children are in the harvest 
reaped from the courtiers’ aforesaid neglect—DowneENn (reading bribe): This 
emendation I explain as ‘taking bribes of suitors, and doing nothing in their in- 
terest’; ‘richer’ suggests some kind of wealth, and it must be base kind of wealth. 
[From the foregoing notes there has been excluded as much as possible all criticism 
of the emendations of fellow-critics. If all these censorious views be well taken, we 
should find as many insuperable objections to each of the proposed emendations 
as there are to the original text, and we have gained nothing by deserting it. I 
am happy in adopting HaLLtwELt’s conclusion: ‘Nothing that has been written 
on this line is entirely satisfactory, and the selection of a reading is, with our present 
means of information, a matter of fancy rather than that of judgement.’—Ep.] 
28, rustling in vnpayd-for Silke] Knicut: As we have had the nobler 
and the richer life, we have now the prouder. The lines which follow mean, we 
take it, that such a one as does rustle in unpaid-for silk receives the courtesy 


202 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACF 11], SC. ii. 


Such gaine the Cap of him, that makes him fine, 

Yet keepes his Booke vncros’d : no life to ours. 30 
Gut.Out of your proofe you fpeak:we poore vniledg’d 

Haue neuer wing’d from view o’th’neft; nor knowes not 


What Ayre’s from home. 


Hap’ly this life is beft, 


(If quiet life be beft) fweeter to you 


That haue a fharper knowne. 


Well correfponding 35 


With your ftiffe Age; but vnto vs, it is 
A Cell of Ignorance : trauailing a bed, 37 


29. gaine] gains Knt, Ingl. 
makes him] makes them Rowe,+, 
Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Var. ’03, 13. 
Coll. iii. makes ’em Cap. Dyce, Sta. 
Ktly, Glo. Huds. Cam. keeps ’em Coll. 
conj.. 
30. keepes his] Keep their Sing. conj. 
Keep his Huds. 
vncros’d:] 
cross’d. Var. ’73. 
31. we poore vnfledg’d| F.2, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. we poor unfledg’d, F3F. 
we, poor, unfledg’d, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. we, poor unfledged, Cap. et cet. 
32. oth’ o’the Cap. et seq. 


uncrof’d, Ff.  wn- 


32. knowes] know Ff et seq. 
not] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. 

33. Hap’ly] Haply Han. Johns. et 
seq. 

34. be] is Rowe,+. 

35. knowne. Well] F.. Known, 
well Coll. Sing. Ktly, Cam. Known; 
well F3F, et cet. 

37. Ignorance:  trauailing a bed,| 
Fi (abed, F.) Rowe i. ignorance; 
travelling a-bed, Rowe ii, Pope, Theob. 
i. ignorance, travelling abed, Coll. 
ignorance, travelling a-bed, Cam. ig- 
norance; travelling a-bed; Theob. ii, et 


neft;| nest, Dyce, Glo. Cam. cet. 


(gains the cap) of him who makes him fine, yet he, the wearer of silk, keeps his, the 
creditor’s, book uncross’d. To cross the book is, even now, a common expression for 
obliterating the entry of a debt. 

29. Such gaine the Cap, etc.] VAUGHAN [reading ‘Seeking for Such gain,’ 
and substituting a dash for the colon after ‘vncros’d’ in the next line]: Thus we 
have a life made up of these four things—attending for a check, doing nothing for a 
bribe, rustling in unpaid-for silk, and fishing for the ostensible homage of the man 
one is impoverishing. Our life is nobler than the first practice, richer than the 
second, prouder than the third; while the fourth is no life at all to our life. So 
amended, too, the passage discloses four participles all descriptive of court life—at- 
tending, doing, rustling, seeking —with which are contrasted ‘this life’ and ‘our life.’ 

29. that makes him] Dyce: We have seen before that ‘him’ is frequently 
confounded with ’em or them by transcribers and printers. [See Text. Notes] 

35. knowne] THISELTON (p. 30): The full stop after ‘knowne’ is really a guide 
to elocution, showing that the construction is ‘(Haply this life is) well correspond- 
ing,’ etc., and that ‘Well compounding’ is not in agreement with ‘a sharper.’ 
[Is a ‘full stop’ necessary? would not the semicolon (F; and F,) suffice sufficiently 
at least to keep up the voice so as to show the connection between ‘this life’ and 
‘Well corresponding’? Were it not that this connection is so very manifest, and 
no other construction conceivable, this ‘full stop,’ it seems to me, would prove an 
elocutionary stumbling-block. Certainly, its guiding power was exhausted by the 
time of the Third Folio.—Ep.] 


37. Cell of Ignorance :] DowpeEn: Possibly in opposition to a cell for study; 


ACT IM, SC. iii] '  CYMBELINE 203 


A Prifon, or a Debtor, that not dares 38 
To ftride a limit. 
Arutz. What fhould we fpeake of 40 


38. Prifon, or] Fy. Prifon or F.F;. prison, for Pope,+. prison o’er Sta. prison 
of Vaun, Dowden. prison for Cap. et cet. 


Prompt. Parv. has ‘Ceele,’ or ‘stodyynge howse. Cella.’—Tuisetton: The colon 
after ‘Ignorance’ should, I think, be refered to Rule XII: In a series of things 
where one is singled out for the premier position by way of pre-eminence, it will 
sometimes be marked off from the rest by a semicolon or colon, the succeeding 
members of the series being separated by commas. 

37. trauailing a bed] Dricuron: That is, ‘no better than travelling the 
length and breadth of one’s bed.’—VaucHAN (p. 434): This means ‘travelling in a 
litter,’ for a ‘litter’ is equivalent to a ‘coach.’ Our coach in its verbal form is but 
an old expression for a ‘litter,’ that is, a ‘coach.’ So we have in North’s Plutarch: 
‘For the most part he slept in his coach or litter, and thereby bestowed his rest,’ 
etc.—Julius Cesar, p. 719.—DOWDEN: The imagined travel of one who lies 
motionless. I think the best comment on this is Shakespeare’s Sonnet, 27: ‘Weary 
with toil I haste me to my bed, The dear repose for limbs with travel tired; But 
then begins a journey in my head.’—I. H. Prarr (NV. & Qu., X, x, 165, 1908): What 
‘travelling a-bed’ means I can form no idea. It has been suggested that with the 
original spelling, ‘travailing,’ it might be equivalent to suffering in bed, but this 
hardly seems satisfactory. Tentatively, I suggest following the punctuation of the 
First Folio: ‘travelling forbid.’ The young princes, forbidden to travel, were in 
the position of a debtor who is not permitted to cross certain bounds.—J. P. 
MALteson (Op. cit., p. 345): That is, you have travelled and seen the world; our 
knowledge is all ‘in the mind’s eye’; our travelling is like that of a man who, 
lying a-bed, roams abroad only in imagination or in dreams.—T. O. HopcEs 
(Ibid.): This phrase is an example of the construction well known to students of the 
Greek drama, in which an adjective so far qualifies a noun that it contradicts it; 
and it means travelling which is no travelling, which goes no further than 
one’s bed. ‘You are free!’ says Belarius. ‘Free?’ says his son. ‘Yes! but free 
to do nothing!’—W. E. Witson (Jbid.): We travel—but only within the narrow 
limits of our own bed. [An utterly frivolous mind would attribute this to Shake- 
speare’s prophetic sense, and accept it as an anticipation of the modern sleeping 
car.—ED.] 

38. A Prison, or a Debtor] HUNTER (ii, 294): The old reading, when rightly 
understood, is better than [for instead of ‘or’], though it has something of that 
haste and unfiledness which is found in many of the finest passages: ‘A prison, 
or a debtor, that not dares To stride a limit.’ 

39. To stride a limit] C. K. Davis (p. 237): As to prisoners for debt, certain 
boundaries were designated as prison limits. If the debtor went beyond these, 
either of his own will or by the permission or negligence of the officer, it constituted 
an escape. 

40. What should we speake of, etc.] Jounson: This dread of an old age, 
unsupplied with matter for discourse and meditation, is a sentiment natural and 
noble. No state can be more destitute than that of him who, when the delights of 
sense desert him, has no pleasures of the rind. 


204 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. ili. 


When we are old as you ?. When we fhall heare 4I 
The Raine and winde beate darke December? How 
In this our pinching Caue, fhall we difcourfe 
The freezing houres away? We haue feene nothing : 
We are beaftly; fubtle as the Fox for prey, 45 
Like warlike as the Wolfe, for what we eate : 
Our Valour is to chace what flyes : Our Cage 
We make a Quire, as doth the prifon’d Bird, 
And fing our Bondage freely . 
Bel. How you fpeake. 50 
Did you but know the Citties Vfuries, 
And felt them knowingly : the Art o’th’Court, 


As hard to leaue, as keepe : whofe top to climbe 53 
41. old] as old Varr. Mal. Ran. 48. Quire] choir Pope, Theob. Han. 
42. December?] Ff, Rowe,+. De- Warb. 

cember, Han. et cet. 50. {peake.] [peak? Fi, Rowe. speak! 
43. Caue,] cave Han. Coll. Cam. Pope et seq. 

45. We are] We’re Pope,+. 51. Citties] Citie’s F3F,. city’s Rowe. 
beaftly; fubtle] beastly-subtle Anon. 52. felt] feel Anon. ap. Cam. 

ap. Cam. 52.. o'th’| o’the Cap. et seq. 


53. keepe:| keep, Rowe, Johns. 


42. December? How] VAUGHAN upholds the punctuation of the Folio, and, I 
think, justly. ‘The Poet,’ he says, ‘is drawing by contrast two pictures of winter, 
not one,—its boisterous and rainy darkness, and its biting frosts.’ 

43. our pinching Caue] Thus in Lear: ‘To be a comrade with the wolf and 
howl Necessity’s sharp pinch.’—II, iv, 213. (This ‘howl’ for owl of the Folio is, 
I think, an emendatio certissima due to Collier’s MS.) This quotation is more 
apposite to the present passage than, it seems to me, Imogen’s ‘There cannot be 
a pinch in death,’ etc.—Eb. 

50. How you speake] Haziitr (p. 12): This answer of Belarius to the ex- 
postulation is hardly satisfactory; for nothing can be an answer to hope, or the 
passion of the mind for unknown good, but experience.—VAUGHAN. (p. 435): 
There is no consequence of knowing the city’s usurers mentioned to be found in the 
whole speech which follows, and is thus made a long sentence without any apodosis. 
I certainly would amend thus: ‘How you’d speak, Did you but know the city’s 
usurers!’ etc. 


51. Citties] Detrus: According to the mode of printing in the Folio, this may 
be either city’s or cities’. 

51. Wsuries] STAUNTON: ‘Usuries,’ in this instance, would appear to mean no 
more than wsages, customs, etc.; though in Meas. for Meas., III, ii, where the 
word occurs seemingly in the same general sense—‘ Twas never merry world since, 
of two usuries, the merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by order of the 
law a furred gown to keep him warm’—it certainly bears a particular reference to 
usury; for what, says Taylor, the Water-poet, in his Waterman’s suit concerning 
Players, 1630?—‘and sleepe with a quieter spirit then many of our furre-gownd 
moneymongers that are accounted good commonwealths men.’ 


INCI 3001, SEs stb] CYMBELINE 205 


Is certaine falling : or fo flipp’ry , that 

The feare’s as bad as falling. The toyle o’th’Warre, 55 
A paine that onely feemes to feeke out danger 

Pth’name of Fame, and Honor, which dyes i’th’fearch, 

And hath as oft a fland’rous Epitaph, 

As Record of faire Act. Nay, many times! 

Doth ill deferue, by doing well : what’s worfe 60 
Mnift curt’fie at the Cenfure. Oh Boyes, this Storie 

The World may reade in me: My bodie’s mark’d 

With Roman Swords ; and my report, was once 

Firft, with the beft of Note. Cysmdbeline lou’d me, 

And when a Souldier was the Theame, my name 65 
Was not farre off: then was I as a Tree 

Whofe boughes did bend with fruit. But in one night, 

A Storme, or Robbery (call it what you will) 

Shooke downe my mellow hangings : nay my Leaues, 69 


54. falling:| Ff, Theob. Warb. fall- honour; Rowe et cet. 


ing, Rowe et cet. 58. fland’rous] Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. 
Jlipp’ry| Fi, Rowe,+. slippery Sing. Ktly. slanderous Var. ’73 et 
Cap. et seq. cet. 

55. oth’] Ff, Rowe. of Pope,-+. 59. Act.] Ff. act; Rowe et seq. 
o’the Cap. Dyce, Glo. Cam. of the many times] many time Rowe ii, 
Wane, “73 Cle CBr, Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. 

Warre,| War F;. VVar F,. 61. Cenfure.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Johns. 
war; Theob. Warb. Coll. Ktly.  censure:— Theob. et 

56. out] our Ff. cet 

EL ent le temenitnen Cape et 63. report,| report F;F, et seq. 
seq. 60. hangings:] hangings, Rowe et 


Honor,| Honour, Ff, Johns. seq. 


56. that onely seemes to seeke] I think that here ‘only’ qualifies ‘to seek,’ 
and that it has its present position for the sake of the rhythm. Otherwise I do not 
comprehend the passage.—Ep. 

57. which dyes i’th’search] INcLEBY thinks that the antecedent to ‘which’ 
is ‘name,’ ‘though it is,’ he says, ‘really ‘fame and honor which dies in the search.” 
—Dow ben holds, more justly, I think, that ‘pain’ is the antecedent, and that ‘the 
labour perishes without attaining fame and honor, and its epitaph is often slan- 
derous.’ The Cambridge Editors record ‘which dye,’ as a reading of Collier’s MS. 
T cannot find it either in the First or Second Editions of Collier’s Notes and Emenda- 
tions, nor in his ‘Seven Lectures on Shakespeare,’ etc., nor in the Second Edition of 
his Shakespeare, nor in his Monovolume, which is supposed to embody all the read- 
ings of the MS. Let the record be accepted, therefore, on the authority of the 
Cam. Edd., which is ample.—Eb. 

60. ill deserue] IncLtEeBy: That is, earn (not merit). 

63. my report] Cf. Cloten’s ‘sell me your good report.’—II, ili, 94. 


206 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act Il, SC. ii. 
And left me bare to weather. 70 
Gut. Vncertaine fauour. 


Bel. My fault being nothing (as I haue told you oft ) 
But that two Villaines, whofe falfe Oathes preuayl’d 
Before my perfect Honor, fwore to Cymbeline, 
I was Confederate with the Romanes : fo a5 
Followed my Banifhment, and this twenty yeeres, 
This Rocke, and thefe Demefnes, haue bene my World, 
Where I haue liu’d at honeft freedome, payed 
More pious debts to Heauen, then in all 
The fore-end of my time. But, vp to’th’ Mountaines, 80 
This is not Hunters Language ; he that ftrikes 
The Venifon firft, fhall be the Lord o’th’Featt , 
To him the other two fhall minifter, 
And we will feare no poyfon, which attends 
In place of greater State : 85 


70. weather] the weather Ktly. wither 80. to’th’| F.. to th’ Rowe,+. to the 


Long MS. ap. Cam. 
71. fauour.| favour! Rowe et seq. 
72. I haue] I Pope, Han. I’ve Dyce 
ii, iii. 
76. Followed] Ff, Var. ’73.  Fol- 
low’d Rowe et cet. 
Banifhment,| banishment; Pope 
et seq. 
this] these Johns. Varr. Ran. 
78. payed] pay’d Rowe et seq. (subs.) 
80. time.] time— Rowe ii, Pope, 
Han. Johns. 


Cap. et seq. 

Mountaines,| Fi, Rowe. moun- 
tains !"Pope,+, Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
mountain! Var. ’73. mountains; Cap. 
et cet. 

81. Hunters] F2, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Hunter’s F;F,, Coll. hunters’ Theob. 
et cet. 

82. o’th’| o’the Cap. et seq. 

85, 86. In...Valleyes] One line Han. 
Cap. et seq. 

85. greater] Om. Han. 


70. weather] For other instances where this means storms, tempests, see SCHMIDT 
(Lex.). 

73, 74. false Oathes ... perfect Honor] VAUGHAN (p. 437): Shakespeare 
here probably alludes to the privilege of nobility, which pledges its ‘honour,’ where 
‘lower ranks take their oaths,’ or pledge their ‘honesty’; and ‘perfect honour’ 
means ‘honour not violated by falsehood,’ as ‘false oaths’ means oaths so violated. 

84. will feare no poyson, which attends] Scumipr (Zex.), under the verb 
‘attend,’ used absolutely, quotes this passage and adds ‘which is present to do 
service.’ This, I fear, I do not understand. Does Schmidt mean that poison is 
present to do service? —VAUGHAN (p. 437) is, to me, almost equally obscure. His 
explanation is, ‘“‘ Poison” here is, as the context shows, the abstract for the concrete 
“attendant who poisons.”’ Both commentators apparently take ‘poison’ as the 
antecedent of ‘which,’ as, I think, wrongly. The antecedent is ‘fear,’ the fear of 
poison, from which the tables of the great, with their ‘tasters’ and closely covered 
dishes, were never free.—Ep. 

85. greater State] STEEVENS: The comparative ‘greater’—which violates the 
measure—is surely an absurd interpolation; the ‘low-brow’d’ cave in which the 


ACT III, SC. ii. ] 


Ile meete you in the Valleyes. 


CYMBELINE 207 


Exeunt. 86 


How hard it is to hide the fparkes of Nature ? 
Thefe Boyes know little they are Sonnes to’th’King, 
Nor Cymébeline dreames that they are aliue. 


They thinke they are mine, 


go 
And though train’d vp thus meanely 
V’th’Caue, whereon the Bowe their thoughts do hit, 
The Roofes of Palaces, and Nature prompts them 93 


86. Exeunt.] Exeunt boys. Pope. 
87. Nature?| nature! Theob. et seq. 
88. to’th’] to the Cap. et seq. 

89.. Nor...dreames| Nor...dreams not 
Anon. ap. Cam. WNor...e’er dream Sta. 
conj. (Atheneum, 14 June, 1873). 

are aliue] are still alive Ingl. 

90, ot. They...meanely] One line 
Rowe et seq. 

90, o1. they are mine,...train’d| they're 
mine; tho’ trained Pope, Theob.  they’re 
mine, tho’ trained Warb. theyre mine; 
and, though train’d Han. Dyce, ii, iii. 
they are mine: and, though train’d Cap. 


et cet. (subs.) 

gi. meanely] meanly. Warb. 

92. Pith... Bowe their] Ff (bow Ff) 
Johns. JI’th’ cave, where, on the bow, 
their Rowe. Here in the cave, wherein 
their Pope. I’th’ cave, there, on the brow, 
their Theob. It’ cave here on this brow, 
theiy Han. I’the cave, where on the bow, 
their Cap. I’th’ cave, wherein they 
bow, their Warb. et cet. (subs.) 

92, 93. hit, The] hit The F;F, et 
seq. 

93. Roofes] roof Pope ii. 
Warb. Johns. 


Theob. 


princes are meanly educated, being a palace of no state at all. [See Text. Notes.] 
—Matone: This kind of phraseology is used every day without objection. 

89. Nor Cymbeline ... are aliue] WALKER (Crit., ili, 322): Could 
Shakespeare’s ear have tolerated this line? [Walker then proceeds to divide the 
preceding lines in order to eliminate all harshness, and to add a syllable which he 
thinks is lacking, thus: ‘Ill meet you in the valleys.—How hard it is | To hide 
the sparks of nature! these ‘wo boys | Know little, they are sons to th’ King; nor 
Cymbeline | Dreams that they are alive.’ Can it be that it never occurred to 
Walker that all such divisions of lines are solely for the eye? If the lines are spoken 
intelligently no ear could possibly distinguish the cleavage.—En.] 

91-95. And though ... of others] Boas (p. 514): These lines guide us to what is 
(more than any other) the central idea binding together the two sections of the play. 
Nature will have her rights, and it is useless to seek arbitrarily to override them. The 
princely youths, though reared in a cave, pine for a court, which is their native air, 
while Imogen, whom the accident of their abduction has made heiress to the throne, 
yearns for the seclusion of domestic life, and thus has chosen a man of humble for- 
tunes as herhusband. She has even longed, in the pain of separation from Posthu- 
mus, to be ‘a neat-herd’s daughter,’ with him as their neighbor shepherd’s son. 

92. I’th’Caue, whereon the Bowe their, etc.] THEOBALD explains his 
reading by reminding us that ‘we call the Arching of a Cavern, or Overhanging of a 
Hill, metaphorically, the Brow.’ In a letter to Warburton (Nichols, ii, 267), 
Theobald writes, ‘as for your change of wherein to within, it gives such sense and 
elegance too, that I cannot but approve it.’ I can find no subsequent reference to 
this emendation, ‘within’; we may, therefore, conclude, as the Cam. Edd. has con- 
cluded, that it was withdrawn.—WaRBURTON thus paraphrases his emendation, 
which has been generally adopted: ‘Yet in this very cave, which is so low that they 


208 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iil. 


In fimple and lowe things, to Prince it, much 


Beyond the tricke of others. This Paladour , 95 

The heyre of Cyméeline and Britaine, who 

The King his Father call’d Guderius . Ioue, 97 
95. Paladour] Ff, Theob. Han. Warb. 96. who] Dyce, Glo. Cam. whom 

Cap. Polydor or Polydore Rowe et Ff. et cet. 

cet. 97. Guiderius. Joue,] Ff. Guide- 
96, 97. The...Guiderius] In paren- rius, Jove! Rowe,+, Guiderius,— 

theses, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Jove! Cap. et seq. (subs.) 


must bow or bend on entering it, yet are their thoughts so exalted,’ etc. This is the 
antithesis. Belarius had spoken before of the lowness of the cave.—JOHNSON: 
I think the reading is this, ‘I’th’ Cave, where in the Bow,’ etc. That is, they are 
trained up in the ‘cave, where their thoughts in hitting the bow, or arch of their 
habitation, hit the roofs of palaces.’ In other words, though their condition is low, 
their thoughts are high. The sentence is at least, as Theobald remarks, abrupt, 
but perhaps not less suitable to Shakespeare. I know not whether Dr Warburton’s 
conjecture be not better than mine. [This conjecture of Dr Johnson was reprinted 
in the Var. of ’73 and ’78, and there an end.]}—STAuNTON’s punctuation of the 
whole passage (Atheneum, June 14, 1873) is thus: ‘They think they are mine: 
and, though train’d up thus meanly, | I’th’ cave wherein they bow their thoughts 
do hit | The roofs of palaces.’ This punctuation was adopted by INGLEBY (see 
Corrections, p. xx.)—DOWDEN also adopts Staunton’s comma after ‘meanly.’— 
THISELTON accepts the Folio without change, and appears no whit disheartened by 
finding no apodosis to ‘though trained vp,’ etc. ‘The initial capital in Bowe,’ he 
says, ‘suggests that the “Bowe” meant is what they think to be ‘The Roofes of 
Palaces”; had ‘‘Bowe”’ been a verb we should have expected to find “hit” similarly 
capitalised. The Bowe may either be the vaulted ceiling of the Cave or the arch 
over its entrance. . . . The Cave’s “‘ Bowe” they take to be ‘‘ The Roofes of Palaces” 
and fret to find that it is nothing of the sort.—Porter and CLARKE: The compari- 
son is made of the arch of the Cave’s roof to a bow, whence they shoot forth the 
arrows of their lofty thoughts far beyond it. Warburton’s change, universally 
adopted, misses the metaphor altogether, and along with it the significance of the 
whole passage.—DowbeEn: I think this emendation of Warburton almost certainly 
right, the misprint ‘the’ for they is a very common one. . . . If we understood 
‘on the bow’ to mean like arrows on the bow, a change of one letter would give 
sense and grammar to the Folio text: ‘I’ th’ cave, there, on the bow, their thoughts 
do hit The roofs of palaces.’ In IV, ii, 380, a thought is compared to a bolt ‘shot 
at nothing.’ [Warburton’s emendation is so slight that it seems a small price 
to pay for an interpretation so fine: although these boys have been brought up in 
this mean, low cave, their thoughts are yet as lofty and royal as though they were 
re-echoed from the domes of palaces. ‘Ha, majesty!’ exclaims the Bastard in 
King John, ‘how high thy glory towers, When the rich blood of kings is set on 
fire!’—IT, i, 350.—Ep.] 

94. to Prince it] For other examples of this indefinite use of ‘it’ after nouns 
or words that are not generally used as verbs, to give them the force of verbs, 


such as ‘Foot it featly,’ Temp., I, ii, 380; ‘I’ll queen it no inch further,’ Wint. 
Tale, IV, iv, 460, etc., see ABBOTT, § 226. 
96. who] See ‘who,’ I, vii, 182. 


ACT III, SC. iii. ] CYMBELINE 209 
When on my three-foot ftoole I fit, and tell 98 
The warlike feats I haue done, his {pirits flye out 

Into my Story: fay thus mine Enemy fell, 100 


And thus I fet my foote on’s necke, euen then 
The Princely blood flowes in his Cheeke, he fweats, 
Straines his yong Nerues, and puts himfelfe in pofture 


That a¢ts my words. 


The yonger Brother Cadwall, 


Once Aruzvagus, in as like a figure 105 
Strikes life into my fpeech, and fhewes much more 


His owne conceyuing. 


98-104. Mnemonic Warb. 

08. three-foot ftoole] three-foot-stool 
Theob. Warb. 

99. The...flye| One line, Han. 

I haue] I’ve Pope,t, Dyce 

My wily 

99, 100. out Into] Out at Han. 

too. fay] Ff, Glo. Cam. say, Rowe 


Hearke, the Game is rows’d, 107 


tor. on’s] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce, 
Sta. Sing. Glo. Cam. on his Cap. et 
Cet: 
103. Straines] Stains Rowe ii. 
105. figure] vigour Coll. MS. 
107. Hearke,| [Horn] Heark! Coll. iii. 
rows’d,| Fz. rouz’d, F3F,. 
rouzd— Rowe, Pope, Han. Warb. 


Clicet- 
100, 101. thus mine...necke| As quo- 
tation, Theob. Han. Johns. et seq. 


rouz’d. Theob. Johns. Cap. Coll. i, ii. 
rous’d, Coll. iti. rouz’d! Var. 773 et 
cet. (subs.) 


103. Nerues] That Shakespeare often uses ‘nerves’ where we should say 
‘sinews’ we all know. I am not sure that in Shakespeare’s mind sinews, arteries, 
and nerves were not all three the sources of strength. Hamlet says, ‘My fate cries 
out, And makes each petty artery in this body As hardy as the Nemean lion’s 
nerve.’ Henry the Fifth calls on his soldiers to ‘Stiffen the sinews, summon up the 
blood.’ But Shakespeare, when the hot blood was stirring, cared little for any nice an- 
atomical distinctions; his Globe audience cared less; and, surely, we least of all—Eb. 

to5. in as like a figure] Herrorp: That is, acting my words as graphically 
as his brother. While Guiderius’s gestures reflect the immediate impression of 
Belarius’s tale, Arviragus, a more imaginative hearer, heightens what he hears by 
his greater energy of conception—Downen: I think that ‘figure’ here means 
‘part enacted,’ as in The Tempest, ‘Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou 
Perform’d.’—III, iii, 83. 

106. shewes much more] DowpEN: Not, shows more than his brother, but 
exhibits his own conception of things much more than merely gives life to what I 
say.—WvyattT: Belarius has here given us the clue to the discrimination of the 
characters of the two youths, apparently so much alike,—a clue that must be 
followed up in the succeeding scenes. 

107. the Game is rows’d] MappEN (p. 26, foot-note): The word ‘rouse’ seems 
to have been generally used in the absence of special terms of venery. We find it 
applied to the lion and the panther, and Gervase Markham, in his edition of the 
Boke of St. Albans (1595), sanctions its application to the hart. But it was in strict- 
ness a term of art used in reference to the buck, and it is so used by Shakespeare. 
Thus, even if other indications were wanting, we could have told that Belarius and 
the sons of Cymbeline were engaged in the sport of shooting fallow deer with the 
cross-bow when he exclaimed, ‘Hark, the game is roused!’ and that Henry Boling- _ 


14 


210 ' THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IH, sc. ili. 


Oh Cymbeline, Heauen and my Confcience knowes 108 
Thou didd’ft vniuftly banifh me : whereon 
At three, and two yeeres old, I ftole thefe Babes, 110 


Thinking to barre thee of Succeffion, as 
Thou refts me of my Lands. uriphile, 
Thou was’t their Nurfe, they took thee for their mother, 


And euery day do honor to her graue: 114 
108. Cymbeline,] Cymbeline. Ff. 113. Nurfe,] nurse; Theob. Warb. 
Cymbeline! Rowe et seq. et seq. 
knowes| know Pope, +. took] take Pope,+. 
111. Succeffion,| succession Cam. 114. her] thy Han. Warb. Cap. Ran. 
112. refts] refl’st Rowe et seq. Ktly. 


113. was’t] waft F3F,. 


broke had in mind the chase of the buck when he assured the Duke of York that his 
son would have found in John of Gaunt a father ‘to rouse his wrongs and chase them 
to the bay.’—Rich. IT: II, iii, 128. . . . Absolute certainty in Shakespearian criti- 
cism is attainable only in matters of venery and horsemanship. Shakespeare would 
as soon write of rousing a fox as of starting a deer. 

108-116. Oh Cymbeline... Game is vp] DOWDEN (p. 405, foot-note): Pro- 
fessor Ingram suggests to me that the speech as written by Shakespeare ended 
immediately before these lines with the words, ‘The game is roused.’ These words 
are awkwardly repeated at the end of the speech, ‘The game is up.’—[I do not 
doubt that Professor Ingram is right. May we not here recognise the same intru- 
sive hand from which this play suffers elsewhere?>—Eb.] 

tro. I stole these Babes] JoHNSON: Shakespeare seems to intend Belarius 
for a good character, yet he makes him forget the injury he has done to the young 
princes, whom he has robbed of a kingdom only to rob their father of heirs —The 
latter part of this soliloquy is very inartificial, there being no particular reason 
why Belarius should now tell to himself what he could not know better by telling it. 
—Inctesy: Belarius’s soliloquy here serves the purpose of a chorus. [I have 
grave doubts. It bears no resemblance to any of Shakespeare’s Choruses. A 
Greek Chorus was composed of spectators.—Eb.] 

112. Thou refts] See ‘solicits,’ I, vii, 175. 

112. Euriphile] WALKER (Crit., ii, 31): This is perhaps a corruption of Euriphyle. 
—Dvyce (ed. ii.): Walker certainly must have written ‘a corruption of Eriphyle.’ 
[Could Dyce have read to the end of Walker’s note? Following what is given 
above, Walker quotes from Chapman’s Odyss., xi, ‘“‘ Mera, Clymene, I witness’d 
there, and loath’d Eryphile,” [7. e., Eriphyle].’ Possibly the bracketed name was 
added by Lettson; still, it is there on the printed page.—Eb.] 

114. to her graue] MALoneE: The Poet ought rather to have written ‘to thy 
grave.’ This change of persons frequently occurs in our author. Thus, in Julius 
Cesar, ‘Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.’—III, i, 30; ‘Hail to thee, 
worthy Timon, and to all That of his bounties taste.’—Timon, I, ii, 129. We meet 
with this construction in Scripture, Acts, xvii, 2: ‘And Paul . . . reasoned with 
them out of the scriptures . . . and that Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ.’ 
Gain eee Bhs really were honouring their mother’s grave alone, 

y contained the ashes of their mother, or the ashes of one 


ACW Ty XE TN, || CYMBELINE Ail 


My felfe Belarius, that am Mergan call’d 115 
They take for Naturall Father. The Game is vp. Exit. 


s 


Scena Quarta. 


Enter Fifanio and Imogen. 
/mo. Thou told’ft me when we came fré horfe, y place 
Was neere at hand : Ne’re long’d my Mother fo 


To fee me firft, as I haue now . Pifanio, Man: 5 
116. [Horn again sounded. Coll. ii. 5. fee me] feeme F2. feem F,F,. 
Game is] game’s Pope,+. I haue now.) Han. Johns. Coll. ii, 
1. Scene continued. Rowe, Theob. Glo. Cam. Ingl. J have now— Rowe, 
Scene vi. Eccles. Pope, Theob. Warb. Coll. i, Sta. Ktly. 
Another Part of the above country. I hope now Sprenger. I do now Daniel, 
Cap. Near Milford-Haven. Var. ’73. Huds. JI haue now: Ff. et cet. 
4. at] ar F2. Pifanio, Man:] Ff.  Pifanio! 
4,5. my... fee me] his... see him Rowe ii,+. Pisanio, Man, Johns. 
Southern MS. Han. Pisanio! Man! Rowe i, et cet. 


mistaken to be so. The expression, therefore, is not, I apprehend, incorrect, still 
less spurious.—Br. NicHotson (NV. & Q., VII, ix, 324, 1890): I think this may be 
explained by supposing that a natural stage-action takes place, and we are at 
liberty to suppose such the more if it explain a passage. Belarius, having said, 
“They took thee for their mother,’ his mind naturally reverts to the fact that she 
has been his devoted wife and chief companion of his solitude for many years, and 
he turns away and pauses meditatingly on her. I say ‘devoted’ and ‘pauses,’ 
because they must not only have been accomplices, but to be an accomplice 
she at least must have loved him, and if he had not done so at first,—and it is more 
likely that he did if we consider his character,—his lonely life with her only as his 
helpmate in bringing up such children, he must have learned to love her. After, 
then, this pause, marked by or;—, he reflectingly says, ‘And every day do 
honour to her grave,’ where he the more uses the third person, because his mind 
again recurs to his first topic—the sparks in the youths’ noble and princely natures, 
—and leads him to reckon this filial love among their excellences. [See I, ii, 58, 
where there is a similar change of personal pronoun and a similar explanation given 
by Nicholson. See also IV, ii, 284, 285, and V, i, 4-6.] 

116. Naturall Father] Crarcre (NV. E. D., s.v. Natural): 13. Of children actu- 
ally begotten by one (in contrast to adopted, etc.) and especially in lawful wedlock; 
hence, frequently equivalent to legitimate. 6. Similarly of other relationships 
(especially natural father or brother) in which there is actual consanguinity or kin- 
ship by descent. [The present line quoted in illustration.] 

1. Scena Quarta] Eccies: The time I suppose to be in the early part of the 
morning of the same day as the last scene. It seems as if Pisanio had reached 
the court in the afternoon of the same also, which he does in the ensuing scene.— 
Dantet (Sh. Soc. Trans., 1877, p. 244): Between this and the preceding scene 
there is an interval of one clear day. Imogen and Pisanio journey into Wales. 
This scene begins Day 7. At its close Pisanio hastens back to Court. 

4,5. My Mother... see me first] VERPLANCK: Southern altered his Fourth 


212 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT 111, SC. iv. 


Where is Pofthumus 2 What is in thy mind 6 
That makes thee ftare thus ? Wherefore breaks that figh 
From th’inward of thee ? One, but painted thus 


Would be interpreted a thing perplex’d 9 
6. Where] Where Ktly. et cet: 
What is| What’s Ktly. 8. One,] One, One, Fi, Rowe i. One 


8. th’inward| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Han. Cam. 
Dyce, Sta. Sing. Ktly. the inward Cap. 


Folio thus: ‘Ne’er long’d fis Mother to see him first,’ which certainly is more con- 
sistent with Imogen’s state of mind, and renders the words ‘As I have now’ more 
relative. 

s, 6. To see... in thy mind] WaLkeR (Crit., iii, 323): We should ar- 
range, I suspect,—‘To see me first as I have now:—Pisanio!— | Man!—Where’s 
Posthumus?—What is in thy mind,’ etc. [Again we have an arrangement which 
no ear of mortal mould could detect when spoken by an impassioned actress. 
Nor is this all. Such an arrangement betrays a lack of dramatic instinct in Walker 
As the tone stands in the Folio, the weary, woebegone, impatience of Imogen in 
its rhythm: ‘Where IS Posthumus?’ Walker’s ‘Where’s Posthumus?’ is no more 
dramatic than if she had asked, ‘Where’s my handkerchief?’—Ep.]—StTauntTon 
also re-arranged these lines and supplied an omission (Atheneum, 14 June, 1873). 
But he, too, has ‘Where’s Posthumus?’ which-is less excusable in him than in 
Walker; Staunton was at one time on the stage, so it was said. His notice is as 
follows: ‘I would read and arrange,—but that the alteration might be thought too 
violent even in this most corruptly printed play,—“‘To see me first, as I to see 
this haven, 1 Now, Pisanio, Man! Where’s Posthumus?” See ante,—‘‘this same 
blessed Milford,’’—and note that “haven” here and in other places must be pro- 
nounced kane; as “‘raven,” metri gratia, must be often sounded rane.’ Did Staunton 
notice that he changes the accent of ‘Posthumus’ from its usual erroneous position 
on the penult to the antepenultPp—Eb.] 

5. as I haue now] Capeti: Imogen only expresses the degree of her longing 
by saying ’twas as great as her mother’s; its object is sufficiently known, and the 
mention of it this way has more beauty than had she made it direct —VauGHAN 
(p. 439) finds a contrast between ‘Ne’re long’d my Mother’ and ‘as I have now’ 
“in this short time, since we came from horse, have longed to see Posthumus.’’’ 
[Is not Rowe’s broken sentence to be preferred? Pisanio’s agonised expression 
startles Imogen and affrights her. Suspicion begins to dawn on her, and her sen- 
tence remains unfinished.—Ep.] 

8. From th’inward of thee] Scummpt (Lex.) gives as parallel to the present 
phrase, ‘those jacks that nimble leap to kiss the tender inward of thy palm.’—Sonz., 
cxxvili. Yet this is not the same ‘inward’ as Pisanio’s, and, according to Bart- 
lett’s Concordance, these two are the only instances of the word, which really needs 
no parallel or explanation whatever —Ep. 

8. painted] That is, described or set forth as in a picture. In Coriolanus, 
after Menenius has been describing Coriolanus and ends with that unparalleled 
expression, ‘He wants nothing of a god but eternity and a heaven to throne vale 
Sicinius sighs, ‘Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.’ Then Menenius replies, ‘I 
paint him in the character.’—V, iii, 27.—Ep. 


ACTIN SCV) CYMBELINE 204 


Beyond felfe-explication. Put thy felfe 10 
Into a hauiour of leffe feare, ere wildneffe 

Vanquifh my ftayder Senfes. What’s. the matter? 

Why tender’ft thou that Paper to me, with 

A looke vntender? If’t be Summer Newes 


Smile too’t before : if Winterly , thou need’ft 15 
But keepe that count’nance ftil. My husbands hand ? 
That Drug-damn/d Italy, hath out-craftied him, 7 
11. hauiour] haviour Rowe,+, Cap. 13. tender’ fi] offer’st Pope, Han. 
Varr. Ran. Knt, Sta. Ktly. [Pisanio reaches her out a 
wildneffe] wilderness Warb. (‘cor- Letter. Cap. 
rected in MS.’ ap. Cam.) 14. If’t] If it Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. 
12. my] thy Pope, Han. Varr. Knt, Coll. 
flayder| F2. fiaieder F,, Rowe i. 15. too’t] to’t FF, et seq. 
steadier Rowe ii, Pope, Han. /ftaider 16. hand ?] hand! Cap. et seq. 
ey Gapeeticets 17. out-craftied| out-crafty’d Cap. 
Senfes.] senses— Pope, Theob. Mal. ouwt-crafted Varr. Ran. Dyce ii, 
Han. Warb. iii. 


10. selfe-explication] CAPELL (p. 111): That is, beyond the person’s own power 
of explaining. 

11. hauiour] Murray (JN. E. D.): Originally adopted from the French avier, 
avoir, having, possession, property, etc. . . . In the 14th and 15th centuries, asso- 
ciation with the English have, having, introduced the variants haver, havoir, havour, 
and the / was established before 1500. At the same time the parallel bekavour was 
formed in the English behave; and in the 16th century, havowr, besides its original 
sense of ‘possession,’ took also that of behavour. Subsequently the termination of 
both words passed through eour to iour (cf. saviour, and vulgar ‘lovier’); the original 
sense, ‘possession,’ became obsolete; and, in the new sense, haviour came down 
alongside of behaviour, of which it may often have been viewed as a shortened form. 

13, 14. tender’st...vntender] IncLtEBy: A quibble, very common with 
the writers of that time, though insufferable now. [If by a ‘quibble’ is meant a 
pun, and if a ‘pun’ means a jest, then was Imogen’s quibble as insufferable in 1609 
as it would be in 1909 or 2009. It was, I think, merely an association of sound, not 
of meaning, that caused one ‘tender’ to follow another ‘tender,’ an illiteration 
that has nothing more of a quibble in it than there is in our ‘might and main,’ 
‘stock and stone.’ It is the same with Lady Macbeth’s ‘T’ll guild the faces of the 
grooms withal For it must seem their guilt’—this too has been called a quibble. I 
do not forget old John of Gaunt’s death bed, where ‘misery makes sport to mock 
itself’; and where he plays nicely with his name of set purpose. That situation 
is far different from the impassioned moments of Lady Macbeth and of Imo- 
gen.—EbD.] 

14. Summer Newes] MALONE: So, too, in Sonnet xcviii: ‘Yet nor the lays 
of birds nor the sweet smell Of different flowers in odour and in hue Could make 
me any summer’s story tell,’ etc. 

16. But keepe] DercHron: Possibly ‘But’ should be Not, 7. e., the news, if 
bad, will be sufficient in itself, and there will be no need of your fierce looks. 

17. Drug-damn’d Italy] Herrorp: That is, detested for its (poisonous) drugs. 

17. out-craftied] Martone: Thus the old copy, and so Shakespeare wrote. 


214 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACY 411, Se, iv. 


And hee’s at fome hard point. Speake man, thy Tongue 18 

May take off fome extreamitie, which to reade 

Would be euen mortall to me. 20 
Pif. Pleafe you reade, 

And you fhall finde me (wretched man) a thing 

The moft difdain’d of Fortune. 


Imogen reades. 

Hy Miftris (Pifanio) hath plaide the Strumpet in my 25 

Bed: the teftimonies whereof, lyes bleeding in me.I fpeak 
not out of weake Surmifes, but from proofe as fjirong as my 
greefe,and as certaine as lexpect my Reuenge. That part, thou 
( Pifanio) muft atte for me, if thy Faith be not tainted with the 
breach of hers; let thine owne hands take away her life: I fhall 30 
giue thee opportunity at Milford Hauen. She hath my Letter 
for the purpofe ; where, if thou feare to firike, and to make mee 
certaine tt 1s done, thou art the Pander to her difhonour , and 
equally to me aifloyall. 


Pif. What fhall I need to draw my Sword, the Paper 35 
Hath cut her throat alreadie? No, ’tis Slander, 
Whofe edge is fharper then the Sword, whofe tongue ay 
18. Speake man,] Speak, man, Fy, 35, 36. Sword,...alreadie?| Sword.,... 
Rowe i. Speak, man; Rowe ii. et seq. already, F3F,, Rowe. sword?...already. 
26. lyes] lie Rowe et seq. Pope et seq. 
29. me,] me. Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. 36, 37- Slander,...Sword,| Ff, Rowe, 
30. owne] Om. Theob. ii, Warb. Pope, Han. Glo. — slander,...sword, 
Johns. Theob. Warb. Johns. — slander,—.., 
34. [She swoons. Ktly. sword; Knt. — slander,...sword; Coll. 
35-47. Mnemonic Pope, Warb. Sta. slander;...sword; Cap. et cet. 


So in Coriolanus, ‘chaste as the icicle that’s curded by the frost from purest snow.’ 
—IV, iii, 15].—Dvce (ed. ii, reading owt-crafted): But in such cases no stress can 
be laid on the spelling of the Folio. In Coriolanus it has ‘You have made faire 
hands, You and your Crafts, you have crafted faire, —IV, vi, 117; and while in 
All’s Well it has ‘muddied,’ in The Tempest it twice has ‘mudded.’ 

34. disloyall] Lapy Martin (p. 190): My pen stops here. I know not how to 
write. Such a charge as that letter contains, to meet the eye of such a creature! 
She has begun to read, full of apprehension for her husband’s safety, and from his 
hand she now receives her deathblow. As the last word drops from her lips, her 
head bows in silence over the writing, and her body shrinks as if some mighty rock 
had crushed her with its weight. These few words have sufficed to blight, to 


blacken, and to wither her whole life. The wonder is that she ever rises. I used to 
feel tied to the earth, 


ACRHIME SC. 1Vv. | CYMBELINE 215 


Out-venomes all the Wormes of Nyle, whofe breath 38 
Rides on the pofting windes, and doth belye 
All corners of the World. Kings, Queenes, and States, 40 


Maides, Matrons, nay the Secrets of the Graue 
This viperous flander enters. What cheere, Madam ? 


Imo.Falfe to his Bed ? What is it to be falfe ? 43 

38. Nyle,] Fi, Rowe i. Nile, Rowe world, Kings...matrons; Ecl. 
ii, Pope, Han. Glo. Nile; Theob. et 41. Matrons,| matrons,— Knt, Sta. 
Gets 43. Bed?] bed! Rowe et seq. 

40. World.] Ff, Rowe,+. world,— What...falfe2?] What! is it to be 
Knt. world: Cap. et cet. false M. Mason, Ran. Sing. Ktly, 


40, 41. World. Kings ... Matrons,| Coll. iii. 


38. Out-venomes] Thus in Richard II: ‘Pierced to the soul with slander’s 
venom’d spear.’—I, i, 171. 

38. Wormes of Nyle] That is, all the asps of the Nile. Cleopatra asks the 
Clown, ‘Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there?’—V, ii, 242. 

39-41. doth belye ... World. Kings ... Matrons] VAUGHAN (p. 441): 
First, ‘corners’ cannot be belied in Shakespeare’s sense of that word, ‘to tell 
lies of,’ although they may be ‘filled with lies,’ and so be belied in a conceived 
sense of that word, which is not Shakespeare’s meaning. . . . I would interpret 
and punctuate thus: ‘doth belie,—All corners of the world,—kings, queens, and 
states, Maids, matrons’; which means ‘where language is borne on the fleet winds, 
and at every corner of the world, belies kings, queens, and persons of highest dignity, 
and both maid and matron:—nay,’ etc—DowbEN adopts Vaughan’s reading and 
interpretation. Yet if the punctuation of the Folio is to be discarded, and it is not 
felicitous, Eccles’s punctuation (see Text. Notes) seems to me to be preferable to 
Vaughan’s; in the latter there is a parenthetical clause so elliptical that it has to be 
explained in the paraphrase by the addition of an af. Vaughan’s reason for making 
this clause, ‘All corners of the world,’ parenthetical seems to me to lack strength. 
We are dealing with poetry, and is there anything to be criticised in the passionate 
exclamation that Slander’s breath rides on the posting winds and covers with lies 
every corner of the earthPp—Ep.] 

40. States] JoHNSON: That is, persons of highest rank. 

43. False to his Bed? etc.] Mrs Grirriry (p. 481): Nothing in situation of 
circumstance, in thought, or expression can exceed the beauty or tender effect 
of these lines. They catch such quick hold of our sympathy that we feel as if the 
scene was real, and are at once transported amidst the gloom and silence of the 
forest, in spite of all the glare of the theatre, and the loud applause of the audience. 
It is in such instances as these that Shakespeare has never yet been equalled, and 
can never be excelled. What a power of natural sentiment must a man have been 
possessed of who could so adequately express that kind of ingenuous surprise upon 
such a challenge, which none but a woman can possibly feel! Shakespeare could 
not only assume all characters, but even their sexes too.—Epwarp Rose (Sh. 
Soc. Trans., 1880-6, p. 1, 1879): I shall endeavour to sketch the effect upon many 
different personages of sudden emotion; but I shall look upon their characters not as 
many and diverse, but as essentially only two—as modifications (or, more rarely, 


216 THE TRAGEDIE OF FACT Il, SCriv. 


[43. False to his Bed? etc. ] 


pure examples) of two great opposing types: the men who are habitually self- 
conscious, given to analyse, their own minds and deeds, and the men who are not. 
Yet, to make clear what I mean, I should like to mention one or two characters in 
real life which impress every one, I believe, as almost pure types of the two classes 
I have named. In the class of simple, direct minds, acting from obvious motives 
and with a minimum of self-consciousness, must surely come those of John Bright, 
of Darwin, of the late Duke of Wellington, and of a vast mass of undistinguished 
people, some dull, some hard, some exquisitely innocent, some marvellously selfish. 
These people vary as much as angel from devil, yet there is about them all a certain 
childlikeness, good or bad, a certain self-confidence, useful or dangerous. Even 
Darwin, while he admits most freely that he may be mistaken, has the seli-confi- 
dence of utter purity; he knows that he is merely telling you what he has seen 
honestly, dully, and without arriére-pensée or reserve. So the Duke of Wellington 
did simply what seemed to him his duty, never thinking what it might seem to 
other men: and so many a man quite unconsciously obeys his own pleasure, his own 
ambition, or the will of some superior nature who without an effort masters him. 
Of the opposite kind are many modern poets—Tennyson, Browning, very notice- 
ably the late Arthur Clough:—men who constantly look into their own minds, 
examine their own motives, deliberate, doubt, and change. A student of human 
nature, in the literary sense—a subjective poet—is, in the nature of things, 
bound to be of this class. Goethe and Byron, though both men of much prac- 
tical sense, belonged essentially to it—they made it the business of their lives 
to think and to express their thoughts: they were not among the great doers 
of this world. Their fine general powers might have obtained for them a good 
place among practical men, but nothing like the rank to which some parts of their 
faculties would seem to have entitled them. That there have also been men of 
infinite littleness in this class hardly needs to be said: a tiny intellect eagerly 
scrutinising itself cannot well be of any calculable value. Shakspere, as a purely 
dramatic poet, had of necessity a nature prone to self-analysis, though his genius 
was large enough to analyse also nearly every other mind, while it yet noted all 
natural objects, and constantly kept all things in due proportion. . . . In his very 
latest plays, the Winter’s Tale and Cymbeline, he has companion studies of two 
contrasting characters, under circumstances to a considerable extent the same. 
Both Hermione and Imogen are accused by their husbands of infidelity, though it is 
true that the former is impeached in the presence of many people, while the latter 
is quite alone, except for the faithful servant who bears the news. But Hermione’s 
is evidently a simple and grand nature of unusual strength, which, though fully 
realising its position, had force enough to bear with the amplest dignity a terrible 
trial. For this great soul no personal attack is too heavy to be endured; it is 
only at the death of her son—following upon a joy so great that she could utter but 
one word—that, like Hero, and not unlike Othello, she falls into a deadly swoon. 
It is not thus that Imogen’s curious, imaginative character is affected by such an 
accusation. She thinks; thinks fast and hard, and talks as fast—she makes what 
is an almost continuous speech of sixty lines. She does not even casually mention 
Cloten without an elaborate definition of his character—‘that harsh, noble, 
simple nothing.’ These are her first words, after that silence so often to be noticed 
in parallel cases in Shakspere.—Sudden Emotion: in ils Effect upon different 
Characters, as shown by Shakespeare. 


ACI, SC. iv, | CYMBELINE 217 


To lye in watch there, and to thinke on him? 
To weepe ’twixt clock and clock? If fleep charge Nature, 45 
To breake it with a fearfull dreame of him, 
And cry my felfe awake? That’s falfe to’s bed? Is it? 
Pifa. Alas good Lady, 


Imo. J falfe? Thy Confcience witneffe : Jachimo, 49 
47. That’s] that Pope, Theob. Han. 47. Is it?] Ff, Rowe, Johns. Dyce, 
Warb. Sta. Glo. Cam. Om. Pope,+. Sepa- 
falfe] Fy. rate line Cap. et cet. 
to’s] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Sta. 49. witneffe:] witness, Rowe,+, Del. 
Glo. Cam. to his Cap. et cet. Ingl. witness. Coll. i, ii, Ktly. 
bed?] bed; Rowe, Coll. bed! Iachimo,] Jachimo,— Theob. 
Pope,+. bed, Ran. Dyce, Sing. Ktly. Warb. Johns. 


Glo. Cam. 


43. What is it to be false ?] VAUGHAN (p. 442, adopting M. Mason’s reading 
—see Text. Notes): Imogen does not ask the general question what falsehood to his 
bed is, but whether all which she describes, that is, all which she herself does, be 
falsehood; and then concludes, ‘that is falsehood, is it?’ Further, there is but 
one question, and that is whether the accumulation of acts here described consti- 
tutes falsehood; not many questions as to many acts, for that spoils the picture 
of her absolute devotion, which shows itself in a whole group of actions and suffer- 
ings. Of the impressive group she says, ‘that’s false to his bed; is it?’ a question 
she has already asked at the beginning of the sentence, and which she energetically 
repeats at the end of it. [It seems to me that the appeal here to be made is to the 
dramatic effect. Imogen, as Rose says, ‘thinks fast,’ but she thinks piecemeal, 
and each reminiscence, as it rises in her mind, is a question, with the faintest 
possible pause, but yet a pause, after each one, for the indignant denial. We must 
bear in mind that she is before an audience, and, however fast she may think, she 
must not think faster than they, and so o’erstep the modesty of nature—ED.] 

44. To lye in watch there, etc.] HUNTER (ii, 2905): Shakespeare has shown 
here, and in the character of the wife of Hotspur, how beautifully he can depict 
conjugal tenderness and affection. Lady Percy of King Henry the Fourth was the 
Countess of Northumberland, of Shakespeare’s own time, the amiable wife of a 
morose husband. A daughter of hers was Countess of Leicester, wife of a Sidney; 
and I am tempted to quote a passage from one of her letters to the Earl, so like 
this speech of Imogen, that if we may not suppose she had recently read it, and the 
words had left their trace on her memory, we may at least take them as proof 
how justly the Poet has here delineated some of the most sacred and honourable 
of human sentiments: ‘Mr Seladine comes in with your letter, whom I am engaged 
to entertain a little: besides it is supper-time, or else I should bestow one side 
of this paper in making love to you. And since I may with modesty express it, I 
will say that if it be love to think on you sleeping and waking, to discourse of nothing 
with pleasure but what concerns you, to wish myself every hour with you, and to 
pray for you with as much devotion as for my own soul, then certainly it may be 
said that I am in love; and this is all which you shall at this time hear from yours, 
D. Leycester.’ 

46. fearfull dreame of him] That is, fearful for him, for his safety. 

49. Thy Conscience witnesse: Iachimo] CapeEtt (p. 111): As the moderns 


218 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iv. 


Thou didd’ft accufe him of Incontinencie, 50 
Thou then look’dft like a Villaine : now, me thinkes 
Thy fauours good enough. Some lay of Italy 


(Whofe mother was her painting) hath betraid him: 53 
51. me thinkes] me thinks F3;.  me- Elze. colour was Herr. broker was 
thinks F, et seq. (i. e. brother, i. e. mother) Sprenger. 
52. fauours] favours Rowe et seq. motheur was Becket. smoother was: 
good] well Cap. Jackson. honour was her plaything 
53. mother was] feather was Cap. Gould. 
Ecl. plumage was Bailey. favour was 53. betraid] bedlaid Bulloch. 


Cartwright. pander was Bulloch, 


[i. e., Capell’s predecessors] have pointed this passage, Imogen’s appeal is to Tachimo’s 
conscience; whereas the Folios direct it to Posthumus, and the other is apostro- 
phized afterwards.—Ecctes: I cannot avoid entertaining a suspicion that this 
address might have been directed to Pisanio, whose close attendance upon her 
person might be supposed to afford him the best assurance of her fidelity —DeEttus, 
as well as all editors who adopted Rowe’s punctuation (see Text. Notes), suppose 
that this appeal is made to Iachimo.—HERzBERG (p. 460) dissents, however, and 
follows the Folio. ‘Thy,’ he says, ‘can refer only to Pisanio In the vividness of her 
emotion Imogen then turns to the absent Iachimo, to whom, of course, “Thou” 
applies. In moments of passionate excitement such a change of appeal is as true 
psychologically as it is common to poets of all timés.—VaucHan: ‘Thy conscience 
witness’ applies to Posthumus—and means more than its words adequately ex- 
press—in the sense of ‘Thy conscience witness whether it is I or thou that is false,’ 
and does not apply to Iachimo.—DownpEN: That is, thy inmost consciousness. 
Ts this addressed to Pisanio or to Posthumus? I think to the latter. [I doubt 
that Imogen was at that instant conscious of Pisanio’s presence.—ED.] 

52. fauours good enough] MAtone: So, in Lear, ‘Those wicked creatures yet 
do look well-favor’d, when others are more wicked.’—II, iv, 250. 

52. Some Iay of Italy] Murray (N. £. D.) describes the Jay as a noisy, 
chattering bird with vivid tints of blue, heightened by bands of jet black and 
patches of white. From a bird of this description the sense is easily transferred 
to ‘a showy or flashy woman; one of light character.’ And inasmuch as its earliest 
use (according to Murray) in this transferred sense is found in The Merry Wives, 
where Mrs Ford says, ‘We'll teach him to know turtles from jays’—III, iii, 44, 
it is not impossible that it is Shakespeare’s own original comparison, unless he 
obtained the idea from the Italian Puta, which means both the bird and a wanton 
woman. Capell was the first to call attention to this Italian similarity, and it was 
afterward put forward by SINGER, without credit to Capell, and mentioned by 
Knicut, but I think no importance has been attached to it—Ep. 

53. (Whose mother was her painting)] The text of Rowe’s first edition 
reads, ‘Whose Wother,’ etc. It is a misprint, merely an inverted M, which was 
corrected in his second edition, but not before CHARLES GILDON put forth a volume 
in 1710 containing Shakespeare’s Poems with Critical Remarks, etc., of his own, 
and a Glossary of about five pages containing An Explanation of the Old Words 
us’d by Shakespeare in his Works. In this Glossary he loyally inserted Wother, 
and still more loyally supplied a definition, namely: ‘Merit, Beauty, etc.’ I am 
indebted for this reference to Gildon to Theobald, who was distressed over his 


ACD Tt, SC. iv.] CYMBELINE 219 


[53. (Whose mother was her painting) ] 


inability to find another example of Wother, no matter what it meant. Theo- 
bald’s own emendation was not happy; the text ‘seems to me,’ he says, ‘to have 
this sense, “‘Whose Mother was a Bird of the same Feather’; i. e., such another gay 
wanton: which is severe enough. I have imagin’d the Poet might have wrote: 
“whose mother was her planting,” 7. e., was bawd to her, and planted her on Pos- 
thumus: which is still more sarcasticall.—‘The true word,’ asserts WARBURTON, 
‘is meether, a north country word, signifying beauty. So that the sense of her 
meether was her painting is that she had only an appearance of beauty, for which 
she was beholden to her paint.’—I can find no such word as meether in Dr JosEPH 
WRIGHT’S monumental English Dialect Dictionary—Dr Apis WRicuHT, in the 
foot-notes in the Cam. Ed., says that the conjecture was ‘withdrawn in MS.’— 
Dr JoHNson wisely and temperately observes: ‘The present reading, I think, 
may stand; “some jay of Italy,” made by art the creature, not of nature, but of 
painting. In this sense ‘‘painting” may be not improperly termed her “‘mother.””’ 
—I think that Theobald may have indirectly suggested HANMER’sS emendation 
which, in his first edition, he inserted in his text without comment; it is ‘Whose 
feathers are,’ etc. This, after changing it to ‘Whose feather is,’ etc.,.was adopted 
by CAPELL.—STEEVENS tells us that he met with a similar expression in one of the 
old comedies, but forgot to note the date or name of the piece: ‘—a parcel of con- 
ceited feather-caps, whose fathers were their garments.’ This quotation is almost 
conclusive, ifi—. In the Variorum of 1803 Harris is quoted as remarking that 
““Whose mother was her painting’ means her likeness.’ The connection is not 
readily detected, I think, between the betrayal of Posthumus and the painted 
likeness of the mother of some jay of Italy. As a family portrait it may have 
been source of pride, but as a means of seduction its value is obscure.—In WILLIAM 
RICHARDSON’S Essays, which are thoughtful and didactic, but barren of enthusiasm 
or vivacity, there is on p. 190 a foot-note on the present passage, which to R. G. 
WuitE (Shakespeare Scholar, p. 462) appears to be ‘entirely satisfactory.’ ‘Imo- 
gen,’ says Richardson, ‘is moved by indignation, and even resentment. These 
feelings incline her to aggravate obnoxious qualities in the object of her displeasure. 
The “jay of Italy” is not only very unworthy in herself, but is so by transmitted, 
hereditary, and, therefore, by inherent wickedness. She derived it from her 
parents: matri tur pi filia turpior; her mother was such as she is; her picture, her 
portrait; for the word “painting” in old English was used for portrait. Shake- 
speare himself so uses it: “Laertes, was your father dear to you? Or are you 
like the painting of a sorrow, A face without a heart?” Perhaps, too, the poet 
uses that sort of figure which, according to rhetoricians, presents as expressing 
some strong emotion, the consequent in place of the antecedent, or the effect for 
the cause. So that, instead of saying that the jay of Italy was the picture of her 
mother, Imogen says, more indignantly and more resentfully, that her mother 
was such another, was her very picture. So that she was inherently and hereditarily 
worthless, and capable of the arts of seduction.’—This is really what I suppose 
Harris means, and it is to me eminently unsatisfactory. I cannot divine why, at 
that supreme hour, Imogen’s thoughts should fly to the jay’s mother as a distinct 
person. If it aggravate the jay’s guilt by showing that her mother before her was 
as bad as she is, why stop at the mother? The hereditary stain will be deeper if 
the jay had a gay granddam, and so on, further and further back. Of course this 
is absurd, but, I think, it tests Richardson’s theory. Moreover, the meaning which 


220 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT III, SC. iv. 


[53. (Whose mother was her painting) ] 

Claudius, in speaking to Laertes, attaches to ‘painting’ cannot I think be attached 
to the word as Imogen uses,it. Claudius refers to it as a mere piece of canvas, a 
simulacrum. Whatever Imogen meant, this she did not mean, We must bear in 
mind that jays not only in Italy, but everywhere, were conspicuous by their paint- 
ing. Of this enough examples may be found in Measure for Measure.—KNIGHT 
asks, ‘May we venture to suggest, without altering the text, that muffler was the 
word; which as written might be easily mistaken for “mother”? The class of per- 
sons which Shakespeare here designated by the term “jay” were accustomed to 
wear a veil or mask called a “‘muffler,” [because, as Randle Holmes says, in his 
Academy of Armory,] “they were ashamed to show their faces.” The jay of Italy 
needed no other disguise than the painting of her face—her muffler was her “paint- 
ing.””’ 

In January, 1852, Cortrer announced the discovery of his Annotated Copy of 
the second Folio, and published in the next year the Notes and Emendations con- 
tained in it. On p. 518 of that volume the emendation, by the annotator of the 
present passage, is thus set forth by Collier: ‘We are told by the amender of the 
Folio, 1632, to read “Who smothers her with painting,” etc. We fairly admit it to 
be possible that the old corrector, not understanding the expression, ‘Whose 
mother was her painting,” as it was recited before him, might himself mistake it 
for “‘Who smothers her with painting’’; but it is much more likely that in this place, 
where Imogen was to give vent to her disgust’and anger, she would not use a 
metaphor, especially so violent a one, as to call the daubing of the face actually the 
“mother” of a courtezan. . . . Imogen would, therefore, be disposed to render the 
contrast as strong as words could make it, and would not be content to throw cen- 
sure on her debased and’ profligate rival merely by a far-fetched figure of speech. 
Shakespeare, indeed, in this very play employs such a figure, but under extremely 
different circumstances, viz., where Guiderius ridicules Cloten for asking if he did 
not know him by his fine clothes. The answer is: ‘‘ No, nor thy tailor, rascal: Who 
is thy grandfather? he made those clothes, Which, as it seems, make thee.”—IV, 
ii, to9-111. These lines occur in Act IV, and what Imogen says of the “jay of 
Italy” is inserted in the immediately preceding Act; and if one thing more than 
another could persuade us that “who smothers her with painting” is the true 
text, it is that, if we suppose differently, it makes Shakespeare employ the very 
same metaphor in two consecutive Acts. Our great dramatist was neither so 
poverty-stricken as regards language, nor so injudicious as regards nature, to 
repeat himself in this way. . . . Imogen would not study metaphors at such a 
time. . . . It is an axiom that genuine passion avoids figures of speech, because 
passion does not reflect, and a figure of speech is the fruit of reflection; therefore, 
we feel assured that the scribe misheard, and wrote “whose mother was her paint- 
ing” instead of “who smothers her with painting.”” The coincidence of sound seems 
otherwise almost inexplicable.—Inasmuch as this emendation was the source of 
much controversy, it seems best that the painful student should have thus before 
him the arguments wherewith Collier first introduced it. The substance of the 
foregoing from his Notes, etc., Collier repeated in his edition, and added: ‘besides, 
if Shakespeare had meant to say that “painting” was the mother of the Jay of Italy, 
he would not have inserted the passage as he has done; the line does not in any 
way call for it; to have said “Whose painting was her mother” would have suited 
the line just as well as the inversion. No inversion is used when Guiderius speaks of 


INCI Tt, E> Wl CYMBELINE 221 


[53- (Whose mother was her painting) ] 


the tailor as the grandfather of Cloten. In Hamlet “good mother,” as it properly 
stands in the First Folio, had been misprinted in the quarto of 1611, “could smother.” 
—I, ii, 77. Still . . . we do not place the emendation of the manuscript in the 
text, upon our ordinary principle, not to disturb words in the old copies which bear 
a consistent and intelligible meaning.’—Cottrer announced his possession of this 
Annotated Copy of the Second Folio in The Atheneum on the 31st of January, 1852. 
A few weeks afterward, in March, HALLiwELt wrote a small pamphlet of fifteen 
pages, wholly directed against this emendation: ‘Whose mother was her painting.’ 
“The original text, whatever the reading, clearly means,’ says Halliwell, ‘that the 
jay of Italy was the creature of Painting, not of Nature, and that this is expressed 
by the original reading in grammatical phraseology, and that it is confirmed by 
other passages in the works of Shakespeare himself.’ (Italics Halliwell’s.] . . . Not 
only is this kind of imagery unusual, but we actually find it introduced into the very 
next Act of this same play, ‘Cloten. Thou villain base, know’st me not by my clothes? 
Guiderius. No, nor thy tailor, rascal: who is thy grandfather? he made those 
clothes, which, as it seems, make thee?’—IV, ii, 107-111. Here is precisely the same 
thought, and might be expressed in the same terms, ‘whose father was his clothing.’ 
A much stronger instance will be found in All’s Well, ‘Let me not live, quoth he, 
. . . to be the snuff of younger spirits . . . whose judgments are Mere fathers of 
their garments.’—1, ii, 58. Mr Collier has a sensible note on this passage. ‘Tyr- 
whitt,’ he says, ‘would read feathers for “fathers”; but the sense of the old reading 
is very obvious; the judgements of such persons are only employed in begetting 
new modes of dressing their persons.’ Precisely so; and a similar explanation 
will suit the passage in Cymbeline. If ‘whose mother was her painting’ was, as I 
have heard it said, too obscure a phrase to be used before the ‘groundlings’ of The 
Globe, surely ‘mere fathers of their garments’ is open to the same objection. . . . 
It must be recollected that the metaphorical use of father, mother, parent is of 
very frequent occurrence in the old dramatists. . . . The imagery is surely not 
more forced with painting than with clothing. If a man’s dress can be meta- 
‘phorically called his father, a courtesan’s painting can, with equal propriety, be 
called her mother; and it must be also noticed that Imogen continues the imagery 
in the next line, calling herself ‘a garment out of fashion.’—A. E. B[rar] (V. & 
Qu., I, v, 484, May, 1852): In the following lines from As You Like It, mother is 
directly used as a sort of warranty of female beauty! Rosalind is reproving Phebe 
for her contempt of her lover, and in derision of her beauty, she asks: ‘Who 
might be your mother? That you insult, exult, and all at once over the wretched?’ 
—IIl, v, 35. Now if Phebe had been one who smothered her in painting, an ap- 
propriate answer to Rosalind’s question might have been—her mother was her 
painting! Most certainly this latter phrase is the more graceful mode of express- 
ing the idea. [Surely, the appeal to a mother is not here made as a ‘warranty of 
beauty,’ but as a warranty of sweetness and forbearance.—Ep.]|—Anon. (Black- 
wood’s Maga., October, 1853, p. 471): We take it that ‘mother’ here means J¢aly, 
and that the painting means model; so that the gloss on the passage should run 
thus: Some jay of Italy, to whom Italy (7. e., Italian manners) was the model ac- 
cording to which she shaped her morals and her conduct, hath betrayed him. 
That this, or something like it, is the meaning is confirmed by what follows—‘ Poor 
I am stale, a garment out of fashion’; that is, the new fashions, the new-fangled 
ways, are to be found only in Italy, and doubtless that daughter of Italy—that jay 


2 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iv. 


to 
NO 


[53. (Whose mother was her painting ) ] 


or imitative creature by whom Posthumus is now enslaved—is a considerable pro- 
ficient in those fashionable and novel methods of conquest. . . . If we adopt 
Johnson’s meaning, we must change ‘was’ into is. [The anonymous author of 
these notes in Blackwood is spoken of by Ingleby in N. & Qu., V, vii, 224, as ‘the 
late Mr Lettsom, but Lettsom himself, in his Preface to Walker’s Criticisms, etc., 
p. liv, speaks of Anon.’s remarks in Blackwood in terms of decided contempt.—ED.] 
—R. G. Warre (Shakespeare's Scholar, pp. 44-48) opposes the emendation of 
Collier’s MS., because it is ‘not absolutely necessary,’ and is, moreover, a descent 
from poetry to prose. The best portion of White’s remarks is a refutation of 
Collier’s rash assertions that ‘Imogen would not study metaphors at such a 
moment,’ and that ‘genuine passion avoids figures of speech.’ In White’s subse- 
quent edition, in 1860, his own contribution to the discussion is mainly a reference 
to the foregoing paper in his Shakespeare’s Scholar.—STAUNTON quotes Steevens’s 
extract from an old Comedy (the title whereof Steevens could not remember) and 
adds another ‘equally pertinent,’ from Middleton’s Michaelmas Term, ‘Why 
should not a woman confess what she is now, since the finest are but deluding 
shadows, begot between tirewomen and tailors? for instance, behold their parents!’— 
III, i, 4. Collier’s annotator proposes a change which everyone must admit to be 
singularly striking and ingenious.—HALLIWELL (Folio edition, 1865): ‘[Collier’s 
MS.], not being acquainted with the figurative idiomatic phraseology which was 
current under various forms in the dramatic literature of Shakespeare’s period, 
gives a reading which is unquestionably more: suitable to modern hearers, and, 
under any circumstances, must be considered a verbal alteration of peculiar 
ingenuity.’-—Dvyce (ed. ii.) refers to the emendation by Collier’s MS. as ‘most 
ingenious. —The CAMBRIDGE EpirTrIon (ed. i, 1866): If the text be right, the 
meaning probably is: ‘Whose mother aided and abetted her daughter in the trade 
of seduction.’ Such a person is introduced by Middleton in A Mad World, My 
Masters, where in Act I, sc. i, we find: ‘See where she comes, The close curtezan, 
whose mother is her bawd?’ It suits the character of Imogen that she should 
conceive a circumstance to account for, and in some measure palliate, her husband’s 
fault.—Ibid. (ed. ii.) Dr W. Atp1s Wricut adds to the foregoing note the following 
comment: ‘The passage from Middleton is quoted in Warburton MS., but it does 
not justify the explanation above given, which I always regarded as very doubtful. 
If the reading in the text be correct, Johnson’s interpretation is right. Compare 
IV, ii, ro8—-111.’—R. M. Spence (N. & Qu., VI,i, 52, 1880): A few lines below, in 
the same speech of Imogen, we read: ‘All good seeming . . . shall be thought 
Put on for villainy: not born where ’t grows,’ etc. So the beauty which Imogen 
feared had seduced Posthumus into infidelity to her was ‘not born where it grew, 
was not native, but the product of meretricious art. Of the seeming bloom on the 
vice-paled cheek, the paint-pot was the “mother.” ’—Hupson (1881): That is, who 
was born of her paint-box; who had no beauty, no attraction, no womanhood in her 
face, but what was daubed on; insomuch that she might be aptly styled the creature 
of her painting, one who had daubery for her mother. So, in Lear II, ii, Kent says 
to Oswald, ‘You cowardly rascal, Nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.’ 
And when Cornwall says to him, ‘Thou art a strange fellow; a tailor make a man?’ 
he replies, “Ay, a tailor, sir; a stonecutter, or a painter, could not have made him 
so ill, though they had been but two hours at the trade.’ A figure more in Shake- 
speare’s style than this [the present text] is hardly to be met with in the whole 


ACT III, SC. iv.] CYMBELINE 223 


Poore I am ftale, a Garment out of fafhion, 
And for I am richer then to hang by th’walles, 55 


55. I am] I’m Pope,+. 55. th’walles] the walls Cap. et seq. 


compass of his plays. . . . Nothing short of a written order direct from the Poet 
himself would persuade me into the substitution [of Collier’s MS.], and even then I 
should entreat him to reconsider before he authorized the change.—R. ROBERTS 
(New Sh. Soc. Trans., 1880-6, p. 202): Compare: ‘If Madame Newfort should not 
be link’t with these Ladyes, the chain wold never hold; for shee is sister to the 
famous Mistress Porter . . . and to the more famous Lady Marlborough (whose 
Paint is her Pander).’—Newes from the New-Exchange, or the Commonwealth of 
Ladies. Printed in the yeere of Women without Grace, 1650, p. 9. Again, com- 
‘pare: ‘Finally hee would thou his equalls . . . and said that his Arrne was his 
Father, his works his Linage.’—Shelton’s Transl. of Don Quixote, 1632, f. 133. 
[Br. NicHotson (NV. & Qu., VI, viii, 241, 1883) pronounced these two quotations 
“exact parallels’ to Imogen’s words. Their value is, I fear, weakened by their 
late date——Ep.]—IncteBy: The hysteria passio was, on more special grounds, 
called ‘the mother,’ as in Lear, II, iv, 56. Accordingly the word stands for the 
characteristic strength or weakness of woman; and here it seems to stand for fe- 
male vanity.—IB. (Revised ed.) justly remarks that ‘the use of the word “mother” 
must not here be confounded with the meaning as a warranty for female tender- 
ness, nor with the hysteria passio for which it sometimes stands. —THISELTON: 
The Jay itself is no sham, for all its showy plumage: the jay of Italy is an egregious 
fraud,—the daughter of her pigmentary adornments, to which she owes her ex- 
istence, such as it is, and without which she would not count. But it is not unlikely 
that there is a concurrent allusion to the ‘mother’ of fluids. Minsheu explains: 
‘the mother or lees of wine, so called, because it nourisheth and preserveth the wine 
as a mother.’ We might interpret, ‘Whose quality depends on her paint.’ There 
may also be a connection between the ‘mother’ and the colour of the liquid, of which 
it may have been regarded as the source—DowbEN: The suggestion ‘whose mother 
wore her painting,’ or ‘saw her painting’ (letters transposed from ‘was’), meaning 
whose mother was of the same ill trade, has not hitherto been made. If we might 
disregard the parenthesis, a slight emendation would alter the sense. Imogen 
might have had a thought similar [to the quotation from Middleton given by the 
Cambridge edition], but have been unable,—like Desdemona,—to frame her lips 
to utter so gross a word; and we might read: ‘Some jay of Italy Whose mother 
was—her painting hath betray’d him.’ 

[The whirlpool of comment that has eddied about this phrase has, apparently, 
revealed only ‘motion without progression.’ I am content to accept the text as 
it stands with Dr Johnson’s paraphrase. In the Text. Notes the conjectures are 
recorded of Zachary Jackson, Andrew Becket, and George Gould, careless and 
confident amenders of Shakespeare’s, whose random guesses I announced, long ago, 
I should cease to record on these pages. They may be found duly credited by the 
CAMBRIDGE Epirors, whose long-suffering toleration exceeds mine. Possibly it is 
well in emergencies like the ‘present to set forth every conjecture, and I have, 
therefore, set forth those of these three copesmates.—Ep.] 

54. Garment out of fashion] Strrvens: Thus, in Westward for Smelts, 
1620: ‘But (said the Bainford fish-wife) I like her as a garment out of fashion.’ 

55. hang by th’walles] SteEvENS: This does not mean to be converted into 


224 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iv. 


I muft be ript : To peeces with me : Oh! 56 
Mens Vowes are womens Traitors. All good feeming 
By thy reuolt (oh Husband) fhall be thought 
Put on for Villainy ; nét borne where’t growes, 
But worne a Baite for Ladies, 60 
Pifa. Good Madam, heare me. 
Imo. True honeft men being heard, like falfe 4neas, 


Were in his time thought falfe : and Syzons weeping 63 
56. Oh!] Ff, Rowe i, Coll. ii, iii. Oh, 61. Good] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
Rowe ii,+. O/ or O, Cap. et cet. Warb. 
57. good feeming] good-seeming Ktly. 61. me.] me— Rowe,+. 
59. borne] born F3F, et seq. 62-68. Mnemonic Pope, Warb. 
growes,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 62. True honeft] True-honest Walker 
Knt, Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam: (Crit., i, 33), Dyce ii. 
grows; Theob. et cet. 63. Synons] Synon’s Rowe. Sinon’s 
Theob. 


hangings for a room, but to be hung up, as useless, among the neglected contents 
of a wardrobe. So in Meas. for Meas.: ‘Which have, like unscour’d armour, hung 
by the wall.’—I, ii, 171. When a boy, at an ancient mansion-house in Suffolk, 
I saw one of these repositories, which (thanks to.a succession of old maids!) had 
been preserved, with superstitious reverence, for almost a century and a half. 
Clothes were not formerly, as at present, made of slight materials, were not kept in 
drawers, or given away as soon as lapse of time or change of fashion had impaired 
their value. On the contrary, they were hung up on wooden pegs in a room ap- 
propriated to the sole purpose of receiving them; and though such cast-off things 
as were composed of rich substances were occasionally ripped for domestick uses 
(viz., mantles for infants, vests for children, and counterpanes for beds), articles of 
inferior quality were suffered to ‘hang by the walls’ till age and moths had de- 
stroyed what pride would not permit to be worn by servants or poor relations. 
‘Comitem horridulum trita donare lacerna’ (Pers. I, 54) seems not to have been 
customary among our ancestors, . . . and there is yet in the wardrobe of Covent- 
Garden Theatre a rich suit of clothes that once belonged to King James I. When 
I saw it last it was on the back of Justice Greedy, a character in Massinger’s Vew 
Way to Pay Old Debts. [MAtone disagrees with this view, which really seems to 
be correct, in the following note:] Imogen, as Mr Roberts suggests to me, ‘alludes 
to the hangings on walls, which were in use in Shakespeare’s time.’ These being 
sometimes wrought with gold or silver, were, it should seem, occasionally ript and 
taken to pieces for the sake of the materials. 

56. I must be ript] Both Rorre and DownEN see a play on words here, and 
refer to Cloten’s threat to Pisanio: ‘Tle haue this secret from thy heart, or rip Thy 
heart to finde it.—III, v, 108. I venture to think that it would be more ac- 
curately defined as a figure or metaphor than as a play on words.—Ep. 

56. Oh!] Is this an exclamation of anger, or of sorrow, or of scorn, or is it a 
shudder?—Ep. 

62, 63. honest men .. . thought false] Eccirs suggests that ‘heard’ is 
here repeated in reply to what Pisanio has uttered. This seems very doubtful, if 
the punctuation proposed in the following note by Vaughan is to be accepted.— 


ACT III, SC. iv.] CYMBELINE 22s 


Did fcandall many a holy teare : tooke pitty 64 
From moft true wretchedneffe. So thou, Poffhumus 
Wilt lay the Leauen on all proper men; 66 
a 64. leare:] tear, Pope, Han. Dyce ii, 66. Leanen on] leven to Ff, Rowe, 
iii, Glo. Cam. Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. level to 
tooke] tooky F2. took FF. Han. 

65. wretchedneffe.| wretchedness: Cap. on all proper| on all; proper 

et seq. Daniel. 


VAUGHAN (p. 444): This is, ‘honest men when they spoke like’ (‘being heard like’) 
‘7mneas were in the time of Aneas thought false’; not, as all editors seem to under- 
stand, ‘honest men were thought false, like false AZneas, as soon as they were 
heard.’ We should print thus: True honest men, being heard like false Aeneas, 
were in his time thought false.’ —DowneNn says of this punctuation that ‘perhaps it 
is right.’ It seems to me entirely right.—Ep. 

63. Synons] In the ‘skilful painting, made for Priam’s Troy,’ which poor 
Lucrece sees and describes there is much about Sinon’s perjury and his ‘borrow’d 
tears,’ and how she tears his likeness in the picture with her nails.—R. of L., 1521- 
1564. 

64. tooke pitty] That is, abstracted pity. 

65. So thou, Posthumus] Warpurton: When Posthumus thought his 
wife false, he unjustly scandalised the whole sex. His wife here, under the same 
impression of his infidelity, attended with more provoking circumstances, acquits 
his sex, and lays the fault where it is due. The poet paints from nature. This 
is life and manners. [This idea Warburton proceeds to amplify in half a dozen 
commonplace lines. The whole note, Epwarps opines, might be referred as an 
example under his canon that ‘The Profess’d Critic, in order to furnish his quota 
to the bookseller, may write Notes of Nothing; that is, Notes which either explain 
things which do not want explanation; or such as do not explain matters at all, but 
merely fill up so much paper.’ 

66. lay the Leauen] CApeLt (p. 112): To ‘lay the leaven’ on anything is a 
scripture phrase; and used (as grammarians are wont to term it) 7m malam partem, 
for—vitiate or corrupt it, the sense it has here; and is also that of ‘o’erleaven’ in 
Hamlet, I, iv, 29; but in Meas. for Meas. we have ‘leaven’d,’ its participle, in the 
sense of season’d simply: for ‘leaven’ is a sour dough, seasoned with salt; . . . to 
a lump of this dough before salting (at which time it is insipid and tasteless) is 
Ajax compared by Thersites in Tro. and Cress., U, i, 15. 

66. Leauen] Upton (p. 212): A reference to 1 Corinthians, v. 6-8, ‘a little 
leaven leaveneth the lump,’ explains this present passage, which means that Posthu- 
mus ‘will infect and corrupt their good names, like sour dough that leaveneth the 
whole mass, and will render them suspected. In line 68 I would read, ‘From thy 
great fall.’ Compare, ‘And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot; to mark the full- 
fraught man and best indued with some suspicion. _I will weep for thee; For this 
revolt of thine, methinks, is like Another fall of man.’—Hen. V: II, ii, 138. [The 
similarity between this passage and the present would lend unusual plausibility to 
Upton’s conjecture, if the smallest objection could be raised against ‘faile.’ In 
Worpswortu’s quotation (p. 333) of this passage from Cymbeline, fall is printed 
without comment. I have failed to find it in any text.—ED.] 

66. proper men] DowpeEn: Not, I think, handsome men (a frequent meaning 


15 


226 THE TRAGEDIE CF [AcT 111, SC. iv. 


Goodly, and gallant, fhall be falfe and periur’d 67 
From thy great faile : Come Fellow, be thou honeft, 
Do thou thy Mafters bidding. When thou feeft him, 
A little witneffe my obedience. Looke 70 
I draw the Sword my felfe, take it, and hit 
The innocent Manfion of my Loue (my Heart :) 
- Feare not, ’tis empty of all things, but Greefe : 
Thy Mafter is not there, who was indeede 
The riches of it. Do his bidding, ftrike, 75 
Thou mayft be valiant in a better caufe ; 
But now thou feem’ft a Coward. 
Pif. Hence vile Inftrument, 
Thou fhalt not damne my hand. 


Imo. Why, I muft dye: 80 
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art 
No Seruant of thy Mafters. Againft Selfe-flaughter, 82 

67. Goodly, and gallant] goodly and 75. firike,] strike; Pope,+. strike. 
gallant Han. Dyce, Ktly. Glo. Cam. Cap. et seq. 

69. bidding.] Ff, Rowe, Coll. Ktly, *76. caufe;| cause, Pope,+, Knt, Coll. 
Cam. bidding: Pope et cet. Sta. Cam. 

70. obedience.| Ff, Rowe,+, Cam. ~ 79. [Hurling it away. Coll. iii. 
obedience: Cap. et cet. 81. And if] An if Walker. 

Looke| Look, F;F;, Cap. Look! 82. Againji] ’Gainst Pope,+, Dyce, 

Pope et cet. ii, ii. 


73. Feare not,| Fear not; Cap. et seq. 


of ‘proper’), but rather honest, respectable, as in ‘a proper gentlewoman.’—2 Hen. 
TVET aieen OG: 

75. Do his bidding, strike] Compare the treatment of this scene in the two 
versions: that in Boccaccio, and that in Westward for Smelts. In the former it rises 
to a level no higher than the rest of the story; but in the latter it has, in rude out- 
lines, the pathos and beauty of the present scene—a proof quite sufficient, as I 
think, to show that it is an adaptation from Shakespeare.—Eb. 

82, etc. Against Selfe-slaughter, etc.] Once before we have had a reference 
to this ‘divine prohibition.’ Hamlet wishes ‘that the Everlasting had not fix’d 
His canon ’gainst self-slaughter!’? In reference to this passage (see note ad loc., 
I, ii, 132, of the present edition).—R. Grant Wuite remarks, ‘Shakespeare may 
have known the Bible, as he knew all other things in his day knowable, so much 
better than I do that I may not without presumption question what he says about 
it. But I have not been able to discover any such specific prohibition?—Bishop 
Worpsworta (p. 149): There is nothing in which Shakespeare is more emphatic 
than in representing the act of suicide as a direct violation of the Divine law [as in 
Hamlet and in the present passage]. I am not aware that such a prohibition is to 
be found in the Holy Scripture [foot-note: Unless it be in the Sixth Command 
ment]; in Cymbeline any reference to Revelation would have been out of place 
The ‘canon,’ therefore, to which our poet refers must be one of natural religion, 


ACF IIT, SC>1Vv. | CYMBELINE 227 


There is a prohibition fo Diuine, 83 
That crauens my weake hand : Come, heere’s my _ heart : 
84. That] That’t Vaun. 84. heart:| heart— Rowe,+. heart. 


Cam. 


[It is unlike Shakespeare to refer, without due authority, to a specific ‘canon,’ or 
to a ‘divine prohibition.’ A conviction, therefore, has never deserted me that 
eventually time would vindicate him. Almost discouraged by a fruitless search 
through a printed collection of ‘The Canons of the Church’ from the earliest 
years down to the time of Shakespeare, at last, in happy hour, through a common 
friend, I applied to Father Ciirrorp, formerly a member of the English Province 
of the Jesuits, and now parish priest of ‘Our Lady of Mercy’ in Whippany, New 
Jersey, whose wide and accurate learning is acknowledged in two hemispheres. 
From his courteous hands I have received the following note, whereby the question 
is finally set at rest, and Shakespeare’s accuracy vindicated: ‘The ecclesiastical 
enactments on the subject of suicide are very rigid, very specific; and almost as old 
as Church legislation itself. Thus: (A) In the Rituale Romanum, in current use 
today, we have the following: De Exequiis: Cap. 2: Quibus non licet dare eccle- 
siasticam sepulturam. S. 3: Se ipsos occidentibus ob desperationem vel iracundiam 
(non tamen si ex insania id accidat) nisi ante mortem dederint signa poenitentiae. 
(B) Father Lehenkuhl (vol. i. of his Theologia Moralis, editio sexta) quotes the 
Decretales as affording abundant evidence of the Church’s mind in the matter. 
(The Decretales or Litterae Decretales, compiled by Alexander III. (1159-1187), 
were published by Gregory IX, and afterwards re-edited again under Papal direc- 
tion by S. Raymund de Pennaforte (1234), commonly known as S. Raymundus 
Non-natus. The contents of this remarkable collection of Decisions on Cases 
that had come up for solution previous to the twelfth century really carry one 
back to the fourth, and, possibly (?), to the third century.) (C) Bishop Hefele 
(Hist. Ch. Councils) quotes a canon (No. 4) of the XVI. Synod of Toledo: ‘If anyone 
has attempted to commit suicide and has been prevented, he is to be excluded for 
two months from all fellowship with Catholics and from the Holy Communion.’ 
I quote from William Clark’s Trans., vol. v, p. 245. Edinburgh, T. and T. Clark. 
(D) Cardinal de Lugo (a Spanish Jesuit Theologian of great name and influence) 
cites some very recondite and curious evidence from S. Augustine Contra Petili- 
anum, cap. XXIV, apropos of the Circwmcelliones, or Circuitores, who defended 
suicide, apparently, in just such cases as Hamlet finds himself in, and who even 
described it as a species martyrii. (E) In the De Civitate Dei, cc, xvii-xxviii, of 
Book 1, the Saint discusses quite an array of instances and cases, and invariably 
concludes against the lawfulness of suicide in any circumstances whatsoever. 
It is a most interesting discussion,—Lucretia, Cato, Regulus, Judas Iscariot,— 
they all come up for notice. (F) A Council of Braga (Concilium Bracharense), 
anno 411, is also instanced by De Lugo; but scholars, I believe, are agreed that the 
Council in question left no clear evidence behind it. The decrees usually cited are 
now known to be spurious. Yet, spurious or genuine, they are very old and show 
the mind of the time,—say, of a century and half later. In all these enactments 
the word canon is explicitly used. Whether the Elizabethans vaguely appre- 
hended all this intricate and ecclesiastical connotation in their use of the word, 
or whether Shakespeare saw it and felt it, is a nice point that I should like to see 
discussed.’] 


228 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT III, SC. iv. 


Something’s a-foot : Soft, foft, wee’l no defence, 85 
Obedient as the Scabbard. What is heere, 

The Scriptures of the Loyall Leonatus, 

All turn’d to Herefie ? Away,away 

Corrupters of my Faith, you fhall no more 


Be Stomachers to my heart : thus may poore Fooles go 
Beleeue falfe Teachers : Though thofe that are betraid 
Do feele the Treafon fharpely, yet the Traitor 92 
85. Something’s] Something Han. ii. 88. [Pulling his letter out of her 
a-foot] F,. afoot F;F,. in front Bosom. Rowe (Letters Pope),+. 
Coll. MS. afore’t— Rowe et seq. 89. Faith,] faith! Theob. Warb. et 
{Opening her breast. Rowe. seq. 
foft,| Ff, Rowe,+. soft! Coll. 90. heart:| heart! Cap. heart. 
Sing. Dyce, Ktly. soft; Cap. et Dyce. 
cet: ot. Though] Om. Pope, Han. 
86. heere,| Ff, Rowe. here; Knt. thofe that are] those, are Vaun. 
here? Pope et cet. are] art F. 


85. Something’s . . . no defence] This line, VAUGHAN (p. 445) suggests, 
should be placed in a parenthesis, whereby it is the ‘heart’ and not Imogen herself 
generally that is made obedient to the scabbard.—DownbEN adopted the sug- 
gestion. Would not the time, however, which Imogen must take in discovering 
what it is which is afore her heart, and the delay implied by ‘Soft, soft,’ break 
this connection with heart, when heard on the stage? This line is highly dramatic. 
There lies in it surprise, wonderment, and ‘soft, soft’? shows that she was searching 
fold after fold of her garment until she finds the letters beneath the inmost of all,— 
next to her very heart.—Ep. 

87. The Scriptures] STEEVENS: So Ben Jonson, in The Sad Shepherd: ‘The 
lovers’ scripture, Heliodore’s, or Tatii.’? [I, ii, ‘scriptures’ here means novels, 
stories, not letters—Ep.] Shakespeare means, however, in this place an opposi- 
tion between ‘scripture,’ in its common signification, and heresy. [It seems to me 
it would be more correct to say that having called the dear letters of her loyal 
lover ‘scripture,’ the instant thought of his disloyalty as quickly suggested ‘heresy.’ 
—Ep.]|—HEravup (p. 331): Where did Imogen find this ‘canon ’gainst self- 
slaughter’? not in the ‘scriptures,’ to which Imogen afterwards alludes, for they 
have no special prohibition of such a crime; and the Hebrew annals, like the 
Roman, contain many instances of self-sacrifice. The curious use made of those 
‘scriptures’ as a simile might, again, be almost taken as a testimony against the 
reformers in favour of the claims of the Catholic Church to set her authority 
above the written word. [And so Heraud’s note runs on, to prove that Shake- 
speare was an ‘extreme Protestant’ and would ‘no more admit a paper Pope 
than he would a personal one,’ etc. I do not, I cannot believe that Heraud 
imagined that Imogen, in referring to the ‘Scriptures’ of Leonatus, supposed that 
what was afore her heart was a copy of Posthumus’s Bible, and yet his words 
come perilously near that meaning. Probably he considered it so evident that 


love-letters were intended that he did not deem it worth while to mark the 
distinction.—Ep.] 


ACT III, SC. iv.] 


Stands in worfe cafe of woe. 


CYMBELINE 229 


And thou Pofhumus, 93 


That didd’ft fet vp my difobedience ’gainft the King 

My Father, and makes me put into contempt the fuites 95 
Of Princely Fellowes, fhalt heereafter finde 

It is no acte of common paffage, but 

A ftraine of Rareneffe: and I greeue my felfe, 

To thinke, when thou fhalt be difedg’d by her, 99 


93-95. Lines end: woe ... fet vp... 
Father ... fuites Cap. Var. ’78, 85, Ran. 
Steev. Varr. Ecl. Knt, Coll. Sing. Dyce, 
Glo. Cam. Huds. Rlfe, Dtn, Dowden. 

93. thou] thou too, Ktly. conj. 

94. That didd’fi fet vp] Ff, Rowe, 
Han. Var. 773, Mal. Knt, Coll. Sing. 
Dyce, Sta. Ktly. That set Pope, Theob. 
Warb. That set’st Johns. That 
diddest set up Var. 778, ’85. thou that 
did’ st set wp Cap. et cet. 

94-096. Four lines, ending: dzfobe- 
dience...makes...fuites...finde (reading 
Against...and did’ st make...even the suits) 
Han. 

Lines end: ’gain/t...contempt 


...finde Mal. Sta. 
JSuites...finde Ingl. 
95. My Father] Om. Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. 
and makes| Ff. and mad’st 
Rowe,+, Cap. Var. 778, ’85, Ran. 
Ecl. and didst make Han. mad’st 
Var. ’73. and make Cap. et cet. 
95, 90. fuites...finde| One line Ktly. 
96. Fellowes,| Fellows, F,. fellows; 
Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Jhalt| shall Sta. ii. (misprint). 
98. greeue] grieve F3F,. 
Selfe,| self Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
99. difedg’d| dis-sieg’d Theob. conj. 
(Sh. Rest., 189, withdrawn.) 


fet...vp...Father... 


93-05. Stands ... the suites] Within the compass of these three lines 
so many changes have been made in the division of them, for the sake of scansion, 
that the CamBripGE EpItIon apparently gave up the attempt to set them forth 
in Text. Notes with intelligible clearness and devoted a full page to reprint the 
various versions at full length. I do not flatter myself that I have succeeded where 
my betters have failed. If I have failed I could be extremely sorry that it was not 
in a better cause. For what do all these changes amount to, when no ear either 
can, or ought to, detect them on the stage? unless we return to the sing-song chant 
of Betterton’s days? Is rhythm to be our master? The cadences into which 
Shakespeare’s music flows, under the stress of deep emotion, do not depend on the 
length of lines or on their division.—Ep.] 

96. Princely Fellowes] Matone: One of the same fellowships or rank with 
myself.—CoL1iER pronounced ‘Fellows’ ‘absurd,’ and in his second and third 
editions adopted the reading of his MS. followers.—ANON. (Blackwood, Oct., 1853, 
p. 471): Imogen means princely equals. This is undoubted. Posthumus was 
beneath her in rank; yet, for his sake, she had declined the proposals of suitors as 
high-born as herself. 

97. common passage] Scumipr (Lex.): That is, occurrence. 

98. straine of Rarenesse] Scumipt (Lew.): That is, motion of the mind, im- 
pulse, feeling. 

98. I greeue my selfe, etc.] Compare Hermione’s pathetic speech to 
Leontes, in The Wint. Tale: ‘how this will grieue you, When you shall come 
to clearer knowledge that You thus haue publish’d me.’—II, i, 119 (of this 
ed.).— Eb. 


230 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IH, SC. iv. 


That now thou tyreft on, how thy memory 100 
Will then be pang’d by me. Prythee difpatch, 
The Lambe entreats the Butcher. Wher’s thy knife? 
Thou art too flow to do thy Mafters bidding 
When I defire it too. 
Pif. Oh gracious Lady : 105 
Since I receiu’d command to do this bufineffe, 
I haue not flept one winke. 
Imo. Yoo’t,and to bed then. 


Pif. Ve wake mine eye-balles firft. 109 
too. That] Whom Pope,+. Johns. Sta. break...first Rowe, Pope, 
ror. me.| me— Pope, Theob. ii, Theob. Warb. Hal. crack...first Coll. 
Han. ii, iii, (MS.). moake...firsi— Ktly. 
102. thy] the F,, Rowe, Pope, Han. wake...out first Johns. conj. Ingl. waste 
103. too] to F.. ... first Elze. wake...blind first Han. et 


109. wake...firft] Fi (eye-balls Fy), cet. 


roo. thou tyrest on] WxHITNEY (Cent. Dict.): The Primary intransitive mean- 
ing of to ‘tyre’ is: To engage in pulling or tearing or rending: used especially in 
falconry of hawks pouncing upon their prey. The secondary meaning is: To be 
earnestly engaged; to dote; gloat [as in the present line]. 

ror. pang’d] For many other examples of verbs formed from nouns, see ABBOTT, 
§200; where ‘panging’ is quoted from Hen. VIII: II, iii, 15: ‘’Tis a sufferance 
panging As soul and body’s severing.’ 

tog. Ile wake mine eye-balles first] Jonnson: I read: Ill wake mine 
eye-balls out first, or blind first. [Of these two readings, only the former is John- 
son’s own; the latter appeared in Hanmer’s text twenty years before the date of 
Johnson’s edition.|—STEEvENS: Dr Johnson’s conjecture may receive some sup- 
port from the following in The Bugbears, a MS. comedy more ancient than Cym- 
belines: ‘I doubt Least for lacke of my slepe’l shall watche my eyes oute.’ [Steevens’s 
quotations, which cannot be verified, should be received with caution —Ep.] 
Again in The Revenger’s Tragedy, 1608: ‘A piteous tragedy! able to wake An old 
man’s eyes bloodshot.’ [Hazlitt-Dodsley reads ‘able to make’ and in a foot-note 
says: ‘The Qto reads wake.’ Churton Collins also reads ‘make’ and no foot-note.] 
Again, in The Roaring Girl, 1611: ‘T’ll ride to Oxford, and watch out my eyes, but 
Pll hear the brazen head.’—Co.tier (ed. ii, reading cracke for ‘ wake’): Neither 
Hanmer nor any of his successors has informed us where the expression to ‘wake 
eye-balls blind’ is to be found. It is, in truth, without precedent, whereas ‘to crack 
the eye-balls’ is a phrase perfectly natural, and requires no addition of ‘blind’ 
or of any other word. Our text is that of the MS. and we are confident it is right. 
—STAUNTON after referring to Hanmer’s emendation and that of Collier, ‘who,’ 
he says, ‘adopts the almost ludicrous alteration of his MS.,’ remarks: ‘There is 
not the slightest need for a change of any kind. “Wake” is a synonym for watch, 
and to watch is a technical term in falconry for the cruel method of taming the 
newly-taken hawks by depriving them of sleep. “TI’ll wake mine eye-balls’® then 
means, “I'll prevent sleep even by the tortures of my eye-balls.” The very zi 
pression, indeed, though overlooked by all the editors, occurs in Lust’s Dominion, 


INCIE THU, SER hy || : CYMBELINE 231 


[109. Ile wake mine eye-balles first] 


IJ, ii: “Tl still wake And waste these balls of sight by tossing them In.,”’ etc. So, 
also, in Middleton’s Roaring Girl, [quoted by Steevens]_—Dvyce (Strictures, p. 212): 
‘To crack the eye-strings’ is a not uncommon expression, and, indeed, occurs in this 
very play, ‘I would have broke mine eye-strings, crack’d them,’ etc., I, iv, 24; but 
who ever heard of ‘cracking the eye-balles,’ though Mr Collier calls it ‘a phrase 
perfectly natural’? . . . I cannot think that [in the passage quoted by Mr Staun- 
ton] the verb ‘wake’ (after which Mr Staunton throws out the comma) governs 
‘eye-balls,’—the meaning I conceive to be, ‘T’ll still keep myself awake, and waste 
these balls,’ etc. (So in Spenser: ‘All night she watcht; ne once adowne would 
lay Her dainty limbs on her sad dreriment, But praying still did wake, and waking 
did lament.’—The Faerie Queene, b. i, c. xi, st. 32). Some word, therefore, seems to 
be required after ‘eye-balls’; nor is the metre, which throughout this scene is far from 
irregular, complete without it. [This note Dyce repeated in his ed. ii.}—INcGLEBY 
quotes from Democritus his Dreame, Peter Woodhouse, 1605: ‘and then I make no 
doubt, Thou’lt laugh no more, but weep thine eye-balles out.’—p. 2, ed. Grossart. 
[But ‘weeping’ is not waking. Here, if ever, we must obey the only safe rule that 
the hardest reading is to be preferred. Staunton is, I think, right in adhering to 
the Folio, if any legitimate sense can be obtained from it. Dyce himself does not 
appear to be thoroughly convinced of the necessity of emendation; he says: ‘some 
word seems to be required after eye-balls.’ This is not saying that the line would 
be unintelligible without it. The objection, at first sight, to Staunton’s interpre- 
tation is that wafch and ‘wake’ are hardly synonyms. Watch but not ‘wake’ is 
the technical term used in the training of hawks. Hartrinc (p. 45) quotes from 
Edmund Bert’s Treatyse of Hawks and Hawking, 1619: ‘1 have heard of some who 
watched and kept hawks awake seven nights and as many days.’ This use of 
watch is frequent in Shakespeare, but even had he meant it here he could hardly 
have used it in place of ‘wake’; even to a falconer’s ears it might have sounded 
strange to hear Pisanio say ‘Ill watch my eye-balls first.’ What is needed, there- 
fore, to uphold the present text are examples of the use of ‘wake’ in the sense 
of watch. The N. E. D. is not, at this writing, advanced as far as the letter W. 
Next to it in value is The Century Dictionary, there, under ‘wake,’ WHITNEY gives 
a quotation from Syr John Maundeville’s Vozage, which seems exactly in point. 
In his chapter xlviii, Syr John says: ‘in that countrey is an olde castell that is on 
a rock, yt men call the castell of Spirys, and there men finde an hawke sitting upon 
a perch right well made & a faire lady of Fayry that keepeth it, & he that will wake 
this same hawke seven days and seven nights, . . . alone without any company 
and without slepe, this faire ladie shall come unto him at the vii dayes ende & 
shall graunte unto him the first thing that he shall aske of worldly things. . . . 
And so uppon a time it befell that a man which that tyme was Kinge of Armonye 
[Armenia] that was a right doughty man waked uppon a tyme, and at the seven 
dayes ende the lady came to him and bade him aske what he would for he had 
wel done his devoure [devoir]. . . . Also a poore mannes soone as he waked on a 
tyme, and asked the lady that he might be rych and happy in marchaundise and the 
lady graunted him. . . . Also a Knight of the Templars waked likewise and when 
he had done, he desired to have a purse full of golde. . . . But he that shal wake 
hath great nede for to kepe him from slepe, for if he sleepe he is lost that he shall 
neuer bee seene.’—pp. 110-112, ed. Ashton. Thiselton also refers to the Century 
Dictionary. After such an array of examples where ‘wake’ is used in the sense of 


232 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Imo. Wherefore then 


[ACT III, SC. iv. 


110 


Didd’ft vndertake it? Why haft thou abus’d 

So many Miles, with a pretence? This place? 

Mine A€tion ? and thine owne ? Our Horfes labour ? 

The Time inuiting thee? The perturb’d Court 

For my being abfent ? whereunto I neuer 115 


Purpofe returne. 


Why haft thou gone fo farre 


To be vn-bent ? when thou haft ’tane thy ftand, 


Th’elected Deere before thee? 
Pi. But to win time 


To loofe fo bad employment, in the which 120 


110. Wherefore] Ah, wherefore Pope, 
Theob. Warb. And wherefore Coll. 
MS. 

113. Action? action Var. ’73. action, 
Cap. et seq. 

115. abfent?] Rowe ii,+, Glo. Cam. 
absent, Ktly, Dyce ii, iii. absent; Ff 
eticet: 


Var. ’73. return? Rowe ii, et cet. 

117. vn-bent? when] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 

unbent when Han. Knt, Dyce, Sta. 

Glo. Cam. wunbent, when Theob. et cet. 

’tane| tane Ff. ta’en Rowe et seq. 

118. Th’] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce 
li, iti. The Cap. et cet. 


119. time] time; Var. ’21. time, 


116. returne.| Ff, Pope,+, Ktly, Coll. 
Glo. Cam. return; Rowe ii. return! 120. loofe] lofe Fy. 


watch—and of a torturing watch—are we justified in changing Shakespeare’s 
text? To be sure, these examples are all from one very old writer and all from one 
chapter, but he uses throughout the language of the common people, and it is fair 
to assume that he was commonly understood. And is it not also fair to assume that, 
in spite of the changes in language between the years when the First Folio and the 
Fourth were printed, ‘wake’ still retained its meaning throughout those sixty-two 
years and was duly comprehended both by Shakespeare’s compositors and by his 
auditors, and that it was only through the decline of Falconry that the force of the 
word became lost?—Ep.] 

II1, 112. abus’d So many Miles] A vivid personification of miles, implying 
that they had rights which those who travelled them were bound to respect. Here 
Pisanio had ‘abused’ them by not fulfilling the purpose which he had in view when 
he set out to journey over them. ‘Abus’d’ occurs in its ordinary meaning in line 
134, below.—Eb. 

117. To be vn-bent] Jonnson: To have thy bow unbent, alluding to an 
hunter. [Did Dr Johnson drop some of his aitches? or was the dropping in his 
day allowable in ‘hunter,’ as it still is in honour, hour, etc.?2—Ep.]—MApDpEN (p. 
236): It was a question to be asked, for when the deer are driven by the stand, then 
comes the moment for action. A stand was a hiding place constructed in the 
thickest brake, commanding the land across which the deer were expected to pass. 

118. Th’elected Deere before thee] Matone: So, in The Passionate Pil- 
grim: ‘When as thine eye hath chose the dame, And stall’d the deer that thou 
should’st strike.’—line 299. 

120. loose] Drtrus: To ‘lose’ may be used as the opposite of to win, and it 
may also mean to be free from, to be loose from. [This note of Delius, VAUGHAN 
(p. 447) controverts, but I think he misinterprets Delius’s doppelsinnig, which he 


ACD 111, SC. iv. | CYMBELINE 233 


I haue confider’d of a courfe: good Ladie 121 
Heare me with patience. 
limo. Talke thy tongue weary, fpeake : 
I haue heard I am a Strumpet, and mine eare 
Therein falfe ftrooke, can take no greater wound, 1a 
Nor tent,to bottome that. But fpeake. 
Pif. Then Madam, 
I thought you would not backe againe. 
Imo. Mott like, 
Bringing me heere to kill me. 130 
Py. Not fo neither: 
But if I were as wife, as honeft, then 
My purpofe would proue well : it cannot be, 
But that my Mafter is abus’d. Some Villaine, 


I,and fingular in his Art, hath done you both 135 
121. courfe:] course. Coll. Dyce, Sta. Cap. 
Sing. Ktly, Glo. Cam. 133. well:] well. Johns. et seq. 
122. me] Om. Cap. (corrected in 134-136. But that...iniurie.| Lines 
Errata.) end: abus’d ... Art... iniurie. Cap. 
patience] patence F>. et seq. (except Ktly, Cam., who follow 
123. weary,| weary; Cap. et seq. F;). 
Speake] Om. Vaun. 134. abus’d.] Ff. abus’d, Rowe, Pope. 
124. I haue] I’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, abus’d; Theob. et seq. 
iii. 135. 1, and) Ff. And Pope,+. Ay, 


125. flrooke] ftrook F3¥,, Rowe i, and Rowe et cet. 


takes as meaning an ‘equivocation,’ as it certainly does mean usually; but here, 
T think, the excellent German editor intends simply that the word is capable of two 
interpretations, without any implication of eqguivocation or double meaning, in 
malam partem, as the old grammarians would say.—Eb.] 

I2I, 122. good Ladie Heare me with patience] I marvel that neither Capell 
nor other editor has here added a stage direction: Imogen makes a gesture of im- 
patience; just as in line 213 of this scene, when Pisanio says to Imogen: ‘Heere is a 
boxe,’ Capell obligingly inserts a double dagger to let us know that Pisanio hands 
it to her. One is almost tempted to assert that, other than the very, very scanty 
stage directions in the Folio, Shakespeare needs none from the first page of The 
Tempest to the last of Pericles.—Ep. 

126. Nor tent] Murray (NV. £. D.): A probe. ‘Modest Doubt is cal’d... 
the tent that searches To’th’ bottome of the worst.’—Tro. & Cress., II, ii, 16. 

132. But if I were] Rev. Joun Hunter: That is, I thought that if I were. 

134, 135. Some Villaine, I, and singular, etc.] VauGHAN: These lines 
should run thus, probably: ‘But that my master is abus’d: some villain, Some 
villain—ay, and singular in his art.’ No words are so often lost by mistake in 
Shakespeare as words repeated; and the repetition here is natural. [Vaughan fol- 
lowed, without investigation, Capell’s text. Had he only looked occasionally into 
the Folio, I think that both he and his readers would have been happier. He 
believed he was adding ‘some villain’ to line 134; in reality he was prefixing it to 


234 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC, iv. 


This curfed iniurie. 136 
Imo. Some Roman Curtezan ? 
Pifa. No,on my life: 
Ile giue but notice you are dead, and fend him 
Some bloody figne of it. For ’tis commanded 140 
I fhould do fo : you fhall be mift at Court, 
And that will well confirme it. 
Imo. Why good Fellow, 
What fhall I do the while? Where bide ? How liue ? 
Or in my life, what comfort, when I am 145 
Dead to my Husband? 
.Pif. Tf you’l backe to’th’Court. 
Imo. No Court, no Father, nor no more adoe 


With that harfh, noble, fimple nothing: 149 
137. Curtezan?] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 149. noble,] ignoble noble B. Nichol- 
curtesan— Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. son (N. & Q., Dec., 1868). nothing noble, 
curtezan. Cap. et cet. Ingl. i, Dtn. that ignoble Elze. no, 

138. life:] life. Pope et seq. no noble Perring. hardly noble Leo. 
139. but] F, him F3F,, Rowe,+. noble, fimple] noble-simple D. 

140. of it.| of it: Pope et seq. C. T.-W. & Q., June, 1882). 
141. fo:] so. Pope,--. fimple nothing:] fimple nothing; 
mift| miss’d Rowe. F,, Ing]. imple nothing? F3F,. simple 


143. Fellow,] Fellow; Rowe, Pope. nothing, Rowe, Pope, Coll. i, Dyce i 
144, 153. bide] ’bide Theob. ii, Warb. Glo. Cam. Dtn. simple, Nothing, 


Johns. Cloten: Theob. Warb. simple nothing, 
147. to’th’| F.. to th’ F;F,, Rowe,+. Cloten: Han. Cap. Dyce (reading 
to the Cap. et seq. Cloten—,’) ii, iii, Huds. simple, nothing, 
Court.] court— Pope et seq. Johns. Sta. Sing. Ktly. simple, empty 

148. Father,] Father; Rowe et seq. nothing, Coll. ii, iii. (MS.). noble 


149, 150. With...Clotten] One line simply in nothing, Vaun. simple, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Dyce, nothing; Var. ’73 et cet. 
Huds. 


line 135; and thereby changing lines that possibly needed no change. The same 
emendation occurred previously to Crarc, but he properly placed the repetition at 
the beginning of line 135.—Ep.|—WAaLKER (Crit., iii, 323): I am all but certain 
we should read and arrange: ‘And singular in ’s art, hath,’ etc. I follow the Folio, 
only expunging ‘I’ (Ay) after ‘villain,’ and altering ‘his’ to ‘s.’? [Walker’s library 
was small, and he is possibly, therefore, excusable; but I think Walker’s editor, 
Lettsom, should have noted that the omission of ‘I’ is as old as Pope, and that of 
the two emendations the alteration of ‘his’ to ‘s’ is alone Walker’s and so trifling 
as to be hardly worth recording.—Ep.] 

140. ’tis commanded] Rotre: This is implied in the injunction ‘to make 
me certain it is done,’ which Pisanio is left to interpret his own way. 

142. will well confirme it] Eccrrs: As that circumstance might be sup- 
posed soon to reach the ears of Posthumus, though himself absent. 

147. you’l backe to’th’Court] Ecctrs: It is not easy to say what follow- 
ing expedient he would have suggested to her, if such had been her determination. 


AGT IIT; SC. 1v..| CYMBELINE 235 


That Clotten, whofe Loue-fuite hath bene to me 150 
As fearefull as a Siege. 

Pi. Vf not at Court, 

Then not in Britaine muft you bide. 


Imo. Wherethen? 154 
150. That Clotten,] Ff. That Cloten: 154. Imo.] Luc. F,. 

Rowe. Cloten: Pope. Imo. Wherethen?] Imo. Hath 
153, 154. Then... Wherethen?] One Han. Warb. MS. 

line, given to Pisan. Han. Warb. Wherethen?| What then Cap. 

MS. conj., Ran. Huds. 


The account intended to be sent to her husband of her death would in that case 
have lost its effect, and consequently must have been laid aside. 

149. that harsh, noble, simple nothing] Matonr: Some epithet of two 
syllables has here been omitted by the compositor; for which, having but one 
copy, it is now vain to seek.—WuuTE justly adds: ‘but no addition is needed to 
perfect the sense.’—SIncER (Shakespeare Vindicated, etc., p. 308) goes even further 
and asserts that the ‘line is quite as harmonious, and more effective,’ without any 
addition.—BuLLoc# (1868, p. 275): Some dozen years ago I adopted the follow- 
ing reading: ‘that harsh noodle simple mouthing fool—.’ Noodle is not in Shake- 
speare, neither is mouthing, though ‘mouthed’ is and so is ‘mousing’; fool is sup- 
plied; the terms are all applicable and the measure is filled up—R. M. SPENCE 
(NV. & Qu., VI, i, 52, 1880): ‘Noble’ I take to be here used in its monetary sense. 
‘Harsh’ I regard as a misprint for trash. The line I read thus: ‘With that trash 
noble, simple nothing, Cloten.’ She calls him first a ‘trash noble’—a base coin; 
then, correcting herself, as even that was too good a name for him, she calls him 
a ‘simple nothing. —ArTHUR Gray (NV. & Qu., VII, vi, 343, 1888): ‘Noble’ is 
unquestionably right. It is practically the synonym of ‘simple’ and, like it, may 
be used in the honourable sense of artless, ingenious, or mockingly, as foolish. 
[Hereupon follow examples of the use of ‘noble’ in the two opposed senses, which, 
we are told, are practically synonyms, but unfortunately, do not cure the halting 
rhythm.|—Br. NicHotson (NV. & Qu., VII, viii, 45, 1889) defends the reading he had 
proposed many years before. See Text. Nofes. He urges, first, that Cloten was 
both by birth and character an ‘ignoble noble’; secondly, that the phrase, while 
stronger than ‘that harsh,’ is less strong than, but a fitting preliminary to, the 
climax ‘simple nothing’; thirdly, that the similarity between ‘ignoble’ and ‘noble’ 
gives a ready cause for the compositor’s catching up the latter only—PorTER and 
Crark remark that the time of the missing foot is filled up by ‘Imogen’s exasper- 
ated pause, when she can think of nothing bad enough further, except his name.’ 
[If ever a poet writ whose selection of words approached perfection, it is Shake- 
speare. We all know this; and yet when there is a chance of ekeing out the metre 
with a word of two syllables, how eager we all are light-heartedly to fill the gap 
and expect an admiring world to acknowledge our success in recalling Shakespeare’s 
very word. But the world is cold, and scorns our word and instantly substitutes 
a true one of its own. ’Tis with our emendations, as our watches, none are just 
alike, but each believes his own. The line, I think, needs no aid beyond the pause 
which Miss Porter and Miss Clarke suggest.—ED.] 

154. Wherethen?] CapeLt (p. 112): There is no accounting for this question, 
and making it proper, if we suppose it connected with the others that follow: but 


236 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acer Il, Sc. iv. 


[154. Wherethen?] 


considering it a question apart, and the others as afterthoughts, “Where then’ may 
be right; and its rectitude would appear in the action, by a due length of pause be- 
tween that and the other questions. [Capell does not here mention his own con- 
jecture What then?, which was probably an afterthought, see page 14 of his Various 
Readings. Six years later, in 1785, Monck Mason made the same conjecture.]— 
MAtone: Perhaps Imogen silently answers her own question: ‘any where. Hath 
Britain,’ etc.—THISELTON (p. 32): This is equivalent to I care not where.—ELzE 
(p. 316): Imogen cannot possibly be the speaker of the two lines following ‘Where 
then?.’ The original distribution of the lines, in my opinion, was this: ‘ Pisanio. 
Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night, Are they not but in Britain? 
Imogen. Vthe world’s volume Our Britain . . . There’s livers out of Britain.’ 
—VAucHAN, whose New Readings, etc., was published in the same year with Elze’s 
Notes, also made a new distribution of speeches, as follows: Imogen asks, ‘Where 
then?’ Pisanio replies, ‘Hath Britain all the sun,’ etc.; and, continuing, concludes 
with, ‘Prythee think, There’s livers out of Britain,’ Whereto Imogen answers, 
‘I am most glad you think of other place.’ Pisanio resumes, ‘The Ambassador,’ 
etc. Inthe course of Pisanio’s speech, line 157, Vaughan changes ‘but not in’t’ 
to ‘but not 7.’ [This re-arrangement DowpDEN pronounces ‘bold,’ which it cer- 
tainly is, but not, I think, too bold. I can only sigh under my breath, ‘Pereant qui 
ante nos nostra dixerunt.’ Exactly the same arrangement had occurred to me. 
It seems highly unnatural that Imogen after-the sad wail from her darkened 
soul, ‘Where then?’ should at once answer her own question with a cheerful al- 
lusion to sunlight over the whole globe, and then go on trippingly, rehearsing the 
advantages of leaving the island, advantages that would come more naturally from 
Pisanio, arguments leading up to his counsel to Imogen actually to follow Posthu- 
mus to Rome. His was no plan formed on the spur of the moment; as the con- 
ference goes on, we see that every detail had been anticipated by him, and note how 
tactfully he deals with his gracious Lady from the very first intimation of his plan, 
‘I thought you would backe againe,’ on through, ‘Then not in Britaine must you 
bide,’ until we hear this first cheering note ‘Hath Britaine all the sun that shines,’ 
and at its conclusion how pitifully Imogen’s words sound, ‘I am most glad you think 
of other place.’ The chiefest objection to this re-arrangement,—apart from its 
boldness,—is, I think, to be found in the poetic imagery, ignoble though it be, in 
which Pisanio, of all men! and at such a tragic hour! indulges. I do not forget how 
a poetic thought, or worse, even a pun, will prove the fatal Cleopatra to Shake- 
speare, and he will follow it to ruin, but in the present burst of ill-timed patriotism 
there is no charm of poetry nor cadence of rhythm to allure him astray. A nest 
of sticks in a great pool as a description of England never fell from lips that had 
once called it ‘this precious stone set in a silver sea.’ Never would Shakespeare, 
speaking of his own ‘demi-Paradise,’ have used a degrading image, like the present, 
or like Byron’s ‘yeasty waves.’ I am sure that the lines beginning with ‘Day? 
Night?’ and ending with ‘Swannes-nest’ are by the same tawdry hand that added 
to The Dirge, ‘Golden lads and girls all must Like Chimney sweepers come to 
dust.’ Finally, this omission does not affect the rhythm harmfully. ‘Hath 
Britaine all the Sunne that shines? prythee thinke’ has but one extra syllable, which 
1s common,—line 156 has one.—Ep.]|—Dowben: I suppose that Imogen at first 


cannot think of leaving Britain; then pauses; and then suddenly determines that she 
will leave her country. 


WET TWIT, SC. iv. | CYMBELINE 237 


Hath Britaine all the Sunne that fhines? Day? Night? 155 
Are they not but in Britaine? I’th’worlds Volume 
Our Britaine feemes as of it, but not in’t : 
In a great Poole, a Swannes-neft, prythee thinke 
There’s liuers out of Britaine, 

Pif/ Lam moft glad 160 
You thinke of other place : Th’Ambaffador, 


155. Day? Night?) Day, night, Theob. 158. prythee] F.. prethee F;F,, Rowe 
et seq. i. prithee Rowe ii, Knt, Dyce, Glo. 
156. I’th’] Ith’ F3F,. I’the Cap. et Cam. Pr’ythee Pope et cet. 
seq. 159. liners] living Pope, Theob. 
157. of it,...in’t:] off it,...in it Schmidt Han. Warb. Ecl. 
(Lex., s.v. ‘ off’). in it,...of it; Daniel, 160. I am] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. 
Huds. of 7t,...it, Vaun. 161. place:] place. Cap. et seq. 
int] Ff, Rowe, Cap. Dyce, Th’) Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce 
Sta. Sing. Ktly, Glo. Cam. in it Pope li, ili, Sing. Ktly. The Cap. et cet. 
elcets Ambaffador] embassador Cap. 
158. neft,|) Fi, Rowe i. nest. Rowe, Var. 778, ’85, Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 
+, Ktly. nest: Cap. et cet. Sing. Coll. iii. 


155. Hath Britaine all the Sunne that shines] MAatonr: Shakespeare 
seems here to have in his thoughts a passage in Lily’s Euphwes, 1580, which he has 
imitated in Rich. IT: [I, iii, 275], ‘ Nature hath given no man a country, no more than 
she hath a house or lands, or liuings. . . . Plato would never accompt him ban- 
ished yat had ye Sun, Fire, Aire, Water and Earth, that he had before, where he 
felt the Winter’s blast and the Summer’s blaze, where ye same Sun, and the same 
Moone shined, whereby hz noted that every place was a country to a wise man, 
and al parts a pallace to a quiet mind. . . . How can any part of the world be dis- 
tant farre from the other, when as the Mathematicians set down that the earth is 
but a point being compared to ye heauens?’—Leiters of Huphues, p. 187, ed. Arber. 

157. Britaine seemes as of it, but not in’t] Hupson: Daniel’s change is 
fully warranted by the context. ‘To be in the world, but not of it’ has long been 
a sort of proverbial phrase-—INCLEBY considers Daniel’s transposition as ‘specious,’ 
and observes, ‘But the ‘‘great pool” stands for the ocean, and not for the world. 
Britain is ‘in the world’s volume,” but seems not to be so, being divisa toto orbe by 
the sea, as a swan’s nest in a great pool is divided from the land. —Dowpen: I 
take the text to mean—Britain is a page of the world’s great volume, but as it were, 
a page torn from it—‘of it, but not in it’; it is islanded in ocean like a swan’s nest 
in a pool, far from the world, as is a swan’s nest from the shores of the pool. The 
‘world’ means the terrene, inhabited world, and Britain was not in it, as Battista 
Guarino writes: ‘Britannia ipsa, quae extra orbem terrarum posita est’—quoted 
in Einstein’s Italian Renaissance in England, p. 19 n. So in Trevisa’s translation 
of Bartholomew Glanvil (Of Anglia): ‘England is the most island of Ocean, and is 
beclipped all about by the sea, and departed from the roundness of the world,’ 7. e., 
of it, yet not in it. 

158. Swannes-nest] WALKER (Vers., 235) calls attention to this hyphenated 
word as an illustration of his observation that ‘Such combinations as “‘Luds’ town,” 
“‘Heaven’s Gate,” and others of the same kind are pronounced as if they were single 
words, with the accent on the first syllable.’ See IIT, i, 39. 


238 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acr m1, sc. iv. 


Lucius the Romane comes to Milford-Hauen 162 
To morrow. Now, if you could weare a minde 

Darke, as your Fortune is, and but difguife 

That which t’appeare it felfe, muft not yet be, 165 
But by felfe-danger, you fhould tread a courfe 


163. morrow.) Ff,.Rowe,+, Ktly. mask Kinnear. blind Vaun. 


morrow: Cap. et cet. 165. ?appeare| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. 
minde] mien Warb. Theob. Dyce ii, iii. Ktly. to appear Cap. et cet. 
Han. mine Theob. conj. (withdrawn). 166. should] shall Var. ’73. 


163. weare a minde] WARBURTON: What had the darkness of her mind to do 
with the concealment of person, which is the only thing here advised? On the 
contrary, her ‘mind’ was to continue unchanged, in order to support her change 
of fortune. Shakespeare wrote, ‘wear a mien.’ Or, according to the French orthog- 
raphy, from whence I presume arose the corruption, ‘wear a mine.’ [Mine was 
Theobald’s conjecture, in a letter to Warburton.|—Jonnson: To wear a dark 
mind is to carry a mind impenetrable to the search of others. Darkness, applied to 
the mind, is secrecy; applied to fortune, is obscurity. The next lines are obscure. 
“Vou must,’ says Pisanio, ‘disguise that greatness, which, to appear hereafter in its 
proper form, cannot yet appear without great danger to itself HEATH (p. 481): 
That is, Now, if you can suffer your mind to be disguised in conformity to your 
fortune. That the mind was to be disguised, as Well as the person, Pisanio plainly 
tells Imogen on the next page, ‘you must forget to be a woman,’ etc.—CAPELL (p. 
112): Previous to his proposal about her person, Pisanio enquires about the state 
of his mistress’s ‘mind’; whether she can ‘disguise that,’ put off the princess, and 
submit herself to her fortune; and, to the end she may appear what she really is in 
some future time, forego the appearance of it now when it cannot be worn without 
danger. This seems to be the sense of this difficult passage, which the Author’s 
masculine brevity has rendered obscure—VAUGHAN (p. 453): What Pisanio 
counsels her to disguise principally, if not solely, is her sex; her greatness was al- 
ready disguised by the costume of a franklin’s wife. I understand ‘which to ap- 
pear itself must not yet be, but by self-danger’ as equivalent to ‘which cannot 
yet appear in an undisguised form without destruction to self.’ So I would inter- 
pret the whole thus: ‘If you would but disguise that womanhood, which cannot 
possibly yet appear openly and in its own character without self-destruction, you 
would,’ etc. What the Poet so meant is shown by Pisanio’s explanation of his ad- 
vice in the next speech which he makes, about the change of fear into courage, and 
all the exterior and interior characteristics of a woman into those of a youthful 
man.—THISELTON: The following words of Musidorus to Pyrocles on the latter’s 
assumption of the Amazonian garb, strongly confirm the Folio text ‘weare a mind’: 
‘to take this womanish habite (without you frame your behaviour accordingly) 
is wholly vaine: your behaviour can never come kindly from you, but as the mind 
is proportioned unto it.’—Arcadia, p. 44. [Capell’s paraphrase is, I think, the 
happiest and most concise—Eb.] 

165. That which t’appeare it selfe, must not yet be] ABBorr ($ 296): 
That is, that which, as regards showing itself, must not yet have any existence.— 


Deicuton: Abbott’s rendering does not take into account the words ‘but by self- 
danger.’ 


ACTstil, SC. iv, | CYMBELINE 239 


Pretty, and full of view: yea, happily, neere 167 
The refidence of Po/thumus ; fo nie (at leaft) 
That though his Actions were not vifible, yet 


Report fhould render him hourely to your eare, 170 
167. Pretty, and] Privy, yet Coll. ii. 168. nie] F.. nigh F,F,, Om. Vaun. 
(MS.). Privy, and Coll. iii. (MS.). 168. leat] lat Ff. 
Happy and Cartwright. Ready, and 169. Actions] action Rowe, Pope, 
Bulloch. Han. 
happily] haply Pope et seq. 169. yet] Om. Pope,+. 


167. Pretty, and full of view] Warsurton: That is likely to prove suc- 
cessful.—JOHNSON: With opportunities of examining your affairs with your own 
eyes.—CaPELL (p. 112): Full of fair view, or affording fair prospect of turning out 
happily.—STEEVENS: This may mean, affording an ample prospect, a complete 
opportunity of discerning circumstances which it is your interest to know. Thus, 
in Pericles, ‘full of face’ appears to signify ‘amply beautiful,’ [x Gower, 23]; and 
Duncan assures [Macbeth] that he will make him ‘full of growing,’ z. e., of ‘ample 
growth,’ [I, iv, 29].—CoLtrer (Notes, etc., p. 521): What can be the meaning of 
‘pretty’ here? It is an indisputable blunder, perhaps from defective hearing; 
Pisanio is showing Imogen how she may remain concealed, and yet have a full 
view of all that is passing around her. [The MS. thus amends: ‘Privy; yet full 
of view.’ She was to remain private and unknown, while she was able to mark 
all that was done by others.|—Wnuite (ed. i.): Here ‘pretty’ seems to be used as a 
diminutive of proper, suitable, as ‘my daughter’s of a pretty age,’ 7. e., to be married. 
—Rom. & Jul., I, iii. The reading of Mr Collier’s MS. is merely specious.—IBm. 
(ed. ii.): Obscure. ‘Pretty’ may mean nicely proper; ‘full of view,’ open. But the 
passage is very unsatisfactory, and yet not certainly corrupt—StTauNnTon: But 
that [Collier’s MS.] implies the misprinting of two words together, we should un- 
hesitatingly adopt his emendation; for Privy restores sense to the passage, and may 
have been mistaken for ‘Pretty’ in old writing, where the one was spelt Privie and 
the other ‘Pretie.—Br. NicuHortson (V. & Qu., VI, viii, 241, 1883): Collier’s 
privy appears to be the best change yet proposed, but the then English did not, 
as does the correctness of this age, require the change of ‘and’ to yet. The word 
privy gives a Shakesperian antithesis to ‘full view,’ explained in the next clause. 
Unseen by Posthumus, you can see him, or be so nigh that ‘Report should render 
him hourly to your ear, As truly as he moves.’—TutsELTon: ‘Tread a course’ 
suggests an equestrian allusion, and for ‘Pretty’ we may, therefore, compare ‘and 
for a need, to ride pretty and well’ (Patient Grissel, II, i, Sh. Soc., p. 19). ‘Full 
of view’ can, having regard to ‘t’appeare it selfe,’ only be equivalent to ‘for all 
to see,’ whence soever the metaphor may be drawn; it is the opposite of ‘viewless.’ 
T have no doubt that the source of the metaphor running through the passage is to 
be found in the tournament, in which the combatants wore armour which so far 
disguised them that they could be recognized only by the devices they bore, and 
which was to protect that which could not be uncovered without ‘selfe-danger,’ 
while they performed the ‘courses’ (see Arcadia, p. 62) in full view of the specta- 
tors—DowbEN: Perhaps ‘Pretty’ means becoming, but I think it qualifies ‘full 
of view,’ as it seems to qualify ‘dark’ in the following from Beaumont and Fletcher, 
‘Mistress, it grows somewhat pretty and dark.’—Beggar’s Bush, V, i. 

170. render] Both WALKER (Vers., 67) and Assort (§ 465), for the sake of what 


240 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. iv. 


As truely as he mooues. 171 
Imo. Oh for fuch meanes, 

Though perill to my modeftie, not death on’t 

I would aduenture. 
Pif. Well then, heere’s the point: 175 

You mutt forget to be a Woman : change 

Command, into obedience. Feare, and Niceneffe 

(The Handmaides of all Women, or more truely 


Woman it pretty felfe) into a waggifh courage, 179 
172. meanes,| means! Cap. et seq. 177. into] in Rowe ii. 
173. Though] Through Heath, Johns. 179. Woman it] Woman’s Walker 

conj. Ran. (Crit., iii.). Woman her very Wray 
174. aduenture.| adventure— Ktly. ap. Cam. 

adventure! Cam. at] Ff, Coll. i, ii, Wh. i, Sta. 
175. heere’s] there’s F,, Rowe. Ktly, Cam. Ingl. i’s or its Rowe et cet. 
176-187. Mnemonic Pope. into a] to Pope,+. to a Steev. 
176. forget] forgot Theob. ii. (mis- Vane oss is sini. 

print). courage,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

Woman:] Woman, Rowe, Pope, Cap. carriage Coll. MS. courage; 
Han. Theob. et cet. 


they are pleased to term ‘versification’ or ‘rhythm,’ would have us pronounce 
(‘soften,’ Abbott calls it) this word into a monosyllable. 

173. Though perill, etc.]| Heato: I think it more probable that the poet wrote 
‘Through peril,’ etc—JoHNson: I read ‘Through peril.’ ‘I would for such means 
adventure through peril of modesty’; I would risk everything but real dishonour.— 
[Heath’s Revisal and Johnson’s Edition were published in the same year, 1765. 
But before Johnson had completed his edition he must have seen Heath’s volume; 
he speaks in his immortal Preface of the ‘gloomy malignity’ with which Heath 
attacks Warburton. Priority in this case is of small moment. Their emendation 
has received but slight regard. They have only one solitary follower. In the 
preceding line, is Capell’s exclamation point after ‘means’ quite right? Does 
it not separate that word too widely from its verb, ‘adventure’?—Ep.] 

176-179. change Command... courage] DEIGHTON: You must ex- 
change that habit of command, to which you have been brought up, for obedience; 
that timidity and coyness, which are the accompaniments of all womankind or, I 
might say more truly, which make up the very nature of fascinating woman, for a 
roguish courage. 

179. Woman it pretty selfe] Murray (NV. E£. D., s. v. Its): The original 
genitive or possessive neuter was HIS, as in the masculine, which continued in 
literary use till the 17th century. But with the gradual substitution of sex for 
grammatical gender in the concord of the pronouns, the indiscriminate use of his 
for male beings and for inferior animals and things without life began to be felt 
inappropriate, and already in the Mid. Eng. period its neuter use was often avoided, 
substitutes being found in thereof, of it, the, and in N. W. dialect, the genitive use of 
his, it, which became very common about 1600, and is still retained in [certain 
counties]. Finally, id’s arose, apparently in the south of England, and appears 
in books just before 1600. It had been, no doubt, colloquial for some time previous, 


ACT ITE SC.iv; | CYMBELINE 241 


Ready in gybes, quicke-anfwer’d, fawcie,and 180 
As quarrellous as the Weazell : Nay, you muft 

Forget that rareft Treafure of your Cheeke, 

Expofing it (but oh the harder heart, 183 


183. heart,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Johns. hap! Warb. Theob. Han. heart! Cap. et cet. 


and only gradually attained to literary recognition. Jts was not admitted in the 
Bible of 1611 (which has thereof, besides the his, her of old grammatical gender); 
the possessive 7 occurs once, [‘That which groweth of zt owne accord of thy harvest, 
thou shalt not reape,’ etc.—Lev., xxv, 5], but was altered (in an edition of 1660) 
to its, which appears in all editions. Jts does not appear in any of the works of 
Shakespeare published during his lifetime (in which and the First Folio the pos- 
sessive it occurs 15 times), but there are 9 examples of it’s and 1 of ts in the plays 
first printed in Folio of 1623. In one of these at least (Hen. VIII: I, i, 18, ‘Each 
following day Became the next dayes master, till the last Made former Wonders, 
it’s’) the word is probably Shakespeare’s own (unless he wrote his). By this time 
it’s had become common in literature, from which the possessive use of it soon 
disappeared; the neuter his is found as late as 1675. 

181. quarrellous] Cratcire (NV. E. D.): Quarrelsome. In common use from 
about 1560 to 1650. 

181. Weazell] TopsELt (pp. 725-733) devotes eight Folio pages to this little 
animal, yet nowhere attributes to it any general disposition to quarrel, but rather 
restricts its range of animosity. ‘They are,’ he says, ‘in perpetual enmity with 
swine, Ravens, Crowes, and Cats.’ Their ‘epithets are, feareful, In-creeper, and 
swift, and besides these I finde not any materiall or worthy to bee rehearsed.’ 
It is only when it is used medicinally, whether eaten raw, or baked, or powdered, 
as set forth by Topsell, that its virtues shine-—Eb. 

183. Exposing it] Waite (ed. i.): In Shakespeare’s time gentlewomen com- 
monly wore masks in the open air. 

183. oh the harder heart] JoHNSoN: I think it very natural to reflect in this 
distress on the cruelty of Posthumus.—CapeLt: This has reference to Posthumus 
whose ‘hard heart’ drove them to these extremities—Hupson: Pisanio apprehends 
that Imogen, in the part she is going to act, will feel the need of a man’s harder or 
tougher heart.—Porter and CiarKk: Referring to Posthumus, whose harder 
heart, harder than his own in proposing such exposure, has driven them to these 
extremities—Ro.re: This too hard hard heart of mine. Compare the use of the 
comparative in Latin. [To the same effect,—attributing the reference to Pisanio 
himself.—Herrrorp].—INGLEBY (Revised ed., p. 105): That is, too hard, Pisanio 
turns aside for a moment to blame and excuse himself for the suggestion WYATT: 
T am not certain of the meaning of these words, and therefore give three other in- 
terpretations before adding one of my own: (1) ‘How more than hard his (Pos- 

_thumus’s) heart,’ 7. e., for compelling you to such hardships. (2) ‘This too hard 
heart of mine,’ which urges you to such a course. (3) Pisanio apprehends that 
Imogen, in the part she is going to act, will feel the need of a man’s harder, or 
tougher heart. (4) I would suggest as possible: ‘O, the danger of your heart 
becoming harder, more like a man’s, when you don man’s attire!’ The following 
“Alack, no remedy!’ at least seems to lend some countenance to this suggestion.— 
Downpen: I take it to mean ‘O, the more than cruelty of it!’—taking ‘hard heart’ 


16 


242 THE TRAGEDIE (OL [ACT III, SC. iv. 


Alacke no remedy) to the greedy touch 
Of common-kiffing Zita: and forget 185 
Your labourfome and dainty Trimmes, wherein 
You made great /wno angry. 
Imo, Nay be breefe ? 
I fee into thy end, and am almoft 


A man already. 190 
Pif. Firft, make your felfe but like one, 

Fore-thinking this. I haue already fit 192 
184. remedy)] remedy! Mal. Steev. conj. 

et seq. 188. breefe?] breefe: F2. brief: F3F, 
18s. Titan:] Titin: F,, Titan, Glo. et seq. 

Cam. IgI. one,] one. Rowe ii. et seq. 

forget] forgot F2 forego Cap. 192. this. I] this, I Rowe et seq. 


as equivalent to severity, cruelty. For ‘harder heart’ Daniel suggested ‘ardour, 
heat. [No explanation yet given seems altogether satisfactory; Dowden’s comes the 
nearest, I think. The reference cannot be to Pisanio, so it seems to me. He did not 
create the situation, he was merely an agent. His words sound to me like an echo of 
‘oh, the pity of it, Iago!’ And yet this has far too tragic a tone at this particular 
point of the speech; when the foundations of Imogen’s deepest life are shattered it is 
an anticlimax almost verging on the comic to bewail an injury to her complexion! 
And yet, in the same breath, Pisanio refers to Imogen’s ‘dainty trims’—an illusion 
not far removed from her complexion. May we not infer that Imogen herself per- 
ceived how inappropriate were Pisanio’s words, by stopping them with ‘Nay, be 
brief’? Just, as ona later occasion, Guiderius says to Arviragus, ‘ Prythee, have done 
And do not play in wenchlike words with that Which is so serious.’—Ep.] 

185. common-kissing Titan] STEEVENS: Compare: ‘and beautiful would 
haue bene, if they had not suffered greedy Phebus, ouer-often, and harde, to kisse 
them.’—Sidney, Arcadia, Lit., 3, p. 248 verso. 

186. laboursome and dainty Trimmes] Hunson: It seems as if the Poet 
meant to gather up the whole traine of womanly graces and accomplishments in 
this peerless heroine; so he here represents her as a perfect mistress in the art of 
dressing—so much so as to provoke the jealousy of Juno herself. And he appears 
to have deemed it not the least of a lady’s duties to make herself just as beautiful 
and attractive as she could by beauty and tastefulness of dress, this being one of 
her ways of delighting those about her. 

191, 192. but like one, Fore-thinking this] THISELTON (vindicating this 
penetration): ‘Fore-thinking’ is here, I believe, the word that is perhaps more 
correctly spelt ‘for-thinking’; ‘this’ either sums up the femininities upon which 
Pisanio has enlarged in his last speech, or as he speaks he may actually point to 
Imogen’s dress. Imogen is no longer to cherish these foibles in her mind. She 
is to repent them, or perhaps even the word will bear the meaning of renouncing or 
forsaking. [Hereupon follow examples of ‘forthenke,’ from The Romaunt of the 
Rose, Skeats’s Chaucer, 3957; of ‘forethinke,’ from the Faerie Queene, IV, xii, 14; 
and from Spotswood’s Hist. of the Church of Scotland, 1655, Pp. 229. Many more 
are given by Braptey (NV. E D., s. v.) with several shades of meaning, whereof the 
nearest approach to Thiselton’s ‘renouncing’ or ‘forsaking’ seems to be to des pise 


AGTH SCadv.i) CYMBELINE 243 
(’Tis in my Cloake-bagge) Doublet, Hat, Hofe, all 193 
That anfwer to them: Would you in their feruing, 

(And with what imitation you can borrow 195 


From youth of fuch a feafon) ’fore Noble Lucius 

Prefent your felfe, defire his feruice : tell him . 

Wherein you’re happy ; which will make him know, 

If that his head haue eare in Muficke, doubtleffe 199 


194. Would] 

Warb. 
Seruing] seeming Daniel. 

196. fore Noble] before Pope, Han. 

197. feruice:| service, Theob. et seq. 

198. you’re] Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. Dyce, 
Sta. Ktly, Glo. Cam. you are Var. ’73 
et cet. 


"Would Theob. ii. 


198, 199. which...Muficke,| In paren- 
theses (subs.) Pope ii, Theob. Warb. 
Varr. et seq. 

198. will...know,] Ff, Rowe, Pope i, 
Sta. Ingl. (without comma after know 
Dowden). will...so, Pope ii, Theob. 
Warb. you will...know, Coll. well... 
know, Vaun. yow’ll...know, Han. et cet. 


happy;| Ff, Theob. Warb. 


happy, Rowe et set. 


199. Mujicke,| musick; Theob. Warb. 


Johns. Johns. 


or neglect, but this, says Bradley, is in ‘Old English only’; the essential thought 
which seems to run through the definitions is that of regret or repentance. This 
idea will give a meaning to the present sentence, and hereby ‘save the face’ of the 
compositors, but the question then arises, will it apply to Imogen in her present 
circumstances? Thiselton thinks it does apply, and he may be right; it obeys the 
golden rule of Durior lectio, etc. And yet even this golden rule should give way 
when, with only a change in punctuation, we can escape all hermeneutical torture, 
and find so easy a solution as that started by Rowe, and adopted by every editor 
since his day. See Text. Notes.—Ep.] 

192. fit] That is, prepared, ready. 

194. in their seruing] That is, with their aid. 

196. such a season] Scumipt (Lex.): That is, of such an age. 

198. happy] STEEVENS: That is, whereon you are accomplished. 

198, 199. which will make him know, If that his .. . eare, etc.] THEOBALD, 
in his Shakespeare Restored, seven years before his edition appeared in 1733, fol- 
lowed Rowe’s punctuation of a comma after ‘happy’ instead of the semi-colon of the 
Folio, and so missed the meaning, yet suggested an emendation which so commended 
itself to Pope that he adopted it in his second edition, of which fact Dr Johnson 
was evidently ignorant, or he would never have here indulged in his heartsome sneer 
at Theobald for ‘one of his long notes.’ Theobald (SH. Rest., p. 153) says, ‘it is 
evident that this passage is faulty in the pointing and in the Text. ‘‘Which will 
make him know’”—What? What connection has this with the rest of the sen- 
tence? Surely, Shakespeare can’t be suspected of so bald a meaning as this: 
“Tf you tell him wherein you’re happy, that will make him know wherein you’re 
happy”; yet this is the only meaning the words can carry as they now stand. 
In short, I take the Poet’s sense to be this: Pisanio tells Imogen, if she would dis- 
guise herself in the habit of a youth, present herself before Lucius, offer her service, 
and tell him wherein she was happy, 7. e., what an excellent talent she had in 
singing, he would certainly be glad to receive her. Afterwards Belarius and 
Arviragus, talking of Imogen, [remark how ‘angel-like he sings!’]. I doubt not, 
therefore, but the passage should be restored thus: “Wherein you’re happy (which 


244 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[acT 111, SC. iv. 


With ioy he will imbrace you : for hee’s Honourable, 200 
And doubling that, moft holy. Your meanes abroad : 
You haue me rich, and I will neuer faile 


Beginning, nor fupplyment. 
Imo. 


Thou art all the comfort 


The Gods will diet me with. Prythee away, 205 
There’s more to be confider’d : but wee’! euen 


200. you:] you, Glo. 

201. Your] For Anon. ap. Ecl, Coll. 
ii. conj. 

abroad:| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Var. 

‘a1, Sing. abroad, Theob. Var. 773, 
Knt, Coll. Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo. Cam. 
abroad? Johns. abroad! Anon. ap. 
Ecl. abroad—Ingl. abroad Han. et cet. 

202. me rich,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Sing. 
me rich; Theob. Han. Johns. made 
me rich Anon. ap. Ecl. me, rich; 
Warb. et cet. 


203. Beginning] Revenue Kinnear. 
Jupplyment] supply Pope,+. 
204. Thou art] Thow’rt Pope,+, Dyce 


205, 209. Prythee] F2. Prethee F3F4, 


Rowe i. Prithee Rowe ii, Knt, Dyce, 
Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. Pr’ythee Pope et 
cet 


206. confider’d:| consider’d, Coll. 

euen] do even Ecl. conj. even 
do Ktly conj. Jeave Vaun. need Wray 
ap. Cam. 


will make him so, If that his head have ear in music); doubtless,” etc.’ This note 
was repeated substantially in Theobald’s edition.—MALtonE, reading with Hanmer 
yowll, observes that ‘the words were probably written at length in the manuscript, 
you will, and you omitted at the press; or ‘‘ will” was printed for we’J.,—STAUNTON: 
Neither you'll of Hanmer, nor you will of [Colliér] is satisfactory. We might per- 
haps come nearer to Shakespeare by reading, ‘Which will make him bow’ (i. e., 
incline, yield, etc.); a change supported by, ‘Orpheus, with his lute, made trees 
. . . Bow themselves when he did sing. —Hen. VIIT: III, i, 4 —INcLEBy: That is, 
which will make him know whether he has an ear for music—Dr1GHTON: Which he 
will quickly discover if he has the smallest ear for music—TIsELTON: Nothing could 
be more persuasive than Imogen’s voice. See IV, ii, 463; also IV, ii, 48; V, v, 280. 
201. holy] Scumupt (Lex.): Pious, godly, virtuous, righteous, of a pure heart. 
201. Your meanes abroad] Matone: As for your subsistence abroad, you 
may rely on me. So, ‘thou should’st neither want my means for thy relief, nor my 
voice for thy preferment.’—ITI, v, 43.—Kwicut: Surely ‘abroad’ is not here used 
in the sense of being in foreign parts. It is the old adverb on brede. The means of 
Imogen are far off,—not at hand,—all abroad, as we still say.—STauNTON: 
‘Abroad,’ that is, disbursed, expended.—Rev. Joan HunTER: You have me, or the 
credit of my name, as your means abroad, rich in what you entrusted to me for the 
benefit of Posthumus.—Dowpen: As to your means abroad, you have me and I 
am rich. [As this interpretation is the latest, so it seems to me the best.—Ep.]— 
SPRENGER, to whom a little English seems to have proved a dangerous thing, ob- 
serves that ‘it appears to have escaped Elze’s notice that the present passage is one 
of the most corrupt in the play; it cannot, as it stands at present, be explained in 
any admissible manner. I conjecture that Shakespeare wrote: “Your means 
abroad, I hope, be rich: and you will never fail In begging our supplyment.’’’ 
205. diet] Murray (NV. E. D., s. v. 1. trans.): To feed in a particular way, or 
with specified kinds of food. In a, figurative sense [the present passage quoted]. 
206, 207. wee’l euen All thet good time will giue vs] Jounson: We’ll make 


ACT III, Sc. iv.] CYMBELINE 245 


All thet good time will giue vs. This attempt, 207 
I am Souldier too, and will abide it with 
A Princes Courage. Away, I prythee. 
Pi. Well Madam, we mutt take a fhort farewell, 210 
Leaft being mift, I be fufpeéted of 
Your carriage from the Court. My Noble Miftris, 
Heere is a boxe, I had it from the Queene, 
What’s in’t is precious: If you are ficke at Sea, 
Or Stomacke-qualm’d at Land, a Dramme of this 215 
Will driue away diftemper. To fome fhade, 
And fit you to your Manhood : may the Gods 
Direét you to the beft. 


Imo, 


207. thot] Fy. 

207, 208. attempt, I...too,) Ff.  at- 
tempt I...to, Rowe ii. (too, Rowe i.), 
Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. Dyce i, Sing. 
Ktly, Glo. Cam. attempt I’m soldier’d 
to, Han. atiempt I’m...to, Pope et cet. 

209. Away,|] Haste away, Han. 

210. farewell,| Fi, Rowe i, Han. 
Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. farewel. Rowe 
ii, Pope. farewe’l; Theob. et cet. 


Amen : I thanke thee. 


Exeunt. 219 


211. Leaft] Left Ff. 
214. you are] you’re Pope,+, Dyce 


215. Stomacke-qualm’d} stomach 
qualm’d Rowe. 

216. diflemper.| distemper— Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. 

217. Manhood:| manhood. Var. ’73. 

218. be/t.] best! Pope et seq. 


[Giving clothes, etc. Coll. iii. 


our work even with our time; we’ll do what time will allow.—Scumipt (Lex.) defines 
‘even,’ as a verb, by ‘to act up to, to keep pace with,’ which the V. E. D. adopts 
totidem verbis. In illustration, Schmidt gives ‘to even your content.’—All’s Well, 
I, ili, 3, and the present passage in Cymbeline, which he paraphrases, ‘we'll profit 
by any advantage offered.’ In the N. E. D. the present passage is the only quota- 
tion. Is it not possible, however, to take ‘even,’ as a verb, in its primary significa- 
tion,’ to level, render plain, or smooth, and then paraphrase Imogen’s cheering, 
courageous words thus: ‘there’s more to be considered; but whatsoever good, time 
may bring us, we’ll smoothe and even it all’?—Ep. 

208. I am Souldier too] WarBurton: I have enlisted and bound myself 
to it—-Matone: Rather, I think, I am equal to this attempt, I have enough 
ardour to undertake it—SrEEvENS: Mr Malone’s explanation is undoubtedly 
just. ‘I’m soldier to’ is equivalent to the modern cant phrase, ‘I am up to it,’ 
i. e., 1 have ability for it—DowbeEN is the only editor who, in the paraphrase, 
“courageously prepared for,’ seems to have perceived that there is here no reference. 
to ardour or ability, but solely to courage, and to the courage of a Prince, the great- 
est of soldiers. —Eb. 

213. Heere is a boxe] MAtone: Instead of this box, the modern editors have 
in a former scene made the Queen give Pisanio a vial, which is dropped on the stage 
without being broken. 

213. I had it from the Queene] Craic: Probably these words would be 
spoken aside, [as ‘likely to excite Imogen’s distrust,’ adds DowpEn]. 


246 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT II, SC. v. 


Scena Quinta. 


Enter Cymbeline, Queene, Cloten , Lucius, 2 
and Lords. 
Cym. Thus farre,and fo farewell. 4 
1. Scena Quinta] Scene mr. Rowe. Lords and Attendants. Han. 
Scene vit. Eccles. 4. farre,| far, Fy, Rowe,+. far; 
The Palace. Rowe. Cap. et seq. 


2, 3. Enter...and Lords.} Enter... 


1. Scena Quinta] Ecctes: This I assign to the afternoon of the same day to 
which the last two scenes belong, so as to leave time for Pisanio to perform his 
journey back to court after his separation from Imogen somewhere in the neigh- 
bourhood of Milford-Haven. As haste was necessary, and he may be imagined 
to travel when alone with greater expedition, he may, perhaps, have accomplished 
in less than a day what, during his attendance upon his mistress, may have re- 
quired a somewhat longer period. That so little time was necessary, however, for 
going and returning, obliges us to suppose the residence of Cymbeline at no very 
remote distance from the above-mentioned harbour, since the whole of Pisanio’s 
absence is here conceived to be included within a compass of time equal to about two 
days and nights. Lucius here takes leave of the king upon setting out for Milford- 
Haven, where he was either to embark, or be joined by the Roman troops from 
Gaul. Cloten had said, in the concluding scene of the last act as it is now disposed 
of, to Lucius, ‘His majesty bids you welcome—Make pastime with us a day, or 
two, or longer,’ &c. But we shall find it necessary to conceive Lucius to have 
remained many more days at the court of Cymbeline, according to the system here 
laid down, namely, while Iachimo was proceeding to Rome, and the letter of 
Posthumus on the road from thence, and even somewhat longer, since we find him 
here setting out just before the reappearance of Pisanio, after his return from his 
attendance upon Imogen.—DanrEL (New Sh. Soc. Trans., 1877-79, p. 244): 
Day 8. In Cymbeline’s Palace. The ambassador Lucius takes his departure, and 
desires ‘a conduct over-land to Milford-Haven.’ Lucius has sojourned in Cym- 
beline’s court since Day No. 4; since then the space between Rome and Britain has 
been twice traversed—by Iachimo going to Rome, and by the post bringing letters 
from Posthumus to Pisanio—and Lucius himself appears to have informed the em- 
peror of the failure of his embassy, and to have received a reply; for he says— 

‘My emperor hath wrote, I must from hence.’ 
The ‘day or two longer’ during which he was invited to rest at Court would hardly 
suffice for this, unless we are to imagine that Rome is only ‘behind the scenes, in 
the green-room.”! Yet more than a day or two is inconsistent with Cymbeline’s 
remark immediately after Lucius’s departure. He misses his daughter— 

‘She hath not appear’d 

Before the Roman, nor to us hath tender’d 

The duty of the day,’ etc. 
And this scene, be it observed, cannot be put earlier in time, as with Act ITI, sc. i. 


1 See Professor Wilson’s Time-Analysis of Othello, New Sh. Soc. Trans., 1875-76, 
part ii, p. 375. 


ACTHIIT, SC. Vv. | 


Luc. Thankes, Royall Sir; 


CYMBELINE 247 


My Emperor hath wrote, I muft from hence, 
And am right forry, that I muft report ye 


My Mafters Enemy. 
Cym. Our Subiects (Sir) 


Will not endure his yoake ; and for our felfe 10 
To fhew leffe Soueraignty then they, muft needs 


Appeare vn-Kinglike. 
ile. 


So Sir : I defire of you 


A Conduét ouer Land, to Milford-Hauen. 
Madam, all ioy befall your Grace,and you. 15 


6. wrote,| Ff, Rowe, Coll. Glo. Cam. 
wrote; Pope et cet. 
hence,| Fi, Rowe,+, Ingl. hence; 
Cap. et cet. 
7. am| I’m Anon. ap. Cam. 
ye] you Var. ’73. 

12. wn-Kinglike] F.F;, 
un-King like Fy, Rowe. 
Cap. et seq. 

13. So Sir:]F2. So, Sir: F;F,, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Glo. Cam. 
So, Sir. Coll. So, Sir, Han. et cet. 

of you] Om. Han. you Walker. 


Pope, +. 
unkinglike 


oe eee 


Glo. Cam. 
15. Madam...you.] All joy befall your 
Grace! and Madam, you! Huds. 
your Grace, and you.] Fi, Rowe, 
Pope. his Grace, and you! Cap. conj. 
Ran. your Grace, and yours! Cap. 
Dyce. your Grace,—and you Coll. ii, 
Sta. your Grace! Queen. And you! 
Cam. Edd. conj., Rlfe, Glo. your Grace; 
and you! Coll. iii. your Grace, and you, 
sir. Jervis. your grace and you! [To 
Cloten. Anon. ap. Cam. your grace; 
adieu! Vaun. your Grace, and you! 


14. ouer Land] over-land Dyce i, Sta. Theob. et cet. 


was necessary; for Imogen’s absence now is the consequence of those journeyings to 
and from Rome since Lucius’s arrival. The King sends to seek Imogen, and it 
then appears that she is really missing. Cloten remarks that he has not seen 
Pisanio, her old servant, these two days. Exeunt all but Cloten. To him enters 
Pisanio, who has returned to Court. Cloten bullies him into telling where his 
mistress has gone, and induces him to provide a suit of Posthumus’s garments in 
which he resolves to set out in pursuit of Imogen. 

6, 7. wrote,...hence, And am] The punctuation here has been deemed im- 
portant, on it apparently depends a nominative to ‘am.’ Pope placed a semicolon 
after ‘wrote,’ and retained the comma after ‘hence’; this was not altogether satis- 
factory, it converted ‘wrote’ to an absolute use, without any direct object.—CaPELL, 
however, retained the semicolon, and added another after ‘hence,’ which has main- 
tained its position to this day, and obliges ‘am,’ in the next line, to find a first person 
by implication.—Ep. 

11. Soueraignty] Scummpt (Lex.): That is, royal dignity. 

13. So Sir: I desire of you] WALKER (Crit., iii, 325): Qu., ‘I desire you.’ 
(Perhaps, too, ‘So, sir; I desire you,’ etc., but I greatly doubt this.)—Dvyce (ed. ii.): 
Collier alters [the colon of the Folio] to a full stop. But though we have had before 
{III, i, 92] ‘So, sir,’ as a complete sentence, here it can hardly be disjoined from the 
words which follow. [May not ‘so’ here mean ‘very good,’ as DEIGHTON gives it, 
or any equivalent phrase of acquiescence? In this case its disjunction, from the 
words which follow, is complete.—ED.] 

14. Conduct] Scummpr (Lex.): Escort, guard. 


248 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IIT, SC. V. 


Cym. My Lords, you are appointed for that Office : 16 
The due of Honor, in no point omit : 


1s. ioy befall your Grace, and you] CAPELL (whose text differs from the 
Folio only in yours instead of ‘you’): Though the editor is clear that there is a 
printer’s mistake in this line, he is not so at present that he has mended it rightly; 
but is more inclined to think it lay in ‘your’ than in ‘you,’ and that ‘your’ should 
be his; let the reader determine. [This conjecture of his for ‘your’ was put forth 
by Malone, and the reading yours for ‘you’ by Steevens; and in neither case was 
there any acknowledgement or reference to Capell. Dyce pilloried Steevens, but 
he did not know, as, possibly, he should have known, that Malone was equally in 
fault.—Ep.}—DAntet (p. 88): Read, ‘All joy befall your grace! Madam, and 
you!’ Lucius is addressing the King; he wishes him all joy, and then, turning to 
the Queen, he wishes her the like——Hupson: I have varied a little from this 
[reading of Daniel] for metre’s sake. [Thus, ‘All joy befall your Grace! and, madam, 
you!’]}—TutsELton: ‘Your Grace, and you,’ #. e., I think, ‘you as Queen, and as 
friend.’—INGLEBY remarks that the words ‘and you’ appear to indicate Cymbe- 
line—Br. Nicwoxson (N. & Qu., VII, ii, 23, 1886) quotes the various explana- 
tions of this line, and, as to Ingleby’s suggestion, that ‘and you’ refers to Cym- 
beline, says that the ‘fatal objection is that Lucius, taking formal leave and bearing 
back a declaration of defiance, is made, with complete disregard to etiquette and 
precedent, to take leave first of the Queen,—one not of royal blood,—and then of 
the King, in words and in a sequence, as though he were an all but unregarded 
William newly married to a Mary, the rightful queen. He thus omits also to take 
leave of the son of this queen, whom he is made to consider a principal personage, 
and who had been appointed as his immediate attender and entertainer.—II, iii, 68. 
And since the simple ‘‘and you” is an absurdly unpolite way of addressing a king,— 
an enemy king, to whom he is ambassador,—it is suggested that the metrically 
needless str may possibly have dropped out. Lastly, it is absurd that Lucius, even 
in mere courtesy, should wish all joy, that is victory, to one whom he is about to 
assail as a rebel. As to the Globe variation, one asks in vain, Where is the adieu 
to the King? He is made a puppet not worth taking into account; the Queen 
alone receives his wishes, while the text is needlessly altered to make her answer 
him. Dyce most oddly says that here “So, sir:” can hardly be disjoined, as they are 
by the colon, from the words which follow. The disjunction brings out the haughti- 
ness of state with which the Roman, again an ambassador, after suggesting a favor- 
able answer, receives the same decision,—‘ So, sir, your words are spoken: I now 
desire of you safe conduct to Milford Haven.” With the same haughtiness he, 
either after “So, sir:” or after “Haven”—not improbably, indeed, after both— 
makes his farewell but silent obeisance to the King, who from that moment is a 
rebel to Augustus, and the King in return gives an equally formal and silent ac- 
knowledgement of it and of his assent to the request. If we do not accept these 
silent actions we make both the King and the Roman utter barbarians, and the 
former one who does not even deign to notice Lucius’s request for an escort. 
Then the Ambassador, turning to the Queen, who is no recognized arbitress of 
peace or war,—or, indeed, politically speaking, no political personage at all,— 
and making another knee-bend, addressing her with “Madam . . . grace,” and 
lastly to Cloten, who had been specially appointed as his care-taker, but of whom 
he had taken a correct measurement, he, simply, and in the same breath, adds, if 
the text be right, “and you.” I say if the text be right, for independently I was led 


INGID TUM, SOs Va CYMBELINE 249 


So farewell Noble Lucius. 18 
Luc. Your hand, my Lord. 
Clot. Receiue it friendly : but from this time forth 20 


I weare it as your Enemy, 
Luc. Sir, the Euent 
Is yet to name the winner. Fare you well. 
Cym. Leaue not the worthy Lucius, good my Lords 
Till he haue croft the Seuern. Happines. rit Lucius, &c 25 
Qu. He goes hence frowning: but it honours vs 
That we haue giuen him caufe. 
Clot. ’Tis all the better, 
Your valiant Britaines haue their wifhes in it. 
Cym. Luctus hath wrote already to the Emperor 30 
How it goes heere. It fits vs therefore ripely 
Our Chariots,and our Horfemen be in readineffe : 


The Powres that he already hath in Gallia 33 
22. Sir,] Om. Pope,+. 28. better,| better; Theob. Warb. et 
23. winner.| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. win- seq. 

ner; Cap. et cet. 29. Britaines] Britains F,F,, Rowe, 
25. the Seuern| Severn Fi, Rowe i. Theob. i, Cap. Britons Pope et cet. 

Happines.| Happiness! Pope et 30. wrote] wrot F2, Cap. 
seq. 31. ripely| F., Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 


ripely, F3F, et cet. 


to wish that yours, the suggestion of Steevens [Capell’s text—Ep.], were the 
text reading, as this would more mark his veiled contempt for the private, but 
insolent and interfering, son of a widow, Neither Ingleby’s suggestion nor the 
Globe’s alteration would be out of place were they necessary, but my contention 
is that in the acted play they are unnecessary.’ [If action be here so essential to the 
comprehension of the text, it is difficult to believe that Shakespeare would not have 
given us some intimation of what that action should be, not in a stage direction,— 
Shakespeare does not stoop to that, except on the rarest occasion,—but by some 
expression let fall by the speaker or by some one present. In the last scene (V, 
v, 300), when Belarius thinks he may have addressed Cymbeline discourteously, 
he says, ‘here’s my knee.’ Thus here, had Lucius made a ‘knee-bend’ to the 
Queen, as Nicholson surmises, and an ‘obeisance’ to the King,—I think we may 
safely trust Shakespeare to have given us a hint. This is not denying that Dr 
Nicholson is right. Jt may be as he says. We must never forget that to him we 
owe the palmarian solution of that incomplete line in Malvolio’s day-dream, ‘And 
play with my-some rich jewel,’ where the steward was about to say “play with my 
chain’ when it flashed on his mind that his chain was a servile badge.—Eb.] 

25. Till he haue crost the Seuern] Eccres: This renders it probable that the 
residence of Cymbeline was supposed to be at no great distance from the sea. 

31, 32. It fits vs ... our Horsemen be] This ‘be’ may be either an infini- 
tive with to omitted, or the subjunctive with that omitted. The latter seems 
preferable-—Eb. 


250 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. v. 


Will foone be drawne to head, from whence he moues 

His warre for Britaine. 35 
Qu. ’Tis not fleepy bufineffe, 

But muft be look’d too fpeedily, and ftrongly. 
Cym. Our expectation that it would be thus 

Hath made vs forward. But my gentle Queene, 

Where is our Daughter ? She hath not appear’d 40 

Before the Roman, nor to vs hath tender’d 

The duty of the day. She looke vs like 

A thing more made of malice, then of duty, 


We haue noted it. Call her before vs, for 44 

36. not] no Daniel. Cap. (corrected ws in Errata), Sing. 

bufineffe,| Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. looks on’s Anon. ap. Cam. looks us 

Coll. Cam. business; Theob. et cet. Johns. et cet. 

37. too] Fy. 43. duty,| duty; Pope et seq. 

38. would] fhould Fi, Rowe,+, Varr. 44, 45. We haue] We've Pope,+, 
Ran. Dyce ii, iii. 

42. looke vs] lookes as F2. looks as 44. vs,| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. us; Cap. 


F;F,, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. etiect: 


42. She looke vs like] Does this mean ‘she looks to us,’ 7. e., where ‘us’ is 
the dative and Imogen is passive, and appears to be in the eyes of Cymbeline ‘a 
thing of malice’? or does it mean ‘she looks at us,’ where Imogen is active and glares 
with malice at her father? In other words, is it Cymbeline who is surly or Imogen? 
It is pleasant to know that only two or three editors attribute the fault to Imogen, 
and they would probably soften their decision by explaining that Cymbeline mis- 
interpreted Imogen’s gentle looks. The following critics apparently think that 
Imogen’s looks were really malicious: RANN, HERFORD, and VAUGHAN. The first 
interprets the phrase: ‘She looks om us, eyes us, or surveys us.’ The second: 
‘Looks upon us like.’ And the third thus comments: ‘‘‘She gives us a look more 
like that of a being who is showing malignity, than of one tendering duty.” As she 
has not appeared this morning, the Poet proceeds, in order to avoid misconstruction 
of the verb in the present tense, “she looks,” with “ we have noted it.”’ The follow- 
ing critics are in favour of Imogen: CAPELL: That is, looks on us, eyes us, or surveys 
us [thus far Rann copied Capell, but did not complete Capell’s note, who adds], 
an expression suiting the surly mood of the speaker—WuuitE, Hupson, ScHMIDT 
(Lex.), RotreE, De1cHton, DowDEN, all repeat the same phrase: ‘she seems to us.’ 
—KEIGHTLEY (E£xp.) sweeps the horizon with the remark: ‘I think we should insert 
on, at, or to after ‘look.’—SIncER follows F, in his text, and naively remarks that 
““looks us” is an awkward phrase.’-—Whereto Dyce replies, ‘in spite of its “awk- 
wardness,” it is assuredly the right reading; our early writers frequently use the 
word “look” with an ellipsis of the word which modern phraseology requires after 
it. Thus, “By looking back what I have left behind.” ’—Ant. & Cleop., III, xi, 33 
(or 57 of this ed.)—Axporrt (§ 220): ‘Us’ probably is used for ‘to us’ in [this pas- 
sage].—In. (§ 200) gives instances of the omission of a preposition after ‘look’; 
thus, ‘Look our dead.’—Hen. V: IV, vii, 76; ‘I must go look my twiggs.’—All’s 
Well, III, vi, 115; ‘He hath been all this day to look you.’—As You Like I ul aas 


ACT III, SC. v.] CYMBELINE 251 


We haue beene too flight in fufferance. . 45 
Qu. Royall Sir, 

Since the exile of Po/thumus ,moft retyr’d 

Hath her life bin : the Cure whereof, my Lord, 

’Tis time muft do. Befeech your Maiefty, 

Forbeare fharpe fpeeches to her. Shee’s a Lady 50 

So tender of rebukes, that words are ftroke;, 

And ftrokes death to her, 


Enter a Meffenger. 
Cym. Where is fhe Sir ? How 
Can her contempt be anfwer’d ? 55 


Mef. Pleafe you Sir, 
Her Chambers are all lock’d, and there’s no an{wer 


That will be giuen to’th’lowd of noife, we make. 58 
45. flight] light Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. 57. lock’d,] Ff, Rowe,+, Sta. Jock’d; 
Varr. Ran. Cap. et cet. 
[Exit a Servant. Theob. ...Mes- 58. to’th’| to th’ F;F,, Rowe,+. to 
senger. Han. the Cap. et seq. 
48. bin] been Fy. Jowd of noife] Ff (loud F;F,), 


49. Befeech| ’Beseech Theob. ii,+, Var. “73, 978: loud noise Var. 773, 
Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. i, Ktly. Jloud’st of noise Cap. 


Sing. Ktly. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, Dyce i, Sta. 
51. ftroke;,| ftrokes, Ff. Cam. Dowden. Jond’st noise Coll. 
54. fhe Sir? How] she? how Pope, (MS.), Sing. White, Dyce ii. loudest 

she? and how Han. she, sirrah? Ingl. noise Rowe et cet. 

conj. , 


51. stroke ;,] A semicolon has here usurped an s. There is no such excuse, how- 
ever, in I, v, 93, where a parallel instance of erroneous punctuation occurs.—ED. 

58. to’th’lowd of noise] Cortier (ed. i.): The preposition of is mistakenly 
inserted after ‘loud’; it is needless to the sense and injurious to the metre.— 
SINGER: It is most probable that of is a misprint for ’st——Dvycr (Remarks, p. 256): 
‘Loud noise’ [of Collier, ed.i.] does not afford the meaning which the Poet certainly 
intended, viz., that the very loudest noise which they could make drew forth no 
answer.— VAUGHAN: The Folios are right, and all editors and critics, from Rowe 
to the last commentator, are wrong in their corrections of them, probable as they 
seem to be. It has escaped the observation of the best lexicographers of the 
English language, including Junius and Skinner [The Century and N. E. D.—Ep.], 
that ‘loud’ was in the fifteenth [?] and sixteenth centuries not an adjective only, 
but a substantive, signifying ‘high and full sound.’ So in Holland’s Plinie, where 
the author is full of animated comment on the nightingale’s song: ‘For at one time 
you shall heare her voice ful of loud, another time as low; and anon shrill and on 
high.’—The tenth Booke, chap. 29. I should certainly read ‘the loud of noise.’ 
[Vaughan gives no example from the fifteenth century; Holland’s Plinie was pub- 
lished in 1601, which is, strictly, the seventeenth century, but may be reasonably 
considered as of the sixteenth—PorrEr and Crark, staunchly loyal to the Folio, 
assert that it is right, and, that albeit without another example in proof, ‘loud’ is 


252 THE TRAGEDIE OF ACT Miia SC ave 


Qu. My Lord, when laft I went to vifit her, 
She pray’d me to excufe her keeping clofe, 60 
Whereto conftrain’d by her infirmitie, 
She fhould that dutie leaue vnpaide to you 
Which dayly fhe was bound to proffer : this 
She wifh’d me to make knowne: but our great Court 
Made me too blame in memory. 65 
Cym. Her doores lock’d ? 
Not feene of late? Grant Heauens, that which I 
Feare, proue falfe. 
Qu. Sonne, I fay, follow the King. 
Clot. That man of hers, Pi/anzo, her old Seruant 70 
T haue not feene thefe two dayes. Exit. 
Qu. Go, looke after : 
Pifanio, thou that ftand’ft fo for Pofthumus , oie. 


Exit. 


60. clofe,] close; Theob. et seq. 

65. too] to F;. 

66. doores] door’s Knt. 

67, 68. Not...Feare] As one line, 
Rowe et seq. (except Coll. i, ii, Sing. 
Ktly). 

67. Grant Heauens,| Grant, Heavens, 
Cap. et seq. 

69. Sonne, Son, F;F;. Go, son Steev. 


69. fay,] say; Rowe, Pope, Han. 
follow] follow you Han. 

71. Exit.] Exit Cloten. After line 
72. Capes 

72. after:| Fi. after— Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Var. ’73. after him. 
Ktly. after. Johns. et cet. 

73. thou that fland’ft] that stands 
Johns. 


conj. Son,—son, Walker, Huds. 


anoun. We may all echo Thiselton’s wish that Vaughan had vouchsafed us a few 
more examples,—more especially since it seems to me not improbable that ‘the 
ful of loud’ is a misprint for ‘ful oft loud.’ Plinie is enthusiastic over the wonderful 
range and power of the song, and in the sentence quoted by Vaughan the word ‘of’ 
is at the end of the line, where a ¢ might readily have slipped out. I am bound to 
say that there is no indication of a missing letter in my copy of Plinie; I suggest it 
merely as a possibility, which would grow to a probability, if no other example of 
‘loud’ as a noun is to be found in English literature.—Eb.] 

63. bound] DowpEN: Does this mean bound in duty? or is the sense ready, 
willing, as often? 

65. too blame in memory] Axsort (§ 73) furnishes several examples of ‘too’ 
used in connection with ‘blame,’ and suggests that ‘perhaps “blame” was con- 
sidered an adjective, as in, “In faith, my lord, you are too wilful-blame.”—r Hen. 
TV: III, i, 177.2. Inasmuch as Shakespeare uses the idiom, and it is common in 
Elizabethan writers, there seems no urgent reason why we should discard it, espe- 
cially where it seems to add strength to the context.—Eb. 

72, 73- Go, looke after: Pisanio, thou that, etc.] VAUGHAN (p. 462): Such 
interrupted language, and so sudden an apostrophe to Pisanio, involving so 
unusual a change of person, leave me in little doubt that in the two commands, 
‘son, I say, follow the King’ (very imperative words, not admitting very slow 
performances), and ‘Go look after,’ were two commands to two different persons. 


ACTS ESC. Vel) CYMBELINE PASE 


He hath a Drugge of mine : I pray, his abfence 
Proceed by fwallowing that. For he beleeues a 
It is a thing moft precious. But for her, 
Where is fhe gone? Haply difpaire hath feiz’d her: 
Or wing’d with feruour of her loue, fhe’s flowne 
To her defir’d Po/thumus : gone the is, 
To death, or to difhonor, and my end 80 
Can make good vie of either. Shee being downe, 
I haue the placing of the Brittith Crowne. 
Enter Cloten, 

How now, my Sonne? 

Clot. ’Tis certaine fhe is fled : 85 
Go in and cheere the King, he rages, none 
Dare come about him. 

Qu. All the better : may 
This night fore-ftall him of the comming day. Exit Qu. 89 


75. that.| that, Coll. that; Rowe et 85. fled:] Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. 
cets Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt. fled, Warb. 
77- Haply| haply, Theob. Warb. et _ fled. Ff, et cet. 
seq. 86. King, he rages,| king; he rages, 
79. is,] Ff, Rowe, Cap. zs Pope et cet. (or rages;) Cap. et seq. 
80. difhonor,| difhonour, F;¥,, Rowe, 88. [Aside. Walker, Glo. Cam. Dyce 
Pope, Han. dishonour; Theob. Warb. ii, Coll. ii, Dowden. 
et seq. 89. day.] day! Pope et seq. 
The author wrote: ‘—I have not seen these two days. [Exit Cloten.] Queen (to 


Attendant). Go, look after Pisanio, thou, that stands so for Posthumus.’ That is, 
‘look thou after Pisanio, who stands so for Posthumus.’ Nothing could be more 
natural than that the Queen, having once already directed Cloten to follow the 
King, and, having heard but now that Pisanio had not lately been seen, should 
dismiss her attendant to search for Pisanio. [In this interpretations of these 
puzzling lines, HANMER anticipates Vaughan, but with a little more violence to the 
text, thus: ‘I have not seen these two days. [Fxit.] Queen [To the Messenger]. 
Go, look after Pisanio—he that standeth so for Posthumus,’ etc. Neither Hanmer 
nor Vaughan indicates, however, the exact time of the Messenger’s departure; it is 
probably after ‘He hath a drug of mine,’ which the Queen gives as reason for send- 
ing after him. To be relieved from supposing that Pisanio is here apostrophised is 
certainly a gain, and purchased, too, at little cost.—Eb.] 

88, 89. may This night fore-stall him of the comming day] Matone: May 
his grief this night prevent him from ever seeing another day, by an anticipated 
and premature destruction—Brab ey (UN. E. D.,s.v. forestall, 4 b.): To bar, or 
deprive (a person) by previous action from, of, out of (a thing). [The present line 
quoted.|}—Wvarrt: It seems to me preferable to give the sentence a figurative 
meaning: ‘May this (night of) sorrow and despair caused by Imogen’s disap- 
pearance deprive him of (the coming day of) her succession to the throne and happy 
reign.,—DowbEN: Wyatt’s interpretation seems to be somewhat strained. The 


254 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. v. 


Clo. Yloue, and hate her : for fhe’s Faire and Royall, 90 
And that fhe hath all courtly parts more exquifite 


Then Lady, Ladies, Woman, from euery one g2 
90. Royall,] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Sta. ning Han. Than lady Ladies; winning 
Ktly. royal; Cap. et cet. Warb. Than lady, ladies, woman; Pope 
ot. that fhe] Om. Ingl. conj. etcet. Than lady, lass, or woman; 
92. Then...Woman,| F.F;. Than... or Than lady, lassie, woman; Elze. 
Ladies Woman, F,. Than Lady, Ladies, Than, birlady, any woman; Sprenger. 
Woman, Rowe. Than any lady, win- 92. euery] cach Pope,+. 


Queen hopes that the King’s violent agitation may end her husband’s life— 
WALKER (Crit., iii, 325): Would the Queen have said this to Cloten? [Foot-note 
by] Lerrsom: And would even Cloten take no notice, if such a speech had been 
addressed to him? It is strange the Old Corrector [?. e., Collier’s MS.] did not add 
an Aside here. [See Text. Notes.] 

90, 91. for she’s Faire... And that she hath] That is, because she’s 
fair. . . . And because that she hath, etc—See ABBOTT, § 285, if need be. 

92. Then Lady, Ladies, Woman, from euery one, etc.] WARBURTON: 
This line is intolerable nonsense. It should be read and printed thus, ‘Than lady 
Ladies; winning from each one,’ The sense of the whole is this, I love her be- 
cause she has, in a more exquisite degree, all those courtly parts that ennoble 
(lady) women of qualities (ladies), winning from each of them the best of their 
good qualities, etc. ‘Lady’ is a plural verb, and ‘Ladies’ is a noun governed of 
it; a quaint expression in Shakespeare’s way, and suiting the folly of the character. 
[‘Warburton’s acuteness seems usually to have forsaken him the moment he lost 
his malignity. As some beasts muddy the water by trampling before they drink, 
so nothing is palatable to Warburton but what he has made turbid.’ Landor, 
Conversation between Dr. Johnson and Horne Tooke-——Ep.|—SEwarp (Note on 
Spanish Curate, I, i, p. 185): I cannot see any impenetrable nonsense in this, 
unless o’er-weaning criticks will labor to expound it into such. The Poet’s text 
is a just climax; scil. ‘She hath all courtly parts more exquisite than any single 
Lady whoever; ay, than many Ladies; nay, than the whole sex put together.’ 
Ferdinand, speaking of his Mistress Miranda, says almost the same thing in The 
Tempest. ‘But you, O you, So perfect and so peerless are created Of ev’ry creature’s 
best.’—IT, i, 47. [It is not impossible, nay, it is highly probable, that in the 
notes to this play we have the very last editorial work of poor, neglected, poverty- 
stricken Theobald. On the title-page to this, the second volume of Seward’s 
edition of Beaumont & Fletcher, it is stated that ‘The Custom of the Country, The 
Elder Brother; The Spanish Curate to page 233 are Printed under the Inspection of 
the late Mr Theobald.’ Theobald died in 1744. The ten volumes were long in 
going through the press, and are all dated 1750.—JouNSON adopted the same in- 
terpretation as above of the present line, and MaLone adopted the reference to 
The Tempest—Touttet added an apposite reference to All’s Well: ‘Lafeu. Are 
you companion to the Count Rousillon? Parolles. To any count, to all counts, to 
what is man.’—II, iii, 202. All commentators agree in the interpretation of the 
present passage as first given by Theobald (probably) in Seward’s volume, except 
Crarc, who has the following note on it: There are many certainly corrupt 
passages in this ill-printed play (we have unfortunately no Quarto to assist us); 


ACT Il, SC. v, | CYMBELINE 255 


The beft fhe hath, and fhe of all compounded 93 
Out-felles them all. I loue her therefore, but 
Difdaining me, and throwing Fauours on 95 


The low Po/thumus, {landers fo her iudgement, 

That what’s elfe rare, is choak’d: and in that point 

I will conclude to hate her, nay indeede, 

To be reueng’d vpon her. For, when Fooles fhall 
Enter Pifanio, 100 

Who is heere? What, are you packing firrah ? 

Come hither : Ah you precious Pandar, Villaine, 

Where is thy Lady? Ina word, or elfe 


Thou art ftraightway with the Fiends. 104 

94. Out-felles]| Excels Coll. conj. Glo. Cam. What are Pope. What! are 

all.] Ff, Pope, Coll. all,— Dyce, Theob. et cet. 
Sta. all: Rowe et cet. 102. Ah] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
therefore,| therefore; Rowe et seq. Ah! Theob. Warb. Johns. Ah, Cap. et 

96. flanders| she slanders Ktly. seq. 

99. For, when Fooles fhalli—| F-., Pandar, Villaine,] Pope, Theob. 
Coll. i, i, Ktly. For, when Fooles— i, Han. Pander, Villain, Ff, Rowe, 
FF, (Fools F,), Rowe i. For when Warb. Johns. pandar! Villain, Cap. et 
Fool— Rowe ii. For when fools-—— seq. 

Pope. For when fools Shail— (Shall— 103. word,] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. word; 
begining line ror), Theob. et cet. Cap. et cet. 

100. Scene vi. Pope, Han. Warb. 104. Thou art] Thow’rt Pope,+, Dyce 
Johns. ii, il. 

101. What, are] Ff, Rowe, Cap. Dyce, [Drawing his sword. Theob. 


this is one. Shakespeare never wrote this nonsense. It is best to leave it, but 
he may have written something like this: ‘she hath all courtly parts more excellent 
Than loveliest ladies; robbing [or stealing] from every one The best,’ etc. If the 
line be nonsense, as Warburton and Craig assert, is it, therefore, misplaced in 
Cloten’s mouth? If the speeches of Cloten are read aloud, no one, I think, can 
fail to observe in them a certain jerkiness, as though the words were jolted forth, 
they do not glide trippingly (or, rather, they trip too much), but come spasmodi- 
cally. This is one of his characteristics, and by it Belarius recognized him after 
long years. It was by ‘the snatches in his voice, And burst of speaking’ (IV, ii, 
142) that made Belarius ‘absolutely’ certain of his identity. Can we ask for an 
illustration of his manner of speaking better than the present line? Each degree of 
comparison, ‘Lady—Ladies—Woman,’ explodes separately.—Ex.} 

99. when Fooles shall] TuiseLton: Cloten possibly had in view some para- 
phrase of the proverb ‘Fools’ haste is no speed.’ This seems to me to be confirmed 
by ‘are you packing sirrah’; but, at least, Pisanio practically finishes the sentence 
for Cloten in this sense, when he says at the end of this scene ‘This Fooles speede 
Be crost with slownesse; Labour be his meede.’ 

ror. packing] STAUNTON: Plotting, contriving, scheming. 

102. Pandar, Villaine,] WaLkEeR (Crit., i, 31): Perhaps, ‘pandar-villain!’ 
The reading in the edition of 1821 [Capell’s] seems more probable. 


256 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT III, sc. v. 


Pif. Oh, good my Lord. 105 
Clo. Where is thy Lady? Or, by Lupiter, 
I will not aske againe. Clofe Villaine, 
Ile haue this Secret from thy heart, or rip 
Thy heart to finde it. Is fhe with Po/thumus ? 
From whofe fo many waights of bafeneffe, cannot 110 
A dram of worth be drawne. 
Pif. Alas, my Lord, 
How can fhe be with him 2 When was fhe mifs’d ? 
He is in Rome. 
Clot. Where is fhe Sir? Come neerer : 115 
No farther halting : fatisfie me home, 
What is become of her ? 
Pif. Oh, my all-worthy Lord. 
Clo. All-worthy Villaine, 


Difcouer where thy Miftris is, at once, 120 
105. good my] my good Theob. Warb. 108. Ile] Will Ktly, Dyce ii, iii. 

Johns. 116. farther] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Sta. 
106. Iupiter,|) Jupiter— Var. ’21, Cam. further Johns. et cet. 

Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 117. her?] her: Ff. her. Rowe, Pope, 
107. Clofe] Come, thou close Anon. Theob. Han. Warb. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 

ap. Cam. her, Cap. (corrected in Errata). 

Villaine| villain, thou Steev. 118. Lord.| Lord! Rowe et seq. 
conj. villain, I Ktly, Dyce ii, iii. 119. Villaine,| villain! Rowe et seq. 


107. Close] That is, secret, as in ‘still close as sure.’—I, vii, 166. 

107. Villaine] WALKER (Crit., ii, 44) devotes a chapter on Villaine and Vil- 
lainie confounded, wherein the present word is the first example. ‘For “villaine’’ 
read villainie, metri gratia. This correction also spares us the repetition of “villain” 
three times within a few lines. The mode of address (abstractum pro concreto) 
is frequent in Shakespeare and his contemporary poets. Gifford, if I understand 
him aright, has made the same remark, Massinger, vol. iii, p. 580, ed. ii. [VAUGHAN 
makes the strange remark that ‘S. Walker suggests “‘villany” conjecturally, but 
does not adduce any examples which confirm his supposition.’ Of course, where 
conjectures are concerned, downright confirmation is always an open question. 
But Walker, in fact, presents ten or twelve examples which he himself believes 
amply confirm his conjecture,—a conclusion which, I think, many students will 
share who read his chapter.—Ep.] 

115. Come neerer] Hupson: He means ‘Come nearer fo the point.’ Speak 
more to the purpose. [In support of this just interpretation, Cratc quotes: 
‘What need’st thou run so many miles about, When thou may’st tell thy tale a 
nearer way.’—Rich. III: IV, iv, 461. There is a sinister idea in Hen. V: ‘give 
us leave Freely to render what we have in charge; Or shall we sparingly show you 
far off The Dauphin’s meaning,’ etc.—I, ii, 238—Ep.] 


ACT III, SC. v.] 


CYMBELINE 257 


At the next word : no more of worthy Lord : 121 
Speake, or thy filence on the inftant, is 
Thy condemnation, and thy death. 


Ty Chen sir: 


This Paper is the hiftorie of my knowledge 125 


Touching her flight. 


Clo. Let’s fee’t: I will purfue her 


Euen to Augu/ius Throne. 
Pif. Or this, or perith. 


She’s farre enough, and what he learnes by this, 130 
May proue his trauell, not her danger. 


Clo. Humh. 


121. worthy Lord:|] Ff. worthy lord, 
Rowe i. worthy lord. Rowe ii, et seq. 
As a quotation, Theob. Warb. Johns. 

126. [Presenting a letter. Mal. Pre- 
senting Posthumus’s letter. Ingl. 

127. feel] feet F.. 

128. [He reads it. Coll. ii. 


132 


129-131. [Aside. Rowe et seq. 

129. Or this, or perifh] Given to 
Cloten, Johns. conj., Ran. Ingl. i. 

130. enough,| enough; Theob. et seq. 

131. trauell] travail H. Ingl. conj. 

132. Humh.| Ff, Rowe,+. Humh! 
Cap. Humph! Var.’03,’13,’21. Hum! 
Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 


125. This Paper] Pisanio afterwards (V, v, 330) says that this was a counter- 
feit letter of Posthumus which he had by accident in his pocket! It is to be feared 
that this is one of the instances of the ‘folly of the fiction’ which Dr Johnson found 
in this play; any comment on it would be, therefore, wasted on ‘unresisting im- 
becility. —Eb. 

129. Or this, or perish] JoHNson: These words, I think, belong to Cloten. 
Then Pisanio, giving the paper, says to himself: ‘She’s far enough,’ etc.—RANN: 
Give me the paper, or thou diest.—MAatoneE: Cloten knew not, till it was tendered, 
that Pisanio had such a letter as he now presents; there could, therefore, be no 
question concerning his giving it freely or withholding it. These words, in my 
opinion, relate to Pisanio’s present conduct, and they mean, I think, ‘I must either 
practise this deceit wpon Cloten, or perish by his fury. —INcLEBy, by an evident 
oversight, adopted Johnson’s conjecture in his text with the following note: “The 
alteration, however, is not necessary to explain Pisanio’s subsequent account of this 
interview; for Cloten had already threatened him with death if he did not disclose 
Imogen’s whereabouts.’ In the Revised Ed., by his son, the error is corrected, and 
the present words given to Pisanio.—TuIseLTon: As Pisanio says this he hands 
Cloten the letter, the Aside not commencing until the next line. He means 
Cloten to understand that he yields to the latter’s threats, while he really ex- 
presses a wish that Cloten may not reach Imogen before he arrives at Augustus’s 
throne (which, considering the state of war, was a perilous thing to attempt, and 
would scarcely assist his design), or that he should perish in the attempt.—DowDEn: 
Perhaps these words are not spoken aside, and are meant to deceive Cloten by 
apparent reluctance in showing a letter which Pisanio believes can really do no 
harm to Imogen. 


17 


258 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Pif. lle write to my Lord fhe’s dead : Oh /mogen, 
Safe mayft thou wander, fafe returne agen. 

Clot. Sirra, is this Letter true? 

Pif. Sir,as I thinke. 

Clot. Itis Pofthumus hand, I know’t. 
would’ft not be a Villain, but do me true feruice: vnder- 
go thofe Imployments wherein I fhould haue caufe to vie 
thee with a ferious induftry, that is, what villainy foere I 
bid thee do to performe it, direétly and truely, I would 
thinke thee an honeft man : 
my meanes for thy releefe, nor my voyce for thy prefer- 
ment. 

Pif. Well, my good Lord. 

Clot. Wilt thou ferue mee? For fince patiently and 
conftantly thou haft ftucke to the bare Fortune of that 
Begger Po/thumus, thou canft not in the courfe of grati- 
tude, but be a diligent follower of mine. 


[ACT III, SC. v. 


meer 


fy Sire lL will. 


Clo. Giue mee thy hand, heere’s my purfe. 


133 
135 
Sirrah, if thou 
140 
thou fhould’ft neither want 
145 
Wilt thou ferue 
150 


Haft any 


of thy late Mafters Garments in thy poffeffion ? 


Prfan. 


I haue (my Lord) at my Lodging, the fame 


Suite he wore, when he tooke leaue of my Ladie & Mi- 154 


ftreffe. 


133, 134. [Aside. Theob. 
133. write to] write Walker. 
Jhe’s| fhe is Fi, Rowe. 
dead:] Ff, Cap. dead. Rowe et 
cet. 

134. agen.] Ff, Rowe i, Sta. again. 
Rowe ii, et cet. 

137. Pofthumus] F., Var.’78. Post- 
humus’s F;, Rowe,+. Posthumu’s F,. 
Posthumus’ Cap. et cet. 

138. but do] but to do Rowe, Pope. 

139. Imployments| employments F3F,. 

140. thee with] Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. thee, with Theob. et 


cet. 

140. foere] foe’re F;F,. soe’er Rowe. 

141. do to performe| Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
do, perform Han. do, to perform Theob. 
et cet. 

truely,] truly: Pope, Han. truly. 

Coll. i. 

142. man:] man, Pope, Han. 

148. mine.| mine Dyce, Sta. 
mine: Glo. 

151. hand,] hand; Var. ’73, Coll. 
Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 


153. at my] at the Fy, Rowe, Pope i, 
Han. 


T37 Clots 


It is Posthumus hand, etc.] Freay (Life, etc., p. 246) believes 


that this play was written at different times, the last three Acts in 1606 just after 
Lear and Macbeth. ‘Especially should II, v, be examined,’ he says, ‘from this 


point of view, in which the prose part is a subsequent insertion, having some slight 
discrepancies with the older parts of the scene.’ 


ACP Ul, SC. Vv. ] CYMBELINE 259 


Clo. The firft feruice thou doft mee, fetch that Suite 155 
hither, let it be thy firft feruice, go. 

Pf. I fhall my Lord. Fixit. 

Clo. Meet thee at Milford-Hauen : (I forgot to aske 
him one thing, He remember’t anon:) euen there, thou 
villaine Poffhumus will I kill thee. I would thefe Gar- 160 
ments were come. She faide vpon a time (the bitterneffe 
of it, I now belch from my heart) that fhee held the very 
Garment of Po/thumus, in more refpeét, then my Noble 
and naturall perfon; together with the adornement of 
my Qualities. With that Suite vpon my backe wilI ra— 165 
uifh her : firft kill him, and in her eyes; there fhall fhe fee 
my valour, which wil then be a torment to hir contempt. 
He on the ground, my fpeech of infulment ended on his 
dead bodie, and when my Luft hath dined (which, as I 169 


155. fetch] fetch me Cap. 164. perfon;] person, Pope et seq. 

157. Exit.] Exeunt. Ff. 165. backe] back, Cap. et seq. 

158. Meet...Hauen| In Italics, as 166. eyes;] eyes— Rowe,+. eyes. 
quotation, Han. Sta. Johns. 

Hauen:| Fi. Haven? Rowe,+. 167. hir] Fy. 

Haven— Han. Haven. Coll. Wh. i. 168. infulment] infultment Ff. 
Haven! Dyce, Coll. iii, Glo. Cam. 169. bodie, and] Fi, Rowe, Pope, 

159. thing,| thing; Cap. et seq. Han, Glo. Cam. Dyce ii, Wh. ii. body; 

160. villaine] F.. villain, F3F,, —and Theob. Warb. Johns. bedy,— 
IRGC, Ware, ee, “ag, Yar, (Coll sy au. and Cap. et cet. body—I know what 
Ktly. Lil do,—and Cap. conj. 


158. Meet thee at Milford-Hauen] HANMER and STAUNTON put these 
words in Italics very properly, as it seems to me, to indicate that they are quoted. 
Cloten reads them from the feigned letter Pisanio has given him.—Eb. 

158, 159. I forgot to aske him one thing] EccLEs, in a note on line 177, 
‘How long is’t since she went to Milford Haven?’ suggests that this ‘is the inquiry 
that before he had forgotten to make.’—TutsELton: As to the rest of this speech, 
Pisanio evidently overhears Cloten. [Thus only (and there is not, in the text, a 
tittle of evidence of it) can Pisanio’s word in the last scene of the play be trusted.— 
Ep.] 

161, 162. the bitternesse of it,... from my heart] Dricuron: That is, 
he can get rid of it now, since his prospect of revenge is so near at hand. 

169. bodie, and] VAUGHAN contributes here a long note with an arrangement 
of the punctuation, which DowpEN commends as making ‘the whole passage run 
more smoothly.’ Vaughan’s note reveals not only his complete misapprehension 
of Capell’s punctuation, but contains the statement that ‘Capell, for the same 
purpose, actually inserted “I know what I'll do” before “and.”’ A glance at 
Capell’s text at once shows that this statement is without foundation. Capell’s 
text has no such insertion. In his Notes (p. 113)—but I will not repeat his un- 
savory explanation. Cloten’s whole speech is not a subject for comment. I am, 
however, certain that had Vaughan, who is prone to be over-hasty, comprehended 


260 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT all, OC. Vi. 


fay, to vex her, I will execute in the Cloathes that fhe fo 170 
prais’d:)to the Court Ile knock her backe, foot her home 
againe. She hath defpis’d mee reioycingly, and Ile bee 
merry in my Reuenge. 
Enter Pifanio. 

Be thofe the Garments ? 175 

Pif. I,my Noble Lord. 

Clo. How long is’t fince fhe went to Milford-Hauen ? 

Pif. She can fcarfe be there yet. 

Clo. Bring this Apparrell to my Chamber, that is 
the fecond thing that I haue commanded thee. The third 180 
is, that thou wilt be a voluntarie Mute to my defigne. Be 
but dutious, and true preferment fhall tender it felfe to 
thee. My Reuenge is now at Milford, would] had wings = 183 


171. knock] kick Han. Warb. and true, Walker, Ingl. duteous-true, 
174. Enter...) Enter Pisanio with a and Elze. 

suit of Cloaths. Rowe. 183. Milford,] Milford; Cap. et seq. 
179. Chamber,| chamber; Cap. et seq. would] ’would Theob. ii, Warb. 
180. thee.] thee: Cap. et seq. Johns. Cap. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, 
182. dutious, and true] Ff. duteous Sing: 


Capell, neither his own note nor Dowden’s commendation would ever have been 
written.—Eb. 

181. voluntarie Mute] DreicHTon: That is, willingly silent, not by neces- 
sity or compulsion; with an allusion to the mutes in Turkish harems, who were, if 
not dumb by nature, made so by having their tongues cut out that they might not 
be able to reveal secrets. 

182. dutious] Another example of the class of words wherein, before the 
termination ous, the compositors of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were 
wont to insert at will an 7 where we now have an e or a #, or no vowel at all, such 
as jealous (uniformly so spelled in Othello); prolixious (Meas. for Meas., I, iv, 162); 
robustious (Ham., III, ii, 10; Hen. V: III, vii, 150); tempestious (Webbe, Disc. of 
Eng. Poetrie, p. 47, ed. Arber); dexterious (Twel. Night, I, v, 58); it is noteworthy 
that in Love’s Lab. Lost, IV, i, we have, in line 71, ‘beauteous,’ and in the next line, 
72, ‘beautious’; this practice descended even to Milton, in whose Samson Agonistes, 
line 1627, we find ‘All with incredible, stupendious force.’ It may be said to have 
survived even to the present day, in common speech, in tremendious and mis- 
chievious. The substance of this note will be found in the foregoing references to 
Twel. Night and Love’s Lab. Lost of this edition —Eb. 

182. dutious, and true preferment] WALKER (Crit., iii, 326): What has true 
preferment to do here? Point: ‘Be but dutious and true, preferment shall,’ etc. 
[This punctuation is plausible, and may be right; but ‘true preferment’ may not be 
so far wrong as Walker supposes. There may be therein the suggestion of a con- 
trast between what Cloten can offer, which would be solid and substantial, and 


what Pisanio might hope for from his loyalty to Imogen and Posthumus, which 
would be insubstantial and false.—Ep.] 


AGT ETE ESC.uVell CYMBELINE 261 


to follow it. Come, and be true. Exit 
Pif. Thou bid’ft me to my loffe : for true to thee, 185 
Were to proue falfe, which I will neuer bee 
To him that is moft true. To Milford go, 
And finde not her, whom thou purfueft. Flow, flow 
You Heauenly bleffings on her: This Fooles fpeede 


Be croft with flowneffe ; Labour be his meede. Exit 190 
184. it.] Ff, Rowe, Coll. it/ Pope et 187. To him] To her Han. To Him 
Cet Anon. ap. Cam. 


185. my] thy Coll. ii. (MS.), Huds. 


185. to my losse] CoLtier (ed. ii.): Thy and ‘my’ were often confounded by 
the old printers, and this seems a case of the kind; the MS. puts thy for ‘my,’ and 
with apparent reason; it was to Cloten’s loss that he bade Pisanio be true, because 
Pisanio was resolved to be true to his own master, Posthumus, who, he was per- 
suaded, was himself true, not meriting any part of the accusation of falsehood made 
to Imogen. 

187. To him that is most true] THIseLTon: That is, ‘to Jove.’ The cir- 
cumstances clearly preclude any other interpretation. Pisanio could not apply 
the epithet ‘most true’ to Posthumus; see his soliloquy on Posthumus’s letter, 
Til, ii, 1-23. Nor could he say that he would never be false to Posthumus whose 
command he disobeys, and to whom he has just said that he would write that 
Tmogen is dead. Pisanio is one of Shakespeare’s great minor characters —DOWDEN 
quotes Thiselton’s interpretation, and adds ‘perhaps right,’ wherewith, I think, 
there will be general acquiescence. In the Cam. Ed. there is recorded a conjecture 
by ‘Anon.’ (whom I almost always suspect to be the peerless Editor himself) of 
‘To Him.’ This, if I understand it, with its capital H, is a reference to an authority 
far higher than the ‘Jove’ of Thiselton. Are we quite sure, however, that Shake- 
speare’s audience, or any audience, could recall Pisanio’s former mistrust or present 
deception so swiftly as to perceive that he here refers to a heavenly standard and 
not to Posthumus himself? His latest references to Posthumus have been un- 
swerving confidence in the absolute truth of Posthumus as regards Imogen. Do 
we not, without stopping to reason, almost instinctively accept the fact that truth 
to Cloten is falsehood to Posthumus, loyalty to the one is disloyalty to the other? 
And may not this fleeting allusion to Posthumus’s truth, if it really is so, be one of 
Shakespeare’s artful devices to soften our hearts unconsciously towards Imogen’s 
cruel husband, and prepare us gradually for his full pardon at our hands? That 
I do not err in supposing that Pisanio’s reference ‘to him that is most true’ is 
generally accepted as referring to Posthumus, Malone’s note on this passage, I 
think, will show: ‘Pisanio, notwithstanding his master’s letter, commanding the 
murder of Imogen, considers him as true, supposing, as he has already said to her, 
that Posthumus was abused by some villain, equally an enemy to both.’—CaPELL’s 
note is to the same effect. I do not forget that an actor could reveal the meaning 
of Anon.’s conjecture by lifting his eyes to Heaven.—Eb. 

188, 189. Flow, flow... on her] VauGHAN: This means, ‘abound to the utter- 
most in her,’ ‘come in a flood tide.’ ‘Flowing,’ in Shakespeare, commonly signifies 
‘abounding greatly in measure and in degree.’ 


262 THE TRAGEDIE OF FACT: 111, SC. V1. 


Scena Sexta. 


Enter Imogen alone. 2 
Imo. I fee a mans life is a tedious one, 
I haue tyr’d my felfe : and for two nights together 4 
1. Scena Sexta.] Scene tv. Rowe. Cloaths. Rowe. Enter...’tir’d like a 
Scene vu. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. boy. Coll. MS. Enter...attired like a 
Scene vut. Eccles. boy. Coll. ii. 
The Forest and Cave. Rowe. Before 3. one,| one: Pope et seq. 
the Cave of Belarius. Cap. Wales: 4. I haue] I’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. 
before the cave of Belarius. Dyce. tyr’d| tired F;F,, Rowe, Pope i, 


2. Enter...] Enter Imogen in Boy’s Han. ’tir’d Sing. Coll. ii. (MS.). 


1. Scena Sexta] Eccies: The time is the evening of the same day with that of the 
two preceding scenes. Imogen, having parted from Pisanio in the morning and wan- 
dered alone during the intermediate part of the day, having directed her steps 
towards Milford-Haven, arrives, accidentally, at the cave of Belarius a little be- 
fore he and his youths return from hunting, and when they are about to pre- 
pare for supper.—DanteL (Sh. Soc. Trans., 1877-79, P- 245): When Pisanio 
parted from Imogen Milford was within ken, but since then, for two nights to- 
gether, she has made the ground her bed, and now on the third evening she arrives, 
faint with hunger and fatigue, before the cave of Belarius. If we suppose, as 
I think we may, this scene to occur on the same day as the preceding scene, we 
get—including this day, the day of her departure from court, and the two inter- 
vals suggested by the time she has wandered alone—a period of five days, which 
may be considered sufficient, dramatically, for the journeyings to and from the 
vicinity of Milford, and not altogether inconsistent with Cymbeline’s remark 
as to her not having lately paid him the daily duty she was bound to proffer. 
She may have seen him on the day of her departure (Day 6); on the next three 
days she is absent from his presence, and on the fourth (this Day No. 8) he notices 
her absence and discovers that she has fled. Even Cloten’s remark of his not 
having seen Pisanio for these two days need not form any serious objection to 
this scheme of time; and all we can say to Pisanio’s remark on quitting Imogen, 
that Lucius would be at Milford-Haven on the morrow, is that his prediction 
has not been verified. Imogen goes into the cave in search of food, and Belarius, 
Guiderius, and Arviragus, returning from hunting, find her there and welcome 
her to their rustic hospitality. It is ‘almost night’ when this scene closes. 

An interval, including one clear day—on the principle of allowing to Cloten for 
his journey into Wales about the same time that has been allowed to Imogen and 
Pisanio. 

4. I haue tyr’d my selfe] Cottier (ed. ii, reading ‘I have ’tir’d myself’): 
That is, Attired myself; this emendation is from the MS. . . . We have still some 
doubt whether the meaning of Imogen be that she has dressed herself like a boy, 
or that she has wearied herself; in the first line she says that ‘a man’s life is a 
tedious one,’ and in the next she may reasonably follow it up by stating that she 
had tired herself—Dvyce (Strictures, etc., p. 214): This emendation certainly does 
not make Imogen say, as Mr Collier supposes, that ‘she has dressed herself like a 


ANGE “TAG, GES Vala CYMBELINE 263 


Haue made the ground my bed. I fhould be ficke, 5 
But that my refolution helpes me : Milford, 

When from the Mountaine top, Pi/anio fhew’d thee, 

Thou was’t within a kenne. Oh Ioue, I thinke 


Foundations flye the wretched : fuch I meane, 9 
5-18. Mnemonic Warb. 7. top,| top Ff et cet. 
5. ground] gound F». 8. was’t] Ff. 
bed.] bed: Coll. Sing. kenne.| F.F;. ken. F,, Rowe,+, 
6. me:] me. Pope et seq. Coll. ii, Ktly. ken: Cap. et cet. 
7. Mountaine top| mountain -top Oh Ioue,] Oh, Jove, F,F,, Rowe. 
Theobaiiy Hans Varn jogs ’is, 21. Knit. O Jove! Cap. et seq. 
Coll. Dyce, Sta. Sing. Ktly, Glo. 9. wretched:| wretched, F;F,, Rowe, 
Cam. Pope, Han. 


boy’; it makes her say that ‘instead of walking about in puris naturalibus, she 
has put on some clothes.’ 

4. my selfe:] THIsELTon (Rule xiii.): An italicised colon sometimes seems to 
stand for a note of exclamation; and may, at times, be uSed, by a slight extension 
of the present use of that note, for the purpose of emphasis. [Is it a fact that 
the Elizabethan compositor’s case was so ill-supplied with exclamation marks that 
the compositor had to resort to the ampler supply of Italic colons? Can any 
reason be given why, when he had the exclamation marks under his hand in the 
case before him, and it was the type he needed, he should move to an adjoining 
case for an Italic colon? I cannot answer, Davus swm, non Gidipus.—En.] 

6. my resolution helpes me] Possibly ‘helps’ here means cures, as it is 
used several times in All’s Well (see Scumipt, Lex.); although, strictly speaking, a 
cure can only follow sickness, with which Imogen was merely threatened. 

6. Milford] Lapy Martin (p. 195): Oh, that name, Milford-Haven! I 
never hear it spoken, see it written, without thinking of Imogen. Weary and 
footsore, she wanders in, with the dull ache at her heart—far worse to bear than 
hunger—yearning, yet dreading, to get to Milford, that ‘blessed Milford,’ as once 
she thought it. When I read of the great harbour and docks which are now 
there I cannot help wishing that one little sheltering corner could be found to 
christen as Imogen’s Haven. Never did heroine or woman deserve to have her 
name thus consecrated and remembered. 

8. kenne] Murray (N. £. D.): Range of sight or vision. 

9. Foundations] Braptey (NV. £. D., 4): That which is founded or established 
by endowment; an institution (e. g., a monastery, college, or hospital) established 
with an endowment and regulations for its maintenance. [That Imogen refers 
to such a ‘foundation’ as a hospital I think her next words show. Of course, we 
all see the play on the word in a double sense, by imputing to what is fixed and 
founded the power of flight; and who does not feel the pathos of this wan smile in 
the hour of her hopeless misery? DEtrus, however, takes a different view; he 
thinks that ‘foundation’ refers to Milford, which, ‘by its very nature, built and 
founded on the earth, should be immoveable, and yet flies when the wretched 
approach it for relief. Imogen has again lost the road to Milford which she had 
lately seen from the mountains.’ Delius may be right; but the fact that to this 
day in England charitable institutions are called ‘Foundations,’ coupled with 
what Imogen goes on to say, weakens his interpretation; as it seems to me.—Ep.] 


264 THE TRAGEDIE CF 


[acT III, SC. vi. 


Where they fhould be releeu’d. Two Beggers told me, 10 
I could not miffe my way. Will poore Folkes lye 

That haue Affli€tions on them, knowing ’tis 

A punifhment, or Triall? Yes; no wonder, 

When Rich-ones fcarfe tell true. To lapfe in Fulneffe 

Is forer, then to lye for Neede : and Falfhood 15 
Is worfe in Kings, then Beggers. My deere Lord, 

Thou art one o’th’falfe Ones : Now I thinke on thee, 

My hunger’s gone; but euen before, I was 


At point to finke, for Food. 


But what is this? 


Heere is a path too’t :’tis fome fauage hold : 20 
I were beft not call ; I dare not call : yet Famine 

Ere cleane it o’re-throw Nature, makes it valiant. 

Plentie, and Peace breeds Cowards : Hardneffe euer 


Of Hardineffe is Mother. 


10. releeu’d] believed John Hunter 
conj. 
Beggers| Beggars F3F,. 
11. way.] Ff, Rowe,+, Ktly. way: 
Cap. et cet. 
Folkes| Folks F;F;. 
"73, 778, °85, Ran. 
12. afflictions] affliction Han. 
them,| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce, 
Glo. Cam. them; Cap. et cet. 
13. Yes; no] yes no Pope. 
Han. 
14. Rich-ones] rich ones Rowe et seq. 
true.| Fi, Rowe,+, Glo. true: 
Cap. et cet. 
15. Neede:] need, Glo. 
17. Thou art] Thowrt Pope,+, Dyce 


folk Var. 


yet no 


Hoa? who’s heere ? 24 
ii, iti, Wh. i. 
17. oth] F,, Rowe,+. oth F:. 


oth’ F;. o’the Cap. et seq. 

19. [Seeing the Cave. Rowe. 

20. too’l:] to’t: Ff, Cap. Dyce, Sta. 
Sing. Glo. Cam. to’t— Rowe,-+-. to it— 
Johns. to it:— Var. ’73 et cet. (subs.) 

21. I were] ’Twere Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Jt were Var. 773. 

22. cleane it] it clean F;F,, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 

makes| make Ff. 

23. breeds| breed Han. 

Cowards:| cowards, Ff, Rowe, 
Pope. 

24, 20. Hoa?] Ho? F,. Ho! Rowe et 

seq. 


13. or Triall] DowpEN: That is, a test of their virtue. 
14. To lapse in Fulnesse] DowpeEn: To fall from truth in a state of pros- 
perity; which reminds Imogen of Posthumus, who, in the fulness of possessing her 


love, had lapsed. 


15. Is sorer] JOHNSON: Is a greater or heavier crime. 


18. but euen before] Scumipt (Lex.): 


That is, just, precisely. In King 


John, ‘And even before this truce, but new before,’ etc., III, i, 233; or as Portia, in 
Mer. of Ven., ‘and even now, but now, This house, these servants and this same 


myself Are yours,’ etc., ITI, ii, 171. 


19. At point] For examples of a similar use of a/, see ABBOTT, § 143. 
21. I were best] For this construction, see ABBOTT, § 352, and ‘Best draw my 


Sword,’ line 27, below. 


24. Hoa? who’s heere?] Lapy Martin (p. 197): In my first rehearsals of 
this scene I instinctively adopted a way of my own of entering the cave which 


ACT MUI, SC. vi. | CYMBELINE 265 


If any thing that’s ciuill, fpeake : if fauage, 25 
Take, or lend. Hoa? No anfwer? Then Ile enter. 


25. thing] Om. F;F,. 73. Take, or yield food: Han. Take 

Speake: if | {peak, if F;F,, Rowe i. ‘ort end—ho! Warb. Take or lend Ho! 

26. Take, or lend. Hoa?) Ff. Take, Johns. Take or rend. Ho! Sprenger. 
or lend—Ho! Rowe, Pope, Theob. Var. Take, or lend. Hol! Cap. et cet. 


I was told was unusual. . . . Mr Macready, after expressing many apprehensions, 
thought I might try it. . . . Imogen’s natural terror was certain to make her ex- 
aggerate tenfold the possible dangers which that cave might cover, from wild 
animals or, still worse, from savage men. . . . The ‘Ho! who’s here?’ was given 
with a voice as faint and as full of terror as could be,—followed by an instant 
shrinking behind the nearest bush, tree, or rock. Then another and a little bolder 
venture: ‘If anything that’s civil, speak!’ Another recoil. Another pause: 
‘If savage, take or lend! Ho!’ Gaining a little courage, because of the entire 
silence: ‘No answer? then I’ll enter!’—peering right and left, still expecting 
something to pounce out upon her, and keeping ready, in the last resort, to fly... . 
And so, with great dread, but still greater hunger, and holding the good sword 
straight before her, she creeps slowly into the cave. 

25, 26. If any thing that’s ciuill, speake: if sauage, Take, or lend] 
WARBURTON: For ‘take or lend’ we should read, ‘Take ’or’t end,’ that is, take my 
life ere famine end it. ‘Or’ was commonly used for ere—HEAtTH (p. 483): That 
is, either take my life or render me your assistance.—CAPELL (p. 112): The 
meaning is, Take me for food, or lend food to me; and is proper enough in her 
circumstances, whatever the savage might be, beast or man.—JOHNSON: I ques- 
tion whether after the words ‘if savage’ a line be not lost. I can offer nothing 
better than to read: ‘If any thing that’s civil, take or lend, If savage, speak.’ If 
you are civilized and peaceable, take a price for what I want, or lend it for a future 
recompense; if you are rough, inhospitable inhabitants of the mountian, speak, 
that I may know my state——STEEVENS: It is by no means necessary to suppose 
that ‘savage hold’ signifies the habitation of a beast. It may well be used for 
the cave of ‘a savage’ or wild man.—M. MASsoNn (p. 330): Steevens is right in 
supposing that ‘savage’ does not mean, in this place, a wild beast, but a brutish 
man, and in that sense it is opposed to ‘civil’; in the former sense the word human 
would have been opposed to it and not ‘civil.’ I should be inclined to read, ‘if 
savage, take or end,’ if I did not suspect that ‘take or lend’ might have been a 
proverbial expression in use at that time, though not now understood.—MALonE: 
Dr Johnson’s interpretation of the words ‘take, or lend’ is supported by what 
Imogen says afterwards: ‘Before I enter’d heere, I call’d, and thought To have 
begg’d, or bought, what I have took.’—Kwicur (reading ‘If anything that’s 
civil, speak;—if savage—take, or lend’): It is scarcely necessary to affix any 
precise meaning to words which are meant to be spoken under great trepidation. 
The poor wanderer entering the cave which she fears is ‘some savage hold’ exhorts 
the inhabitant to speak if civil—if belonging to civil life. This is clear. But we 
doubt whether she goes on to ask the savage to take a reward for his food or to 
lend it; in that case she would address ideas to the savage which do not belong 
to his condition. . . . We have ventured to print the passage as if the expression 
‘if savage’ were merely the parenthetical whisper of her own fears—‘If anything 
that’s civil, speak; take, or lend.’ The ‘if savage’ is interposed when no answer 


266 THE TRAGEDIE OF FACT 111, 60.71. 


Beft draw my Sword ; and if mine Enemy 27 
But feare the Sword like me, hee’! fcarfely look on’t. 
Such a Foe, good Heauens. Exit. 29 
27. and if] an if Huds. 29. good] ye good Cap. 
28, 20. hee’l...Heauens.] One line Exit] She goes into the Cave. 
Walker. Rowe. 


29. Such] Grant such Pope,+. 


is returned to ‘speak.’—HartLey COLERIDGE (ii, p. 192): The text is probably 
right. Shakespeare does not plan his sentences beforehand, and lay them out in 
even compartments; they grow and expand, like trees, towards heaven. If you 
be civil, speak; nay, but however savage, at least assist me for recompense.— 
Scumupt (Lex., s. v. lend): Perhaps ‘take or /eave,’ 7. e., destroy me or let me live. 
‘If the strawy Greeks . . . Fall down before him, like the mowers swath; here, 
there, and everywhere, he leaves and takes.’—T7ro. & Cress., V, v, 26.—Br. NICHOL- 
son (NV. & Q., VII, i, 423, 1886): Imogen calls out, ‘if you be savage, still you 
can understand my wants and questions, here take this I offer’—advancing her 
hand with her purse in it, or lifting it horizontally from her girdle—‘or lend me 
what I want.’—InctEeBy: No explanation or emendation of this phrase hitherto 
proposed is satisfactory. . . . After all, the sense is so doubtful that ‘speak’ and 
‘take, or lend’ might, as Johnson proposed, change places; or ‘civil’ and ‘savage’ 
might do so.—DEIGHTON: That is, probably, take money for the food I so surely 
need or bestow it upon me out of compassion; ‘lend’ is frequently used by Shake- 
speare without the idea of return, though generally in this sense figuratively.— 
Herrorp: Take payment, or give me (food). © The ellipse is harsh, and not quite 
clear; but Imogen’s preoccupation with the thought of food makes it very natural.— 
Wyatt: If ‘take’ has the meaning [of taking money in exchange for food], ‘lend’ 
cannot have its usual modern sense, for a stranger could not proffer money and in 
the same breath suggest a loan; ‘lend’ is frequently used by Shakespeare without 
the notion of return— VAUGHAN (p. 555): The words ‘speak’ and ‘take, or lend’ 
have been understood as addressed to the inmate of the cave; but I take them to 
be, like the words immediately following, ‘then I'll enter,’ expressive of Imogen’s 
intentions. Indeed, it seems almost absurd that Imogen should ask the inmate 
of the cave, supposed or found incapable of conversation with her, to ‘take or 
lend’—words of which he knew not the meaning. I would read: ‘if savage, 
Take on lend—Ho!—No answer; then I’ll enter.’ The whole amounts to this: 
‘If he be one capable of conversation, I will speak; if a wild rustic, incapable of it, 
T will take upon loan’—‘Ho!—no answer; then I’ll enter.’ ‘Lend’ was a noun 
substantive when Shakespeare wrote, equivalent to loan. So (I borrow the quo- 
tation from Latham’s Johnson’s Dict.): ‘For the lend of the ass you might give me 
the mill.'—The Crafty Miller—Downpen: I think that ‘or’ here means ere (as 
often it does), before. If robbers lurk in the cave, Imogen bids them ‘take,’ seize 
on, what she possesses, before they ‘lend,’ afford her the sustenance she needs. 
Lines [25 and 26 in the next scene] addressed to ‘civil’ men refer to the begging 
or buying which she would have addressed to civil occupants of the cave. 

27. Best draw my Sword] For examples of similar construction, see ABBOTT, 
§ 351, and ‘I were best,’ line 21, above. 

29. Such a Foe, good Heauens] Cf. ‘good Newes Gods’, III, ii, 42. 


ACT III, SC. vii.] CYMBELINE 267 


Scena Septima. 


Enter Belarius, Guiderius, and Aruiragus. 2 
Bel, You Polidore haue prou’d beft Woodman, and 
Are Matter of the Feaft : Cadwall, and I 
Will play the Cooke, and Seruant, ’tis our match : 5 
The {weat of induftry would dry, and dye 
But for the end it workes too. Come, our ftomackes 
Will make what’s homely, fauoury : Wearineffe 
Can {nore vpon the Flint, when reftie Sloth 
Findes the Downe-pillow hard. Now peace be heere, ' 10 
Poore houfe, that keep’ft thy felfe. 
Gut. Iam throughly weary. 


Aru. I am weake with toyle, yet ftrong in appetite. 1 
1. Scena Septima.] Fi, Cap. Scene 10. Downe-pillow] Fi, Rowe i, Ktly, 
continued, Rowe et cet. Dyce ii, ili. down pillow Rowe ii. et 
3. Polidore] Paladour Theob.+, cele 
Cap. Polydore Var. ’73 et seq. Now] F2, Glo. No F;F,. Now, 
4. Cadwall] Cadwal Pope et seq. Cap. et cet. 
5. Seruant,| servant; Theob. et seq. 11. felfe.] self! Pope et seq. 
6. of] and Cam. (misprint?) [Exit, to the Cave. Cap. 
7. too| to Ff. 12,13. L am] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. 
Come,| Come; Cap. et seq. 12. throughly| througly F;. _ thor- 
9. reftie] Sing. Ktly. restive Steev. oughly Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. Coll. 
Var. ’03, 713. refty Ff et cet. Wh. i. 


3. Woodman] REED (Meas. for Meas., IV, tii, 170): A ‘woodman’ seems to 
have been an attendant or servant to the officer called Forrester. See Manwood, in 
the Forest Laws, 1615, p. 46. It had, however, a wanton sense. [Here it signifies, 
of course, merely a hunter.|—Matone: So in Lucrece: ‘He is no woodman that 
doth bend his bow To strike a poor unseasonable doe.’—580. 

5. our match] STEEVENS: That is, our compact. See HI, iii, 81-83. 

6. The sweat of industry, etc.] VAucHAN: The language here is to our ears 
unpleasant and inappropriate, but chiefly because we regard sweat as the perspira- 
tion collected on the surface of the skin. But Shakespeare treats it here as a vital 
and virtuous juice in the tissues of industry, which, if industry were disappointed of 
its reward, would dry up and perish out of its constitution. Possibly it is since 
Shakespeare’s day that the word ‘sweat’ has caught up associations which make 
it unpleasant. He often uses it in tragic passages. [See the Bible, passim.] 

9. restie] Cratcre (N. E. D., 2): Disinclined for action or exertion; sluggish; 
indolent, lazy. [Examples here follow from Coopers’ Thesaurus, 1565; Golding, 
1571, and from Jonson, 1609, but none so good as the present. Cotgrave, s. v., 
Cabrer sur le devoir, gives, ‘To be restie, or backward in duetie.’—Ep.]—STAuNTON: 
Dull, idle, perhaps uneasy. 

11. Poore house, that keep’st thy selfe] Thus in As You Like It: ‘But at 
this hour the house doth keep itself; There’s none within.’—V, iii, 82. 


268 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT III, SC. vil. 


Gui. There is cold meat i’th’Caue, we’l brouz on that 
Whil’ft what we haue kill’d, be Cook’d. 

Bel. Stay, come not in: 
But that it eates our victualles, I fhould thinke 
Heere were a Faiery. 

Gui. What’s the matter, Sir ? 

Bel. By lupiter an Angell : or if not 
An earthly Paragon. Behold Diuineneffe 
No elder then a Boy. 

Enter Imogen. 

Imo. Good mafters harme me not : 
Before I enter’d heere, I call’d, and thought 
To haue begg’d, or bought, what I haue took : good troth 
I haue ftolne nought, nor would not, though I had found 
Gold ftrew’d i’th’Floore. Heere’s money for my Meate, 


15 


20 


25 


28 


14. Vth’ ith F.F;. ithe Cap. et seq. 
Caue,| cave; Cap. et seq. 
brouz] F.F;. browse Dyce, Sta. 

Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. brouwze F, et cet. 

15. we haue] we've Pope,+. 

16. [Re-enter Belarius. Cap. 
Stay,] Stay; Cap. et seq. 
in:| in— Rowe,+, Ktly. 

Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
{Looking in. Rowe. 
17, 18. Mnemonic Warb. 
18. Heere] Ff, Rowe i. He Rowe ii, 
Ingl. Jt Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Here Johns. et cet. 


in. 


23. Enter...] Re-enter... Dyce. 

24-28. Mnemonic Warb. 

24. mafters| master Ff, Rowe, Pope. 

25. call’d,} call’d; Theob. Warb. Cap. 
et seq. 

26. To haue] T’have Pope,+, Dyce 

27. nought,| Ff, Rowe,+. 
Dyce. nought; Cap. et cet. 

I had| I’'d Pope,+. 

28. firew’d 7i’th’| Strewéd in the Ingl. 

ii. 


naught; 


Vth] FF, Rowe,+. ith’ F;. 
ithe Coll. Dyce, Sta. Sing. Ktly, Glo. 


20-22. Angell: ... Paragon. ...Boy.] 
angel!...paragon....boy. Rowe,+. angel: 
..paragon!...boy. Cap.  angel!...para- 
gon!...boy! Var. ’73 et seq. 


Cam. o’th or o’the Han. et cet. 

28-30. Lines end: for ... Boord, ... 
parted Ing}. 

28. Meate,] meai: Cap. et seq. 


14. we’l brouz on that] Murray (N. E. D.): To browse properly im- 
plies the cropping of scanty vegetation—said of goats, deer, cattle. [The present 
is the earliest instance recorded by Murray of the use of ‘browse’ in a figurative 
sense. If this prove correct, it is perhaps worthy of remark that even now, when 
use and wont have familiarized us with fanciful uses of the term, to speak of ‘brows- 
ing on cold meat’ would raise a smile, and that this smile must have broadened 
into a laugh when, for the first time, a Globe audience heard this huntsman’s word 
put into a huntsman’s mouth, and thus drolly applied —Ep.] 

21. An earthly Paragon] Thus in Two Gent., ‘Valentine. —and is she not a 
heavenly saint.’ Proteus. No; but she is an earthly paragon.’—IT, iv, 146. 

26. To haue begg’d] For instances of the Complete Present Infinitive, see 
ABBOTT, § 360. 


28. Gold strew’d i’th’Floore] BoswrEtt: Change to ‘o’the floor’ is un- 


ACT III, SC. vii.] CYMBELINE 269 


I would haue left it on the Boord, fo foone 
As I had made my Meale ; and parted 30 
With Pray’rs for the Prouider. 
Gui. Money? Youth. 
Aru, All Gold and Siluer rather turne to durt, 
As ’tis no better reckon’d, but of thofe 
Who worfhip durty Gods. 35 
Imo. I fee you’re angry: 
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I fhould 
Haue dyed, had I not made it. 
Bel. Whether bound ? 
Imo. Yo Milford-Hauen. 40 
Bel. What’s your name? 
Imo, Fidele Sir : 1 haue a Kinfman, who 


Is bound for Italy ; he embark’d at Milford, 43 
29. Boord,| board F;F,, Rowe, Pope, are Var. ’73 et cet. 

Han. Glo. Cam. 39. Whether] Whither Fj. 
30. Meale,;] meal, Coll. Glo. Cam. 40. Hauen,]| Haven, sir. Cap. Steev. 

parted| parted thence Pope,+. Wain, OB, "0a, 

parted so Cap. 41. What's] Say, what is Han. What 
32. Money? Youth.] Money, Youth? 1s Cap. Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Knt. 

Rowe et seq. AD, SUS Sir, WARE "7G Coll, IDyrce, 
33. to durt,| doe durt, F.K;. do durt, Ktly. Glo. Cam. 

F,. to dirt, Rowe. to dirt! Pope et seq. 43. he embark’d| he ’embark’d Pope. 


36. you're] F;F,, Rowe,+, Cap. Dyce, he embarques Han. Eccl. Ing]. i. here 
Sing. Ktly, Glo. Cam. your F2. you embark’d Vaun. 


necessary. ‘In’ was frequently used for on. Thus, in the Lord’s Prayer: ‘Thy 
will be done zm earth.’—Cottrmr (ed. ii.): Further on we have ‘fallen zm this offence’ 
[line 45] for ‘fallen into this offence,’ and there is as much reason for amending the 
one as the other. 

30. As I had made my Meale; and parted] The Text. Notes show how 
editors, in the belief that this line needs a syllable, supplied the gap—M atone 
added ‘With’ from the next line, and bids us say ‘ Prayers’ as a disyllable. Kercut- 
Ley adopted this injunction, with its division of the line. I cannot believe that 
the line needs anything but a very timid pause after ‘Meale.’—Eb. 

42. Fidele] Our German brothers find some difficulty in transferring this 
name into their own language, where it will then bear a signification which by no 
means comports with Imogen’s tragic situation.—Timck converts it to Pidelio; 
HeErtzBerG, to Fidelis; and GILDEMEISTER, to Fidus.—Ep. 

43. he embark’d at Milford] Inctesy: ‘Embark’d’ not only mars the sense, 
but makes Imogen say what is absurd.—H. IncteBy (Ingleby, ii.): Some editors 
read embarks, after Hanmer, but Posthumus might well be supposed to be on the 
high seas, and Imogen about to join him in Italy—TutseLtton: That is, ‘was to 
embark.’ The tense may perhaps be explained by taking ‘he embark’d at Milford’ 
as virtually in the oratio obliqua; it is as if Imogen were thinking of a letter in which 
Posthumus might have written ‘I embark at Milford.’ 


270 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT III, SC. vil. 


To whom being going, almoft fpent with hunger, 

I am falne in this offence. 45 
Bel. Prythee (faire youth) 

Thinke vs no Churles : nor meafure our good mindes 

By this rude place we liue in. Well encounter’d, 

’Tis almoft night, you fhall haue better cheere 

Ere you depart: and thankes to ftay, and eate it : 50 

Boyes, bid him welcome. 
Gui. Were you a woman, youth, 

I fhould woo hard, but be your Groome in honefty : 


I bid for you, as I do buy. 54 
4s. I am] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. 53. hard,| hard Knt, Dyce, Wh. Sta. 
47. Churles:| churls, Pope ii,+, Glo. Cam. 

Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Groome in honefty:| F.. Groom 


48. Well encounter’d,| Ff. Well-en- in honefty; F;F,, Rowe,+, Cap. Ingl. 
counter’'d. Rowe.  Well-encounter’d! groom.—In honesty Tyrwhitt, Var. 778 
Pope. Well encounter’d! Theob. et cet. ec 


49. night,| night: Cap. et seq. 54. I bid for you, as I do buy.] Ff (doe 

50. depart:] depart, F;F,, Rowe,+. F.F;), Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. Coll. 

thankes] Fi, Rowe,+, Dyce. Glo. i, ili, Dyce, Wh. i, Ktly, Ing]. I’d bid 

Coll. iti, Cam. thanks, Cap. et cet. for you; as I would buy. Han. I'd bid 

eate ii:] Fi, Rowe. eat. Var. ’73. for you as I’d buy. Johns. Cap. Coll. ii. 

eat it. Pope et cet. I bid‘for you, as I’d buy. Tyrwhitt, Var. 

53. woo] wooe F.F;, Pope,+. woe 78 et cet. I bid (welcome) to you as I'd 
F,, Rowe, Johns. be done by. Herr. 


45. falne in this offence] For instances of ‘in’ used for imto, see ABBOTT, 
§ 159. 

53. I should woo hard, but be] ABsotr (§ 126): There is here, perhaps, 
a confusion between ‘7f I could not be your groom otherwise’ and ‘but in any case 
T would be your groom.’ [Is there not here an absorption of to in the final ¢ of 
‘but’? That is, ‘I should woo hard but’ [to] be your groom in all honesty.’— 
Ep.] 

53, 54. Groome in honesty: I bid for you, as I do buy] Tyrwurt: 
I think the passage might be better read thus: ‘but be your groom. In honesty, 
I bid for you, as I’d buy.’ That is, ‘I should woo hard, but I would be your bride- 
groom. (And when I say that I should woo hard, be assured that) in honesty 
I bid for you only at the rate at which I would purchase you.’—M. Mason (p. 331): 
Hanmer’s [Johnson’s.—Ep.] amendment is absolutely necessary: ‘J’d bid for you 
as I'd buy.’ That is, ‘I would bid for you as if I were determined to be the pur- 
chaser.’ And ‘in honesty’ means in plain truth. ‘I bid for you,’ in the indicative 
mood, is undoubtedly wrong; for Guiderius does not bid for him, or express a desire 
for bidding for him, except on a supposition that he was a woman; and accordingly 
Arviragus in reply to him says: ‘he is thoroughly satisfied to find him a man and 
will love him as a brother.’—Co ter (ed. ii.): The whole sentence is evidently 
conditional, and it is just as necessary to amend the first part of the sentence as 
the last. Guiderius is stating figuratively what he would give, if it happened that 
Imogen was a woman.—STauNToN: We are not satisfied that the present emen- 


ACT IIL, SC. Vil. | CYMBELINE yh 


Arutz, Ile make’t my Comfort 55 
He is a man, Ile loue him as my Brother : 
And fuch a welcome as I’d giue to him 
(After long abfence) fuch is yours. Moft welcome : 58 


55: Comfort] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Sta. Warb. Glo. Cam. Wh. ii. brother, 
Sing. Ktly, Coll. iii, Glo. Cam. comfort; Johns. brother; Coll. Wh. i. brother:— 


Cap. et cet. Han. et cet. 
56. man,] Fi, Rowe, Cap. man; 58. fuch is] such as Var. ’03, ’21, 
Pope et cet. Dyce i. (misprint?) 


Brother:| Fi, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 


dation, which is Tyrwhitt’s, gives us what the author wrote, but have none better 
to offer—Inciesy: The letters of ‘I do buy’ spell bid you. The sense then would 
be ‘For that you are a man, I bid for your friendship, as I bid you’—1. ¢., as offer- 
ing favours, not suing for them. ‘Bid’ is equivalent to invite. No tolerable 
sense has ever been made of ‘I do buy’ by tinkering the second word—Ism. 
(ed. ii, H. IncreBy): To say the least, it is a somewhat lame speech. Arviragus 
[sic] could hardly speak in the present time, knowing or believing Imogen to be a 
boy. Perhaps it would make better sense if the second ‘I’ were treated as Ay, 
it being ordinarily so spelt; and then if we take Steevens’s reading in line [53], we 
might paraphrase the passage thus: ‘Were you a woman, youth, I should woo 
hard to be your groom in right good faith,—ay, bid for you with the intention of 
getting you.—DowpeEN: Of proposed emendations the best is that in the text 
above [Tyrwhitt’s] or Hanmer’s. But the first ‘I’ is perhaps an error, caught 
from the preceding line, and I venture to propose ‘ Bid for you as I’d buy,’ the force 
of ‘I should’ running on to the word ‘Bid’; the meaning would be ‘TI should offer 
myself to you in honourable love, even as I would obtain you.’ My suggestion, 
if adopted, would improve the time metrically. The text of the Folio may mean 
‘What I promise I will pay. —TuisreLton: In other words, ‘Here’s my hand; if 
you were a woman I should offer it as for a “Hand fastynge” in token that I fer- 
vently desired to be betrothed to you in all good faith; since, however, you are a 
man, I offer it, after the manner of binding a bargain, to show that I mean the 
welcome I bid you in exchange for your friendship.’ . . . ‘Your Groome’ is prob- 
ably an exact equivalent to ‘your young man.’ [I can see no excellent good reason 
for deserting the punctuation of the Folio. It is of far more importance, is it not, 
to be ‘honest’ in your wooing than in dealing with your grocer? albeit apparently 
those who, with Tyrwhitt, transfer ‘honesty’ to the tradesmen, might not agree 
with me. Is there any insuperable objection to regarding ‘I bid’ as the present 
tense denoting custom: ‘I am now bidding for you as I always do when I buy.’ 
Whether or not the bargaining words, ‘bid’ and ‘buy,’ are such as should enter the 
ears of love (if a woman) or a friendship (if a man) rests with Guiderius or, rather, 
with the same intrusive paddling hands that mar ‘the Dirge’ with ‘golden boys 
and girls.’-—Ep.] 

ss-s8. Ile make’t my Comfort . . . such is yours] Br. NicHotson (N. 
& Q., VII, i, 425, 1886): The words, ‘I’ll make’t my comfort He is a man, 
T'll love him as my brother,’ are spoken partly soliloquy-wise, partly generally; 
then turning to Imogen, he addresses her with ‘And such a welcome . . . is 
yours,’ and in agreement therewith embraces her, saying after the embrace, ‘Most 
welcome!’ ‘There is no necessity for a full stop after ‘brother’; indeed, so long a 


Pye THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT III, SC. vii. 


Be fprightly, for you fall ’mongft Friends. 


Imo. ’Mongft Friends ? 60 
If Brothers : would it had bin fo, that they 
Had bin my Fathers Sonnes, then had my prize 
Bin leffe, and fo more equall ballafting 63 


59. [Embracing her. Ingl. 

60. [Aside. Rowe. 

60, 61. Friends? If Brothers:] friends. 
If Brothers: Ff. friends, If brothers: 
Rowe, Theob. Warb. Ecl. friends? 
If brothers, Pope, Johns. friends, If 
brothers— Han. friends! If brothers, 
Var. ’73. friends, If brothers— Dyce, 
Wh. Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. friends, If 


Dowden. friends! 
et cet. 
61, 62, 63. bin] been Fy. 
62. Sonnes,| sons! Theob. et seq. 
prize] price Han. Warb. Cap. 


If brothers? Cap. 


ii, 630). peize Vaun. 
63. ballafting] balancing Han. Warb. 
Cap. 


brothers,— Sta. friends, If brothers! 


pause would not be natural, but there is need of a dash to show that there is a 
change of address—a change of direct address to Imogen.—VAUGHAN (p. 468) 
somewhat modifies Nicholson’s ingenious arrangement by not including so much 
in the Aside, and by changing ‘Ile love’ into J Jove. Thus: ‘Arv. [aside] Vl mak’t 
my comfort He is a man. [To Imogen] J love him as my brother, And such a 
welcome, as I’d give him After long absence, such is yours.’ ‘He’ in line 50 is 
the disguised Imogen; ‘him’ in the same line is-Guiderius, pointed at by Arvira- 
gus. So is ‘him’ in the next line. ‘T’ll love’ is a most natural depravation of 
T love, being in pronunciation identical. [Of the two interpretations, Vaughan’s 
seems to me the better—I love and J’/] love are almost indistinguishable in pro- 
nunciation, and by making the direct address to Imogen begin with these words, a 
certain awkwardness in beginning it with ‘And’ (as Nicholson begins it) is avoided. 
Inasmuch as both Vaughan’s and Nicholson’s suggestion appeared in the same 
year, no priority can be claimed for either—Ep.] 

60, 61. "Mongst Friends? If Brothers:] To both A. E. TutseLton and 
Percy Smmpson we are all much indebted for their vindication, in very many 
instances, of the much calumniated punctuation of the Folio. Of the present 
Italic interrogation mark after ‘Friends’ I can find no explanation in either of 
them. In general, the compositors affixed an interrogation to any sentence which 
contained a How, or a What, or a Who, etc., where we should now place an ex- 
clamation. In the present instance there is no such cause: the interrogation must, 
therefore, have a meaning of its own, and derived from the copy; it is rather beyond 
the intelligence of a compositor to have supplied it of his own motion. Should 
it not, therefore, be retained? Is it not conceivable that Imogen, still doubting, 
repeats Arviragus’s last words questioningly, ‘Mong’st Friends?’ and then seeing 
the adoration of the boys written in their faces, adds with a smile of assent: ‘If 
Brothers.’ There is no need of adding ‘Yes,’ or ‘Indeed,—a smile would answer 
everything. For this dramatic reason I think the interrogation should be re- 
tained.— Ep. 

62, 63. my prize Bin lesse ... ballasting] Heatn (p. 483): The sense 
is, Then had the prize thou hast mastered in me been less, and not have sunk thee, 
as I have done, by overloading thee.—Jounson: That is, Had I been a less prize, 
T should not have been too heavy for Posthumus.—Downen: Imogen means 


ACTS ESCenvile| CYMBELINE 273 
To thee Pofthumus. 
Bel. He wrings at fome diftreffe. 65 


Gui. Would I could free’t. 
Aru. Or I, what ere it be, 


What paine it coft, what danger : Gods! 


Bel. Hearke Boyes. 
Imo. Great men 


O 
That had a Court no bigger then this Caue, d 
That did attend themfelues, and had the vertue 
Which their owne Confcience feal’d them : laying by 
That nothing-guift of differing Multitudes 74 


68. danger:] danger, Theob. Warb. 
Ingl. danger. Johns. Coll. Glo. 
danger! Cap. et cet. 

Gods !| Aside, and given to Imo- 
gen Elze. 

69. [Whispering. Rowe. Talks with 
them apart. Cap. 

70-77. [Aside. Cap. 

73, 74. them: laying...Multitudes| Ff, 
Rowe. them; laying...multitudes, Pope, 


Theob. Warb. them, laying...multitudes, 
Han. Johns. Ktly. them, (laying... 
multitudes) Cap. et cet. (subs.) 

74. nothing-guifi] Fi,  nothing-gift 
Rowe,-+, Cap. (in Errata), Dyce ii, iii, 
Sta. Wh. Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. nothing 
gift Var. ’73, et cet. 

differing| defering Theob. Han. 
Warb. deafening Bailey (ii, 132). 
Muttitudes] multitude Spence. 


that if she had been a rustic girl, her price or value would have been less (or she 
would have been less of a prize), and it being a more even weight to that of Post- 
humus, the ship of their fortunes would have run more smoothly. 

65. He wrings at some distresse] Both Scummr (Lex.) and WHITNEY 
(Cent. Dict.) define to ‘wring’ by to writhe in pain or torture. This implies phys- 
ical contortion and can hardly be applicable either here or in Much Ado, ‘’Tis 
all men’s office to speak patience To these that wring under the load of sorrow.’— 
V, i, 28. I think the word means here that Imogen’s whole demeanour signified 
suffering, deep-seated and sharp.—Ep. 

72, attend themselues] That is, wait on themselves. 

74. That nothing-guift of differing Multitudes] Taropatp: The only 
idea that ‘differing’ can here convey is variable changing, as in the Prologue to 
2 Hen. IV: ‘The still-discordant wavering multitude,’ line 19. But then what is 
the ‘nothing-gift’ which they are supposed to bestow? The Poet must mean that 
court, that obsequious adoration, which the shifting vulgar pay to the great, is a 
tribute of no price or value. [Having thus showed that he has exactly understood 
the word ‘differing,’ and illustrated it from Shakespeare himself, Theobald, by one 
of the oddest of freaks, asserts that he is ‘persuaded, therefore, [Italics mine] that 
our Poet coined it from the French verb deferer—to be obsequious, to pay defer- 
ence.’ And in his text he actually changed ‘differing’ into defering, and Warbur- 
ton said that he had rightly so spelled it!—Ep.]—Heratn (p. 483): The ‘nothing- 
gift’ which the multitude are supposed to bestow is glory, reputation, which is a 
present of little value from their hands, as they are neither unanimous in giving it, 
nor constant in continuing it—Jounson: I do not see why ‘differing’ may not be 
a general epithet, and the expression equivalent to the many-headed rabble-—M. 
Mason (p. 332): ‘Differing multitudes’ means wnsteady multitudes, who are con- 


18 


274 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IN, Sc. vii. 


Could not out-peere thefe twaine. Pardon me Gods, 75 

V’ld change my fexe to be Companion with them, 

Since Leonatus falfe. | 77 
75. out-peere] out-peece F>. out-piece ii,+, Cap. Leonatus false— Var. ’73, 

F;F,, Rowe. 78,85, Ran. Leonatus’ false. Walker, 
76. them,] them. Var. 85. Sing. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Leonate is 


77. Leonatus fal/e.] Leonatus’s false. Cap. conj. 
Rowe i, Ingl. Leonatus is false. Rowe 


tinually changing their opinion, and condemn to-day what they yesterday ap- 
plauded.—Cottier (ed. ii.): This means merely differing in respect of rank from 
the persons upon whom those multitudes bestow the ‘nothing-gift’ of reputation. 
The poet is contrasting, in a manner, the givers with the person to whom the gift 
is made.—Dyce (Remarks, p. 257): When Monck Mason [Theobald.—Ep.] cited 
the line from the Induction to 2 Hen. IV. he pointed out the true meaning of ‘differ- 
ing’ in the present speech.—STAuNTON: ‘Differing multitudes’ is a very dubious 
expression. Imogen is struck with the generous courtesy and spirit of the young 
mountaineers, and she reflects that even princes or noblemen placed as they are 
(setting aside the worthless consideration of different ranks) could not outshine these 
peasant youths. Does it not appear, then, more than probable that Shakespeare 
wrote ‘differing altitudes’?—THISELTON (p. 35): The force of ‘nothing-gift’ de- 
pends upon the legal rule that ‘a gift without délivery is ineffectual to pass any 
property unless the gift be by Deed.’ (Warton’s Law Lexicon.) ‘The virtue which 
their owne Conscience seal’d them’ is clearly contemplated as theirs by Deed; 
whereas the gift of the ‘differing multitudes’ is merely verbal, and therefore value- 
less, as not having the seal of Conscience.—DowbDEN: That is, disregarding ap- 
plause from crowds which differ one from another, and all, at various times, from 
themselves, a gift which is an airy nothing. 

75. Out-peere] The Cam. Epp. note that F, lacks the hyphen. One of my 
copies of F, agrees with the note of the Cam. Edd.; the other two have a hyphen— 
thus affording a needless warning against trusting too much to the old texts.—Ep. 

76. ’ld change my sexe, etc.] GrRvrnus (p. 644): As the royal blood in 
these brothers longed with the might of natural desire to escape out of lowliness 
and solitude into the life of the world, so Imogen’s woman’s blood, on the contrary, 
as naturally longed to escape out of the intrigues of the world, so well known to her, 
into retirement and peace. 

77. Since Leonatus false] CAPELL (p. 113): This sentence shows with what 
religion Shakespeare kept to his accent; since rather than violate it by using Post- 
humus there, he chose to violate harmony by that hissing collision that is now in 
this line, if is be admitted as necessary, as all the moderns [i. e., Rowe, Pope, Theo- 
bald, Hanmer, Warburton] have thought it, and as it must be in truth. There is 
a method of soft’ning this line, and retaining is too, which the editor can see no 
objection to; and that is—by supposing that ‘Leonatus’ singly is a mistake of the 
printer’s for ‘ Leonate is’; a contraction exactly similar (‘Desdemone’ for Desdemona) 
is thrice met with at the latter end of Othello. [STEEVENS adds the instances of 
‘Prosper’ for Prospero, ‘Enobarbe’ for Enobarbus.}—MALOoNE: As Shakespeare has 
used ‘thy mistress’ ear’ and ‘Menelaus’ tent’ for ‘thy mistresses ear,’ and ‘ Mene- 
lauses tent,’ so, with still greater license, he used ‘Leonatus false’ for ‘since Leonatus 


ACT III, SC. vii. ] CYMBELINE 275 


Bel. It fhall be fo : 78 
Boyes wee’l go dreffe our Hunt. Faire youth come in ; 
Difcourfe is heauy, fafting : when we haue fupp’d 80 


Wee’l mannerly demand thee of thy Story, 
So farre as thou wilt fpeake it. 

Gut, Pray draw neere. 

Aru, The Night to’th’Owle, 


And Morne to th’Larke leffe welcome. 85 
Imo, Yhankes Sir. 
Arut. I pray draw neere. Exeunt, 87 
79. Faire youth| Faire you F2. Fair, 83. Pray] I pray Pope,+. 
you F3F,, Rowe. 84, 85. One line Pope et seq. 
. 80. we hare] we've Pope,+, Dyce ii, to’th’| Ingl. to th’ Fi, Rowe, 
iii. +, Dyce ii, iii. to the Cap. et cet. 
82. it.] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 86, 87. Om. Pope, Han. 
Watrb. 


is false. —STEEVENS: Of such a license, I believe, there is no example either in the 
works of Shakespeare or any other author. [A rash assertion, which I think 
Steevens would not have made before his quarrel with Malone. If he refer to the 
absorption of the substantive verb in a preceding s, an example occurs in this 
very play. As Iachimo resumes his position in the trunk, he says, ‘Though this 
a heavenly angel,’ etc., where zs is absorbed in ‘this.’ Similar examples are 
numerous in Shakespeare; many of them are gathered by WALKER, Vers., p. 08. 
—Eb.] 

81. demand thee of thy Story] This idiom is common. See ‘I shall de- 
sire you of more acquaintance.’—Mid. N. D., UI, i, 188.—Axssotr (§ 174) has 
gathered many examples wherein he explains the use of ‘of’ as meaning concerning 
or about. This, however, wil! not always apply; within six or seven lines of the 
- foregoing quotation from Mid. NV. D., Bottom says (in the Ff), ‘I shall desire of you 
more acquaintance,’ repeating the identical words, yet changing the construction, 
whereby Apport’s observation will hardly apply. Perhaps it would be better, 
in cases like the present, to regard, with DricuTon, ‘of thy story’ as a partitive 
genitive.—ED. 


276 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT II, SC. vill. 


Scena Odtaua. 


Enter two Roman Senators,and Tribunes. 2 
1.Sen. This is the tenor of the Emperors Writ ; 
That fince the common men are now in Action 
’Gainft the Pannonians, and Dalmatians, 5 
And that the Legions now in Gallia, are 
Full weake to vndertake our Warres againft 


The falne-off Britaines, that we do incite 


1. Scena Octaua.] Warb. Johns. Cap. 
Ingl. Scene v. Rowe. Scene changes to 
Rome. Theob. In margin, and sub- 
stituting Iv, m1, in the text as Scene vm, 
and closing the Act. Pope, Han. Scene 
vane Weis Vey le Gatis 

Rome. Rowe. Rome. The Senate- 
House. Cap. A public Place. Dyce. 


tain... Cap. 

4. That fince|] Since that Vaun. 

7. Warres| War Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. 

8. falne-of | fall’n off Pope, Theob. i, 
Han. 

Britaines] Britaine F.. Britains 

F;F,, Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, Cap. 


2, Enter two Roman....] Enter cer- Britons Theob. ii. et cet. 


1. Scena Octaua] This scene is transposed by Ecctes to follow II, iv, with the fol- 
lowing note: ‘Great absurdities and inconsistencies respecting the time and order of 
events must be the consequence of permitting this scene to retain its former situation. 
According to the present scheme, intelligence may be transmitted to the Roman 
State relative to the success of Lucius’s embassy at the British Court while Iachimo 
is posting back to Rome, and he arrives at the house of Philario, after his return, 
before the Senators deliver the Emperor’s orders to the Tribunes in consequence 
of that intelligence. The time may be imagined a part of the same day with the 
preceding. [That is, the day when Iachimo won the wager from Posthumus.]— 
CapELL (p. 114): This whole scene is discarded and thrown to the bottom by 
[Pope and Hanmer], and another scene stuck in place of it,—the third of next 
act,—which they make the concluding one of this. No reason is given for this ex- 
traordinary liberty, nor no good one could be given; on the contrary, there are many 
against it, which it were too long to enumerate, tedious to the uncritical reader, and 
needless to those who read with attention— Dantet (Sh. Soc. Trans., 1877-70, p. 
246): We learn that Lucius is appointed general of the Army to be employed in the 
war in Britain. This scene is evidently out of place. In any time-scheme it must 
come much earlier in the drama. . . . I rather think it may be supposed to occupy 
part of the interval I have marked as ‘Time for Posthumus’s letters from Rome to 
arrive in Britain.’-—TuisEtton: The insertion here of this scene, if somewhat out of 
the actual order of time, is justified by its marking the turning-point of the action, 
gently foreshadowing, as it does, the reappearance of the ‘false Italian’ along 
with Posthumus in Britain, which is so essential to the complete vindication of 
Imogen. 

7- Our Warres] VAUGHAN (p. 472): ‘Wars’ is a singular noun substantive in 
sense here, being equivalent to ‘war.’ So in North’s Plutarch: ‘And they say that 


ACT IH, SC. viii. ] CYMBELINE 277 


The Gentry to this bufineffe. He creates 
Lucius Pro-Confull : and to you the Tribunes 10 
For this immediate Leuy, he commands 
His abfolute Commiffion. Long liue Cz/ar. 
Tri. Is Lucius Generall of the Forces ? 
2.96n. I. 
Yvi. Remaining now in Gallia ? 15 
1.Sez. With thofe Legions 
Which I haue fpoke of, whereunto your leuie 
Mutt be fuppliant : the words of your Commiffion 
Will tye you to the numbers, and the time 


Of their difpatch. 20 
Tri. We will difcharge our duty. Exeunt. 
Ir. commands] commends arb. Cam. 
Theob. Sing. Dyce, Coll. ii, iii, Sta. 18. fuppliant] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. 
Glo. Cam. Sing. Wh. i, Ktly. supplyant Cap. et 


13, 15, 21. Tri.] First Tri. Dyce, Glo. cet. 


there died in that wars . . . about the number,’ etc. So again in Rich. II: ‘Wars 
[Qq, Ff] hath not wasted it, for warr’d he hath not.’—II, i, 252. 

II, 12. he commands His absolute Commission] THEOBALD: ‘Commands his 
commission’ is such a strange phrase as Shakespeare would hardly have used. I 
have by Mr Warburton’s advice ventured to substitute commends, 7. e., he recom- 
mends the care of making this levy to you; and gives you an absolute commission 
for so doing —CapELL: Is commends a fit word to be joined with ‘absolute com- 
mission’? or for an Emperor to use, and to ‘tribunes’? The Poet thought otherwise, 
and made choice of ‘commands,’ a direct gallicism.—JoHNson: He ‘commands’ 
the commission to be given to you. So we say I ordered the materials to the 
workman.—SINGER: Commend was the old formula. We have it again in Lear: 
‘I did commend your highness’ letters to them.’—II, iv, 28; All’s Well: ‘Com- 
mend the paper to his gracious hand.’—V, i, 31. [Dyce quotes this with ap- 
proval.|—HALLIwELL: Commends may be almost said to be the correct technical 
term which ought to be here employed. 

18. suppliant] See ‘supplement,’ III, iv, 203. 


278 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act Iv, Sc. i. 


Actus Quartus. Scena Prima. 


Enter Clotten alone. 2 
Clot Jam neere to’th’place where they fhould meet, 
if Pifanio haue mapp’d it truely, How fit his Garments 
ferue me? Why fhould his Miftris who was made by him 5 
that made the Taylor, not be fit too? The rather (fauing 
reuerence of the Word) for ’tis faide a Womans fitneffe 


COmes by fits : therein I muft play the Workman, I dare 8 
The Forest. Rowe. The Forest in 5. me?] me! Rowe et seq. 

Wales. Theob. Country near the Cave. 7. for] because Pope,+. 

Cap. 8. fits:] Fi, Rowe, Cap. fits. Pope 
2. Clotten] Cloten F;F,, Rowe et et cet. 

seq. Workman,| Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
3. to’th’| F2, Ing]. to th’ F;F,, Rowe, workman; Theob. Han. Warb. work- 

+, Cap. to the Var. ’73 et cet. man. Johns. et cet. 


1. Scena Prima] Ecctes: I am inclined to suppose that more than two nights and 
a day have intervened since the concluding scene of the foregoing act [which, accord- 
ing to Eccles’s arrangement, is III, vii.], that is, that the present scene opens with a 
part of the morning of the second day from the evening wherein Imogen first arrived 
at the cave of Belarius. By this supposition, the strong affection which the two 
young men appear to have conceived for her in her assumed character, before 
she sickens and apparently dies, will be rendered more probable, and time be 
allowed for all the parties concerned to reach the neighborhood of Milford, while 
it must, nevertheless, be acknowledged that the distance they have to travel 
is a point entirely undetermined, and that Pisanio, in III, iv, which has been 
represented as passing on the morning of the same day, in which she happened upon 
the retreat where she now abides, had said, ‘the Ambassador, Lucius the Roman, 
comes to Milford-Haven Tomorrow,’ line 162. But there is no occasion for imag- 
ining his intelligence to have been so perfectly exact——Danret (New Sh. Soc. 
Trans., 1877-79, Pp. 246): Day go. Wales. Enter Cloten dressed as Posthumus. 

4. if Pisanio haue mapp’d it truely] PorTeR-Crarke: This helps out de- 
ficiencies by the implication that Pisanio had added special instructions. These 
may be imagined to take Cloten out of his way, on the supposition that Imogen 
had gone straight on in hers to Milford-Haven. But she stopped in the cave, on 
which, of course, Pisanio did not count. 

7- for ’tis saide] See Apporr (§ 151) for many other examples of the common 
use of ‘for’ in the sense of because. 

7,8. a Womans fitnesse comes by fits] Brapey (WV. E. D., s. v. Fit, sb?, 4. f.): 
A violent access or outburst of laughter, tears, rage, [or of any emotions ; Inasmuch 
as Cloten apologises for the word ‘fitness,’ he probably uses it in an objectionable 
sense.—Ep.]. 

8. play the Workman] Not his outer garments, but his own personal attrac- 


tions must here be the agent. This leads him to rehearse his personal advantages. 
—Eb. 


ACTIV, SC. 1] 


CYMBELINE 


279 


{Peake it to my felfe, for it is not Vainglorie for a man, 
and his Glaffe, to confer in his owne Chamber; I meane, fe) 
the Lines of my body are as well drawne as his; no leffe 
young, more f{trong, not beneath him in Fortunes, be- 
yond him in the aduantage of the time, aboue him in 13 


9, 10. felfe, for...Glaffe, to confer... 
Chamber; I meane,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. self, (for...glass to confer...cham- 
ber;) I mean Theob. Warb. Knt, Coll. 
i, ili, Dyce i, Sta. (subs.). self, (for... 
glass to confer;...chamber;) I mean, Var. 
21, Sing. Ktly. self—for...glass to confer 


..chamber—I Glo. Cam. self, for...glass 
to confer...chamber. I mean, Ingl. self, 
(for...glass to confer;...chamber, I mean) 
Johns. et cet. (subs.). 
g. not] Om. Rowe ii, Pope. no Han. 
Vainglorie] F.. Vain-glory F;F,. 
to. I meane| I ween Vaun. 


9, 10. selfe, for... Glasse, to confer ...Chamber; I meane] I 
found it well nigh impossible to collate this passage, wherein the difference of the 
readings lies solely in the punctuation, without separating it into such a number 
of items, each consisting of only two or three words, that the student would find 
it hard to obtain from the collation any intelligible idea. I decided, therefore, to 
record mainly the limits of the parenthesis, and disregard minute accuracy in the 
intermediate punctuation. I infer that the Cam. Epp. found the same difficulty; 
their only note records the reading of ‘Capell,’ which I have attributed to Johnson, 
whose edition, I incline to think, preceded Capell’s.—Ep. 

to. Chamber; I meane] Cottrrr (ed. ii.): It has been invariable to make 
the parenthesis end at ‘chamber,’ [as in Coll. i. and iii—Ep.], but it is a decided 
error. [I cannot quite agree with Collier that it is a ‘decided error’ to end the 
parenthesis at ‘chamber’; many excellent editors have so ended it, videlicet Collier 
himself. To-day I think it is better to include the explanatory ‘I mean.’ To- 
morrow I may think differently. Ophelia’s wits were not wandering, but she was 
highly sane when she said ‘Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we 
shall be.’ And Emerson speaks of ‘The fool’s word: consistency.’—Eb.| 

I2. not beneath him in Fortunes] What are the ‘fortunes’ wherein 
Cloten was on an equality with Posthumus? And wherefore does Shakespeare so 
very frequently use the plural? Is it to make a distinction between mere wealth, 
fortune, and the many blessings or advantages which are independent of wealth? 
Nerissa says to Portia, ‘If your miseries were in the same abundance as your good 
fortunes are,’ etc. Orlando says to Oliver, ‘I will go buy my fortunes.’ Lysander, 
in Mid. N. Dream, asserts, ‘My fortunes every way as fairly ranked as his.’ May 
we not discern running through these examples, and including Cloten’s words, a 
strain of thought which suggests opportunities or chances of future good luck? 
Orlando with his patrimony could buy opportunities to make his fortune. 
Lysander’s chances in life ranked Demetrius’s. Portia’s miseries were not as 
‘abundant in the present as her opportunities of happiness in the future; and 
although Posthumus was exiled and in disgrace, his chances of a turn of the 
tide were as fair as any one’s, and Cloten was not beneath him in it. I have 
nowhere found any explanation of this plural, ‘fortunes.’—Scumipt (Lex.) merely 
states it as a fact that Shakespeare frequently uses the plural, and the N. E. D. 
does not, I think, mention it at all—Eb. 

13. aduantage of the time] That is, a better reputation in the world wherein 
we live, in the society about us. Macbeth says, ‘Away and mock the time with fair- 


280 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT Iv, SC. i. 


Birth, alike conuerfant in generall feruices, and more re- 14 
markeable in fingle oppofitions ; yet this imperfeuerant 
Thing loues him in my defpight. What Mortalitie is ? 16 


15. imperfeuerant] ill-perseverant Han. errant Coll. MS. im percieverant Coll. iii. 
Johns. ill perseverant Warb. imper- 16. Thing] Things Rowe ii. 
ceiverant Dyce, Glo. Cam. perverse, is?] is! Rowe et seq. 


est show.’ And Hamlet says, ‘show the very age and body of the time his form and 
pressure’; and in many another passage.— En. 

14. generall seruices] Ecctes: That is, those performed on the field of battle. 

1s. single oppositions] CapeELL (p. 114): Opposition of man to man, 
duels; see 1 Hen. IV: ‘In single opposition, hand to hand.’—I, iii, 99. -SCHMIDT 
(Lex., s. v. Opposition): That is, when compared as to single accomplishments. 
According to the usual interpretation, equivalent to single combats. {With 
Capell’s quotation from z Hen. IV. before us, this interpretation seems to be the 
only one.—Ep.] 

1s, 16. this imperseuerant Thing] Hanmer’s emendation, i!-perseverant, 
was adopted by JoHNSON without comment, further than to note his authority 
for it. What meaning he attached to the words in the present context it is difficult 
to divine; in his Dictionary he defines ‘perseverant’ as ‘persisting; constant.’ 
Either meaning, with ‘ill’ prefixed,—zll-persisting or ill-constant,—is hardly con- 
sistent with Cloten’s denunciation of Imogen; they indicate the very quality which 
alone could give him hope. This unsatisfactory emendation, however, died out 
with Warburton.—CaPELL next, in his Glossary (vol. i, p. 34), pronounced the word 
a ‘mistake of the Speaker [z. e., Cloten] for perseverant, a French word, signifying 
persevering, unshaken, not to be shaken.’—STEEVENS followed with a suggestion 
which sufficed all editors and editions down to and including Knight. ‘“Imper- 
severant”’ may mean,’ said Steevens, ‘no more than perseverant, like imbosomed, 
impassioned, im-masked,’ implying, therefore, I suppose, that these words meant 
no more than bosomed, passioned, and masked; of these, however, im-masked is 
the only one used by Shakespeare. Yet Steevens builded better than he knew.— 
CoLtier (ed. i.) agreed with him; ‘unless,’ he says, ‘we suppose Cloten to mean 
imperceptive or unperceiving as regards his advantages over Posthumus.’ Whether 
or not Dyce took a hint from this note by Collier we cannot know, but in the fol- 
lowing year in his Remarks, etc. (p. 258), after quoting Collier, he continues, 
‘The right reading (according to modern orthography) is undoubtedly “this 
imperceiverant thing,” 7. e., “this thing without the power of perceiving my supe- 
riority to Posthumus.” A passage in The Widow (by Jonson, Fletcher, and 
Middleton) stands as follows in the old copy: ‘methinks the words Themselves 
should make him do’t, had he but the perseverance of a cock sparrow, that will 
come as Pitlip, pd can nor write, nor read, poor fool!””—IT, ii; where, of course, 

perseverance” is, with our present spelling, perceiverance, i. e., power of per- 
ceiving.’ The next contribution to the discussion came, nine years after Dyce’s 
Remarks, from W. R. Arrowsmitu (N. & Q., I, vii, 400, 23 April, 1853), who ob- 
serves that the only other example of ‘imperseverant’ besides this in Cymbeline 
which he found occurs ‘in Bishop Andrewes’s Sermon preached before Queen 
nee at Hampton Court, in 1594, in the sense of unenduring: “For the Sodom- 
ites ar od i i i i : oe aie . 
ae Can as of Papen ae sinners; and Lot’s wife of im perseverant and 

g persons.”’—Library of Ang. Cath. Theology, vol. ii, p. 62. Per- 


AGH Tip SEs V6) CYMBELINE 281 


[15, 16. this imperseuerant Thing] 


severant, discerning, and persevers, discerns, occur respectively, at pp. 43 and 92 
of Hawes’s Pastime of Pleasure (Percy Soc. ed.). The noun substantive, per- 
severance — discernment, is as common a word as any of the like length in the 
English language. To omit the examples that might be cited out of Hawes’s 
Pastime of Pleasure, 1 will adduce a dozen other instances; and if these should 
not be enough to justify my assertion, I will undertake to heap together two dozen 
more. Mr Dyce, in his [Remarks], rightly explains the meaning of the word in 
Cymbeline.’ Hereupon Arrowsmith sets forth the ‘promised dozen’ examples; 
it is needless, I think, to repeat them here; especially as they are not of the adjec- 
tive, but of the noun ‘perseverance,’ whereof he might have found two more ex- 
amples in Shakespeare, one in Tro. & Cress., III, iii, 150, and another in Macbeth, 
IV, ili, 93. When Arrowsmith says that he had found a second instance of the use 
of ‘imperseverant’ in Andrewes’s Sermon he did not emphasize the fact that it 
did not bear the same meaning that Dyce attributes to the word Cloten uses. 
Cloten means, so says Dyce, wn-discerning; whereas Andrewes means unenduring; 
wherefore ‘imperseverant’ in Cloten’s mouth still remains unparalleld. Dyce’s 
spelling, zmperceiverant, with its meaning of wndiscerning, has been adopted by 
The Globe Ed., the Cam. Ed., and by the N. E. D., the last gives ‘imperseverant,’ 
but refers for its definition to imperceiverant. To the instances of perseverance 
already given, P. A. Danret (New Sh. Soc. Trans., 1887-92, p. 212) contributes: 
‘There is not one amonge the very brute bestes that hath not perseuerance of suche 
good as is done vnto him.’—Fol. 8 verso. ‘Som other receiue a plesour offered 
so carelessly that he that gaue it maye in maner stande in doute whether he that 
receiued it hadde any perserueaunce that he was plesoured or no,’ 1569. Nicolas 
Haward, The Line of Liberalitie, etc., Fol. 73 recto. Daniel adds: ‘It has already 
been proved up to the hilt by Dyce and others that he was right in modernising the 
word to imperceiverant; the above is an additional proof. But see Schmidt.’ It 
has been intimated above that Steevens was nearer right than he was aware, 
for this reason: Shakespeare uses ‘persever,’ according to Schmidt (Lex.), ten times 
in the sense of persevere, to insist, to be constant, whereof the participial adjective, 
perseverant, would bear the same meaning; and ‘imperseverant,’ if we regard the im 
as of negative force, would mean wnpersevering, that is, inmconstant, uninsistent, 
fickle, which clearly cannot be Cloten’s meaning when he applies the word to 
Imogen. But are we obliged to take im- as of negative force? Why may we not 
accept it as of an intensive force? We find it frequently thus used by Shakespeare, 
for example: ‘[they] rather choose to hide them in a net Than amply to imbar 
their crooked titles. —Hen. V: I, ii, 94; where the excellent editor, Walter George 
Stone, proves, I think, that ‘imbar’ is used intensively, meaning to bar, or obstruct 
amply, thoroughly. Again, ‘And never yet did insurrection want Such water 
colors to impaint his cause.’—z Hen. IV: V, i, 80; ‘trick’d With blood of fathers, 
mothers, daughters, sons, Baked and impasted with the parching street.—Hamlet, 
TI, ii, 481; ‘this trunk which you Shall bear along impawn’d.’—Wint. Tale, I, ii, 
436; ‘I am too sore enpearced with his shaft.’—(impearced or impierced, FFF.) 
Rom. & Jul., I, iv, 19; ‘these talent of their hair With twisted metal amorously 
impleached.’—Lov. Comp., 205; ‘If that the Turkish fleet Be not enshelter’d and 
embay’d.’—Oth., II, i, 18; ‘that sweet breath Which was embounded in this beauteous 
clay.’—King John, IV, iii, 137; ‘Nips youth 7’ the head and follies doth emmew.’— 
Meas. for Meas., WII, i, 91; ‘How much an ill word may empoison liking. —M uch Ado, 


282 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT “IV, (Scr. 


Pofthumus, thy head (which now is growing vppon thy 17 

fhoulders) fhall within this houre be off, thy Miftris in- 

forced, thy Garments cut to peeces before thy face: and 19 
17. now is] is now Rowe ii,+, Varr. 18, 19. inforced] enforced Rowe et seq. 

Ran. 19. thy face:| her face; Warb. Han. 
18. off,] off; Cap. et seq. Johns. Dyce ii, iii. 


III, i, 86. These words are, of course, compounded of a verb and the prefix in- 
changed into im- before b, m, and p. All the examples with the prefix im-, which 
have been just quoted, belong, I think, to the Fourth Class according to MURRAY 
(N. E. D. s. v. In-); where the in- or im- is, so Murray says, ‘of Teutonic origin, 
prefixed to Old English and Middle English adjectives [and verbs also, in times much 
more recent, I venture to think] with an intensive force. In origin akin to [the 
Latin in-] with the sense “only,” “intimately,” “thoroughly”; and hence “ex- 
ceedingly,” ‘“very.”’ It is to this intensive class, therefore, that I think ‘im- 
perseverant’ belongs, and that Cloten, in effect, calls Imogen ‘this most constant, 
this immoveably persistent thing.’ Any change in spelling is, I fear, of more than 
doubtful propriety.—Scumipt’s unhappy definition, to be discarded needs but to 
be seen: ‘giddy headed, flighty, thoughtless.’-—Since writing the foregoing, I find 
that the Rev. Joun Hunter has the judicious note on ‘imperseverant’: ‘That is, 
persisting, stubborn. The prefix im- is not here the negative one,’ which is in 
accord with what I have just said——Eb. . 

19. thy Garments cut to peeces before thy face] WARBURTON: Post- 
humus was to have his head struck off, and then his garments cut to pieces before 
his face; we should read ‘her face,’ 7. e., that is Imogen’s, done to despite her, who 
had said she esteem’d Posthumus’s garment above the person of Cloten.— 
Matone: Shakespeare, who in The Winter’s Tale, makes a Clown say, ‘If thou’lt 
see a thing to talk on after thou art dead,’ would not scruple to give the expression 
in the text to so fantastic a character as Cloten. The garments of Posthumus 
might indeed be cut to pieces before his face, though his head were cut off; no one, 
however, but Cloten would consider this circumstance as any aggravation of the 
insult.—Dvyce (ed. ii.), after styling this note of Malone ‘preposterous,’ remarks 
that ‘Cloten could have no possible object in cutting to pieces the garments of 
Posthumus before his face, even if Posthumus had been alive to witness the dis- 
section. Cloten wishes to cut them to pieces before the face of Imogen as a sort 
of revenge [for what she had said to him]. Cloten is certainly not the downright 
idiot that Capell and Malone would make him out to be. —Kwnicur agrees with 
Malone: ‘Cloten in his brutal way, thinks it a satisfaction that, after he has cut 
off his rival’s head, the face will still be present at the destruction of the garments.’ 
—PorTER-CLARKE explain ‘thy face? by supposing that ‘Cloten is, in fancy, 
taunting Imogen,’ and they may be right; albeit, that after using ‘thy’ three times 
in addressing Posthumus, the transition in the fourth ‘thy’ to Imogen is somewhat 
abrupt. It seems to me, however, that too much attention has been given to the 
‘face’ and not enough to the ‘garments.’ In the prospective duel there can be but 
two suits of garments; one on each of the combatants. Unhappily both suits 
belong to Posthumus. To which one, therefore, does Cloten refer? He could 
hardly refer to the suit he himself wore. His return to the Palace in rags (which 
would not have been improved by his acrobatic ‘spurning’ of Imogen, while on 
horse-back) did not exactly comport with his royal rank. He must, therefore, 


ACTAIV, SC. Li.) CYMBELINE 283 


all this done, fpurne her home to her Father, who may 20 
(happily ) be a little angry for my fo rough vfage: but my 
Mother hauing power of his teftineffe, fhall turne all in - 
to my commendations. My Horfe is tyed vp fafe, out 
Sword, and to a fore purpofe : Fortune put them into my 
hand: This is the very defcription of their meeting place 25 
and the Fellow dares not deceiue me. GTR 


Scena Secunda. 


Enter Belarius, Guiderius , Aruiragus,and 2 
Imogen from the Caue. 
Bel. You are not well : Remaine heere in the Caue, 
Wee’l come to you after Hunting. 5 
Arut. Brother, ftay heere : 
Are we not Brothers ? 
Imo. So man and man fhould be, 
But Clay and Clay, differs in dignitie, 


Whofe duft is both alike. I am very ficke, 10 
20. fpurne] Pil spurn Han. Warb. Johns. meeting-place Han. et 
Father,| father; Cap. et seq. cel 
21. happily| haply Johns. et seq. 1. Scene continued. Rowe. 
(except happely Wh. i.). Scene changes to the Front of the 
23. fafe,| safe, Johns. safe: Pope et Cave. Theob. 
seq. 4. [To Imo. Cap. 
24. purpofe:] purpose. Cap. Coll. ii, Caue,] cave; Theob. Warb. et seq. 
iii. purpose! Pope et cet. 5. to you] you Pope,+. 
24, 25. Fortune...hand:| fortune... 6. [To Imo. Theob. 
hand! Han. Fortune,...hand! Johns. 8. be,| be; Theob. Warb et seq. 
emcees 10, 16. I am] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, 


25. meeting place] Ff, Rowe, Theob. iii. 


have in mind the suit worn by Posthumus. May we not then picture the fight, as 
it outlined itself in the conceited brain of the braggart, where his every stroke 
cut and slashed his victim’s fine garments, while that victim was still alive, and, 
in the havoc of his clothes, receive a foretaste of his own doom, before Cloten gave 
him his coup de grace? If this picture be true, the Folio text needs no change.— 
Ep. 

ro. Whose dust is both alike] DrrcHTron takes ‘dust’ here as a reference 
to the ashes of death, and he may be right; but I had always supposed the sen- 
tence to mean that clay and clay are different in outward show, although both are 
composed of the same dust, where ‘dust’ is used in its Biblical sense: ‘dust thou 
art and unto dust shall thou return. —Ep.—PoORTER-CLARKE suggest that these 
words were elicited by ‘an embrace from the loving and sympathetic Arviragus, 
from which, although not in itself objectionable, Imogen had instinctivly recoiled.’ 


284 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acr Iv, Sc. u: 


Gui. Go you to Hunting, Ile abide with him. II 
Imo. So ficke I am not, yet I am not well : 

But not fo Citizen a wanton, as 

To feeme to dye, ere ficke : So pleafe you, leaue me, 

Sticke to your Iournall courfe : the breach of Cuftome, 15 

Is breach of all. Iam ill, but your being by me 

Cannot amend me. Society, is no comfort 

To one not fociable : I am not very ficke , 

Since I can reafon of it : pray you truft me heere, 


Ile rob none but my felfe, and let me dye 20 
Stealing fo poorely. 

Gui. I loue thee : I haue fpoke it, 22 
11. Hunting,] hunting; Coll. Dyce, 17. Society,] Society Rowe et seq. 
Sta. Glo. Cam. hunting. Sing. 18. I am] I’m Pope,+, Steev. Var. 

12. not,| Ff. Rowe,-++, Coll. Dyce, 103, “1S vce, tl. 
Sta. Glo. Cam. not; Cap. et cet. JSicke,| fick. F. 
well:| well, Rowe, Pope, Han. 19. of it:] Ff, Coll. of’ Han. of it. 
13. Citizen] sickening Perring. Rowe et cet. 
14. me,] me; Cap. et seq. heere,| here: Cap. et seq. 
15. Cuftome,] custom Cap. et seq. 20.. felfe,] Fi, Rowe,+, Coll. self; 
15, 16. Cuftome, Is] custom is The Cap. et cet. 
Sta. conj. (Atheneum, 14 June, 1873). - dye] dye, Cap. et seq. 
16. ill,| il; Cap. et seq. ; 22. {poke it,| spoke it; Theob. et 
17. me.| me: Cap. et seq. seq. 


13. not so Citizen a wanton] Nares (Gloss., s. v. Citizen. As an adjec- 
tive): Town bred; delicate—Hupson: I suspect this is an instance of transposi- 
tion, and that ‘wanton’ is to be taken as an adjective,—‘so wanton a citizen,’ or 
‘a citizen so wanton.’—Scumipt (Lex.) supplies many an instance of ‘wanton’ used 
as a noun. None, however, can be better than the following, which DowpEN 
supplies from Roper’s Life of Sir Thomas More (Lumbys ed. of Utopia, xlii.), where 
Sir Thomas says: ‘For me thinketh God maketh me a wanton, and setteth me 
on his lapp and dandleth me.’—Mourray (N. E. D., s. v. Citizen, 4. adjective): 
Citizenish, city-bred. monce-use. [The present line the sole quotation.] 

15. your Iournall course] JoHNnson: Keep your daily course uninterrupted; 
if the stated plan of life is once broken, nothing follows but confusion. 

19. Since I can reason of it: pray you trust me] WALKER (Crit., i, 77) 
devotes a chapter to examples where, as he says, ‘’Pray you, ’beseech you, are fre- 
quent in Shakespeare. I remember also ’crave you (in Macb.), and the substitution, 
in printing, of the longer form for the shorter has destroyed the metre of numerous 
passages in our old dramatists.’ Among the examples is the present line, which 
Walker would accordingly read: ‘Since I can reason of ’t. Pray trust me here.’ 
So again in IV, ii, 323, 324, below. 

20. Ile rob none but my selfe] DowpeN: Does Imogen give her words 


point for herself by a hidden reference to the womanly charms and princely graces 
she has deprived herself of? 


ACT ATVs (SCr t10.] CYMBELINE 285 
How much the quantity, the waight as much, 23 
As I do loue my Father. 

Bel, What? How? how? 25 


Aru. If it be finne to fay fo (Sir) I yoake mee 
In my good Brothers fault : I know not why 
I loue this youth, and I haue heard you fay, 
Loue’s reafon’s, without reafon. The Beere at doore, 
And a demand who is’t fhall dye, I’ld fay 30 
My Father, not this youth. 
Bel. Oh noble ftraine ! 
O worthineffe of Nature, breed of Greatneffe ! 
“Cowards father Cowards ,& Bafe things Syre Bace ; 


“Nature hath Meale, and Bran ; Contempt, and Grace. 35 
23. How] As Heath and Johns. conj. Rowe. 
Cap. Ran. 31. My...youth.| As quotation, Han. 


waight as much,] weight, as much 
Perring. 
much,| much Ingl. (Perring conj.). 

28. youth,| Ff, Rowe,+, Sta. youth; 
Cap. et cet. 

29. Loue’s reafon’s,| Loves reafons F>. 
Love’s reafons F;¥,. Love reasons Pope, 
+. Love’s reason’s Rowe, Johns. et 
sed. 

reafon.| Fi, Rowe,+, Ktly, Ingl. 


Johns. et cet. (except Coll. i.). 
32-37. [Aside, Cap. 
33. Nature,] nature! Cap. et cet. 
34, 35. As quotation, Ff, Rowe. 
In margin, Pope, Han. 


34. Cowards father Cowards,| F2. 


Cowards, Father, Cowards F,F,. Cow- 
ards, father cowards Rowe i. 
things Syre Bace] F2. things, 


Sire, bafe F3F,. things, Sire base Rowe i. 


reason; Cap. et cet. 
Beere| F>. 


23. How much the quantity] JoHNsoNn’s Edition and HEAtH’s Revisal were 
issued in the same year; priority in the Nofes can be given therefore to neither in 
proposing ‘As much,’ etc. (In his Preface, however, Johnson refers to Heath.)— 
Matone: Surely the present reading has exactly the same meaning, ‘How much 
soever the mass of my affection to my father may be, so much precisely is my love 
to thee; and as much as my filial love weighs, so much also weighs my affection for 
thee.’ —VAUGHAN (p. 475): I cannot legitimately extract Malone’s interpretation 
from Shakespeare’s words. As Shakespeare did not intend ‘weight’ to be identical 
with quality, ‘so much is my love’ is not to be discovered in his words. The 
line may be amended thus: ‘So much the quantity,’ etc—DowpEN: As I read 
this, the sentence runs: ‘I love thee (I have spoke it) as I do love my father.’ 
Line 23 I regard as parenthetical. Guiderius cannot deny that in quantity, the 
accumulation of years of affection, the love of his father may be greater, but in 
weight (of passion) this new love equals it. ‘How much the quantity’ means 
‘Whatever the quantity may be.’ 

32. Oh noble straine] Nares (Gloss.) defines ‘strain’ as ‘descent, lineage,’ 
which harmonises with what Belarius goes on to apostrophise, ‘O breed of Great- 
ness!’—Scumipt (Lex.) defines it by ‘impulse, feeling’—a meaning of which it is 
certainly capable, but not, I think, in the present context.—Eb. 

34, 35; 45-47; 72-75; 80, 81. All these lines Pope, followed by Hanmer, de- 


things sire the base Pope,+. things 


Beer F3F,. Bier sire base Rowe ii. et cet. 


286 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. il. 


I’me not their Father, yet who this fhould bee, 36 
Doth myracle it felfe, lou’d before mee. 

36. I’me] F;. Ime F2. I’m Fy, Rowe, 37. it felfe, low’d before mee.) itself; 
+, Knt, Dyce, Sta. Sing. Ktly, Glo. lov’d before me! Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Cam. J am Cap. et cet. itself, lov’d before me! Theob. Warb. 


Father,| father; Theob. Warb. et Johns. 
seq. 


servedly degraded to the foot of the page,—without comment, and no comment 
was needed,—their just belief was thereby indicated that the lines were none of 
Shakespeare’s. Not so, however, CAPELL, who administers a grave rebuke (p. 
116): ‘licenses of this sort,’ he says austerely, ‘ought never to be taken at any 
time without reasons which carry instant conviction, which cannot be urged for 
any one of the above-mentioned couplets; whose meanness (the cause, in all likeli- 
hood, of their being rejected) may have a source they were not aware of; namely, 
that they are only quotations—they have the air of it, each of them; and what at 
present is only conjecture, may very possibly be turned into truth by the happy 
diligence of some future researcher.’ 

34. Cowards father Cowards, etc.] In tracing Ovid’s influence on Shake- 
speare, WALKER (Crit., i, 153) quotes this line as one ‘that has the look of an 
imitation,’ not from Ovid, but from Horace, IV, Ode iv, 29: ‘Fortes creantur fortes. 
Et bonis est in juvencis, est in equis patrum Virtus,’ etc. [It may well be that the 
author of these doggrell rhymes, and of many another in this play, imitated whom 
he pleased, like Habakkuk, ‘it etait capable de tout.’ In the present instance, 
however, he had the effrontery to prefix inverted commas, to indicate that they were 
maxims or noteworthy lines. It may, perhaps, be worthy of remark that these 
inverted commas, although extremely rare, are not unknown in the Folio. An 
instance occurs in Tro. & Cress. on what would be page 81 (if the pages were num- 
bered), column a, third line from the bottom: ‘Therefore this maxime out of loue I 
teach, “‘ Atchiewement, is command; vngain’d, befeech.”’ It is evidently thus printed, 
because Cressida has just termed it a ‘maxim.’ In a note on this line WHITE 
(ed. i.) points out another instance in Meas. for Meas., where Isabella says: ‘Then 
Isabell liue chaste, and brother die; ‘More then our Brother, is our Chastitie.” ’— 
II, iv, 186, p. 70, col. 6, third line before the end of the Act. Ina note on Polonius’s 
precepts in Hamlet, I, iii, 59, etc., KNiGuT observes that ‘it is remarkable that in 
the Qto, 1603, the “‘precepts” are printed in inverted commas, as if they were taken 
from some known source,’ etc.—Dyce (Remarks, p. 207) replied: ‘Not at all 
“remarkable.” In the Qtos of [Hamlet] (excepting that of 1603) a speech of the 
Queen, IV, v, is “printed with inverted commas.”’ Hereupon the passage is 
reprinted by Dyce, each line beginning with a comma. Dyce, with his invincible 
Scotch accuracy, adds parenthetically ‘(the 4to of 1637 gives it with double com- 
mas).’ ‘In various other early plays,’ Dyce proceeds, ‘THe GNEomIC PorTIONS 
are so distinguished.’ He quotes seven examples, to which White, in his note on 
Tro. & Cress., adds others, all interesting, but too long to be repeated here on what 
is not really germane to the present text.—Ep.] 

36, 37. who this should bee . . . lou’d before mee] DEIGHTON: That is, 
But that this boy of whom we know nothing should be loved more than me is 
surely miraculous—DowpEN: ‘Miracle’ may be a noun—doeth, accomplishes a 
very miracle; or a verb—shows itself miraculous. 


KEW INV, SO, wh | 


CYMBELINE 287 


’Tis the ninth houre o’th’Morne. 38 
Arw. Brother, farewell. 
Imo. 1 with ye fport. 40 
Arut. You health.———So pleafe you Sir. 
Imo, Thefe are kinde Creatures. 

Gods, what lyes I haue heard: 

Our Courtiers fay all’s fauage, but at Court ; 

Experience, oh thou difproou’ft Report. 45 

Th’emperious Seas breeds Montters ; for the Dith, 

Poore Tributary Riuers, as fweet Fith : 47 


38. oth] F,. oth Fo. 
Cap. et seq. 

41. You health.| Vou, health— Theob. 
i. You health— Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. 
Your health— Han. You, health..Sta. 

42. [Aside. Johns. and Cap. 

42, 43. One line, Rowe et seq. 

43. I haue] I’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii, 
Ingl. 

heard:| heard! Rowe et seq. 
44. all’s| alls F2. 


oth’ F3. o’the 


45-47. In margin, Pope, Han. 

45. oh thou] oh how thou Rowe, Theob. 
Warb. 

Report.| report— Theob. ii, 
Warb. report! Var. ’73 et seq. 

40. Th’] Ff, Rowe, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Coll. Dyce ii, iii, Ingl. The 
Cap. et cet. 

emperious| imperious Rowe et 
seq. 
breeds] Fy. 


38. ’Tis the ninth houre o’th’Morne] Caperit: As Belarius utters these 
words he turns to a part of the cave and takes down some of their hunting in- 
struments, reaching one to Arvigarius, which is the occasion of the words, ‘So 
please you, Sir,’ the reaching being linked with a call. [Dr Johnson, borrowing 
from Prospero’s speech to Caliban, said that if ‘Capell had come to him, he would 
have endowed his purposes with words.’—ED.] 

41. So please you Sir] Tyrwuirr: I cannot relish this courtly phrase from 
the mouth of Arviragus. It should rather, I think, begin Imogen’s speech. [See 
preceding note.]J—WALKER (C7it., iii, 326): Point, ‘So please you, sir—’ Arviragus 
is speaking to Belarius. [See Capell’s preceding note, wherein he anticipates 
Walker.] 

46. emperious] MALone: Used for imperial. 

46. Seas breeds Monsters; for the Dish] Vaucuan (having found the 
following in North’s Plutarch, ‘He ... answered them proudly that a platter 
was too little to hold a dolphin,’ Lucullus, p. 521) concluded that we should print, 
‘The imperious seas breed monsters for the dish; Poor tributary,’ etc. ‘That is, 
of course, “‘The sea breeds creatures which would be monsters in a dish; while the 
poor rivers, which pay their tribute to it, breed fish as sweet as the creatures of 
the sea are monstrous.’ [Vaughan’s quotation from Plutarch gives the im- 
pression, I fear, that Lucullus was discussing the possibility of serving up dol- 
phins as a tempting viand; in reality, he used the simile in order to show the 
inhabitants of Seleucia that their city was too small for a School of Oratory, without 
any reference to the edible quality of a dolphin. I am afraid Vaughan failed to 
note this, and by his change of punctuation gives us to understand that monsters 
were cooked and eaten as a toothsome entremets. Any time or thought, however, 


a 


THE TRAGEDIE OF [act Iv, Sc. i. 


288 
I am ficke ftill, heart-ficke; Pi/anio, 
Ile now tafte of thy Drugge. 
Gui. I could not ftirre him : 
He faid he was gentle, but vnfortunate ; 
Difhoneftly afflicted, but yet honeft. 
Arui. Thus did he aufwer me : yet faid heereafter, 
I might know more. 
Bel. To’th’Field, to’th’ Field : 
Wee’l leaue you for this time, go in,and reft. 
Arut. Wee’l not be long away. 
Bel. Pray be not ficke, 
For you muft be our Hufwife. 
Imo, Well, or ill, 
I am bound to you. 


48 


50 


55 


Exit. 


48. flill,) Ff, Rowe,+, Sta. Cam. 
still; Cap. et cet. 
heart-ficke;| heart-sick— Rowe,+. 
heart-sick. Coll. Glo. Cam. 
49. Ile] I will Var. ’73. 
{Drinking out of the Viol. Rowe, 
+. Swallows some. Dyce, Wh. Sta. 
Glo. Cam. Drinking. Coll. ii. Taking 


53. hus] So Cap. 
faid heereafter,| said, hereafter 
Rowe et seq. 
5s. To’th’...to’th] To th’...to th’ Ft, 
Rowe,+. To the Cap. et seq. 
56. time,] time; Pope et seq. 
. 89. Hufwife] Fi, Cap. houswife 
Rowe i. housewife Rowe ii. et cet. 


it. Coll. iii. 61. bound] still bound Cap. 


Exit.] After line 62, Cap. 


expended on these trashy lines, so utterly inappropriate as coming from Imogen’s 
sad, sad heart, and never written by Shakespeare, is utterly wasted —Ep.] 

49. Ile now taste of thy Drugge] The CowprEn-CrarKkes: At one time 
we believed that these words were merely meant to indicate that Imogen intends 
taking some of the drug when she returns into the cave and shall be once more 
alone. But upon reconsideration of the stage situation—the momentary with- 
drawal of Belarius and the young men, which gives her the opportunity of speak- 
ing in soliloquy and of remembering Pisanio’s gift,—we think it probable that the 
author intended this to be the juncture at which she swallows some. 

49. Drugge] Dyce: The ‘drug,’ it appears, was a solid—BUcKNILL (p. 22) 
Cornelius has given to the queen a narcotic, something that will stupify and dull 
the sense for a while, but will not prove poisonous. The plot of the play hinges 
upon the operation on Imogen of this narcotic, the supposed powers of which appear 
to have been exactly the same as that given by Friar Lawrence to Juliet for the 
purpose of simulating death. Modern medicine is acquainted with no drug having 
the property to produce for a while the show of death, and yet leave the powers of 
life so unharmed that the subject of them shall be ‘more fresh, reviving.’ 

50. I could not stirre him] Jonnson: Not move him to tell his story. 

51. gentle, but vnfortunate] Jonson: ‘Gentle’ is well-born, of birth above 
the vulgar.—Strrvens: Rather of rank above the vulgar. 


ACT IV, SC. it.] CYMBELINE 289 
Bel. And fhal’t be euer. 62 
This youth, how ere diftreft, appeares he hath had 
Good Anceftors. 
Aru. How Angell-like he fings? 65 
Gut. But his neate Cookerie ? 
Arutz. He cut our Rootes in Charraéters, 67 


62. And...euer] Continued to Imo. 
(reading shall) Heath, Mason, Huds. 
Warb. MS. (N. & Q., VIII, iii, 263). 

Shalt] fhalt Ff. so shalt Han. 
shall Warb. Huds. 

63. diftreft, appeares he] Fi, Rowe, 
Coll. Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo. Cam. dis- 
tress'd appears he, J. W.S. (Shakesperi- 
ana, Feb., 1884). distress’d, it appears 
he or distress’d, ’t appears he Craig. 


conj. distress’d, appears, he Cap. et cet. 

63. he hath] to have Pope,+. 

65, 66. fings?...Cookerie?| 
cookery! Theob. et seq. 

66, 67. Two lines, ending: Rootes... 
Charracters. Glo. Cam. 

One line, Cap. et seq. (except 

Glo. Cam.). 

67-609. He ... Dieter] Continued to 
Gui. Cap. Var. ’78 et seq. 


sings !... 


62. And shal’t be euer] Caprett: This reply of Belarius has been objected 
to, but with no sort of reason; the only force of it is—that he would always be doing 
what might bind her to him. 

63. how ere distrest, appeares he hath] Knicut (reading ‘howe’er dis- 
tress’d he appears, hath’): [The comma, inserted by Capell after ‘appears,’] is 
to us unintelligible; we have, therefore, ventured on the transposition in our text, 
assuming that the printer, having left out the ‘he’ in his first proof, inserted it as a 
correction in the wrong place—one of the commonest of typographical errors. 

63. appeares] ABBOTT (§ 295) surmises that ‘perhaps “appear” was sometimes 
used as an active verb.’ (See III, iv, 165, where Abbott thinks that it may be used 
reflexively.) But afterwards (§ 411) he inclines to think that the better way is to 
consider the phrase as a confusion of two constructions: ‘He hath had, (it) appears, 
good ancestors,’ and ‘He appears to have had.’ 

66. Cookerie] Mrs LENNOX (i, 163): [When Imogen assumes a man’s garb] 
Shakespeare drops Boccaccio, after having servilely copied from him all the inci- 
dents which compose this part of the plot; but by changing the scene and charac- 
ters he has made these incidents absurd, unnatural, and improbable. The rest of 
the Play is equally inconsistent, and if Shakespeare invented here for himself, 
his imagination in this one instance is full as bad as his judgment. His Princess, 
forgetting that she had put on boy’s cloaths, to be a spy on the actions of her 
husband, commences as Cook to two young foresters and their father, who live in a 
_ Caye; and we are told how nicely she sauced their broths. Certainly this Princess 
had a most ceconomical education.—Douce (ii, 105): [Mrs Lennox] ought at least 
to have remembered, what every well-informed woman of the present age is ac- 
quainted with, the education of the princesses in Homer’s Odyssey. It is idle to 
attempt to judge of ancient simplicity by a mere knowledge of modern manners.— 
Mrs Jameson (ii, 83): We must not forget that ‘her neat cookery,’ which is so 
prettily eulogised by Guiderius, formed part of the education of a princess in those 
remote times.—FLETCHER (p. 46): These words of Guiderius are remarkable in 
two respects. They show the graceful propriety with which the Poet could ascribe 
to his ideal princess a familiarity with the most ordinary branches of domestic 
economy; and exhibit at the same time the inimitable art wherewith he could lend 
ideal dignity to one of the homeliest qualifications. 


19 


290 THE TRAGEDIE OF ACT IV, SC. ii. 


And fawe’ft our Brothes, as /uzo had bin ficke, 68 
And he her Dieter. 
Arut, Nobly he yoakes 70 


A {miling, with a figh ; as if the fighe 

Was that it was, for not being fuch a Smile : 

The Smile, mocking the Sigh, that it would flye 

From fo diuine a Temple, to commix 

With windes, that Saylors raile at. 75 
Gui. I do note, 

That greefe and patience rooted in them both, 


Mingle their fpurres together. 78 
68. fawe’ ft] fawe’t Ff. sauc’d Rowe. 71, 75. as if..raile at.| In margin, 
Brothes] F2. broth Rowe ii,+. Pope, Han. 
Broths F3F, et cet. 73. Smile,| Smile F3;F, et seq. 
bin] been F3F,. 76. I] Yes, I Han. 
71. figh;] F., Theob. Warb. Johns. 77. them] him Pope et seq. 
Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. sigh. Pope, 78. {purres] pow’rs Pope i. 


Han. figh: F;F,, Rowe et cet. 


67-70. Arui. He cut... Arui. Nobly he, etc.] We are at times 
inclined to exclaim at the stupidity of the printers; and yet there is here a manifest 
error, such as giving two consecutive speeches to the same speaker, which escaped 
the notice of Rowr, Popr, THEOBALD, HANMER, WARBURTON, JOHNSON, and, in 
recent times, INGLEBY (ed. i.). CAPELL was the first to correct it by giving to 
Guiderius the whole of the first speech attributed to Arviragus from ‘He cut our 
Rootes in Characters, line 67, to ‘And he her Dieter,’ line 69.—Eb. 

67. Charracters] STEEVENS: So, in Fletcher’s Elder Brother, ‘—a bookish boy, 
That never knew a blade above a penknife, And how to cut his meat in characters.’ 
—IV, i, 16. 

77. greefe and patience rooted in them both] Hunter (ii, 296) censures 
Knight for not mentioning that him for ‘them’ is merely Pope’s ‘conjectural emen- 
dation,’ and also for taking no notice of the reading of the Folios. ‘Yet one would 
have thought,’ he goes on to say, ‘that the unsuitableness of “both,” as annexed to 
“him” or the awkwardness of it, if referred to “Grief and Patience,’ would have 
shown that the original copies deserved to have their reading at least exhibited. 
That the original is the true reading will easily be made to appear.’ Hereupon 
Hunter quotes lines 65-78 for the sake of the emphasis given therein to ‘smiling’ 
and ‘a sigh,’ and ‘Grief and Patience,’ and then asks, ‘Who can doubt that “them” 
has for its antecedent the smile and the sigh? In both might be discovered at 
once both grief and patience. It is the highest style of art; but the beauty is lost 
if we substitute him.’ THISELTON agrees with Hunter, who is, I also think, entirely 
right.— Eb. 

78. spurres] WHITNEY (Cent. Dict.): A large lateral root of a tree—RuSKIN 
(vol. iv, p. 397): There is only one thing belonging to hills that Shakespeare seemed 
to feel as noble—the pine tree—and that was because he had seen it in Warwickshire, 
clumps of pine occasionally rising in little sandstone mounds, as at the place of ex- 


cution of Piers Gaveston, above the lowland woods. . . . Note his observance of 


AGTELV,ESCuli al CYMBELINE 291 


Arut. Grow patient, 


And let the ftinking-Elder (Greefe) vntwine 80 
79-81. In margin, Pope. 80. flinking-Elder] ftinking Elder FF, 
79. patient,| Fi. patience, Rowe. et seq. sticking ivy Bailey. 

patience; Cap. patience! Theob. et cet. vntwine| not twine Ingl. conj. 


the peculiar horizontal roots of the pine, spurred as it is by them like the claw of a 
bird, and partly propped, as the aiguilles by those rock promontories at their 
bases which I have always called their spurs, this observance of the pine’s strength 
and animal-like grasp being the chief reason for his choosing it, above all other 
trees, for Ariel’s prison. [See IV, ii, 227.] 

79-81. Grow . .. Vine] INcitEBy reads, ‘Grow patience—And let the 
stinking elder, grief, untwine His perishing root—with the increasing vine’; 
and thus interprets: ‘The construction seems to be, “Grow patience, with the 
increasing vine [that is, ‘let patience grow with the growth of the vine’]; and let the 
stinking elder (grief) untwine [from it] his perishing root.” In this play one must 
be prepared for an elliptical construction. Here the vine is Fidele or, perhaps, 
Fidele’s heart.’ 

80. stinking-Elder] ELLAcoMBE (p. 64): There is, perhaps, no tree around 
which so much of contradictory folk-lore has gathered as the Elder tree. With 
many it was simply ‘the stinking elder,’ of which nothing but evil could be spoken. 
Biron, in Love’s Labor Lost, V, ii, when he said ‘Judas was hanged on an Elder’ 
only spoke the common medieval notion; and so firm was this belief that Sir John 
Mandeville was shown the identical tree at Jerusalem, ‘and faste by is zit, the 
Tree of Eldre that Judas henge himself upon, for despeyr that he hadde, when he 
solde and betrayed. oure Lord,’ [p. 60, ed. Ashton]. This was enough to give the 
tree a bad fame, which other things helped to confirm—the evil smell of its leaves, 
the heavy narcotic smell of its flowers, its hard and heartless wood, and the ugly 
drooping black fungus that is almost exclusively found on it (though it occurs also 
on the Elm), which was vulgarly called the Ear of Judas (Hirneola auricula Jude). 
This was the bad character; but, on the other hand, there were many who could 
tell of its many virtues, so that in 1644 appeared a book entirely devoted to its 
praises. This was ‘The Anatomie of the Elder, translated from the Latin of Dr 
Martin Blockwich by C. de Iryngio’ (7. e., Christ Irvine), a book that, in its Latin 
and English form, went through several editions. And this favourable estimate of 
the tree is still very common in several parts of the Continent. . . . Nor must we 
pass by the high value that was placed on the wood both by the Jews and the 
Greeks. It was the wood chiefly used for musical instruments, so that the name 
Sambuke was applied to several very different instruments, from the fact that 
they were all made of Elder wood. The ‘Sackbut,’ ‘dulcimer,’ and ‘pipe’ of Daniel 
iii. are all connected together in this manner. 

80. Elder (Greefe) vntwine] Jounson: Shakespeare had only seen English 
vines which grow against walls, and therefore may be sometimes entangled with 
the elder. Perhaps we should read—untwine—from the vine.—STEEVENS: Sir 
John Hawkins proposes to read—entwine. He says, ‘Let the stinking elder 
[Grief] entwine his root with the vine [Patience] and in the end Patience must 
outgrow Grief.,—MAatone: That is, may patience increase, and may the stinking 
elder, grief, no longer twine his decaying [or destructive, if perishing is used actively] 
root with the vine, patience thus increasing!—Moncx MAson (p. 333) would read, 


292 THE TRAGEDIE OF fact Iv, SC. ti. 


His perifhing roote, with the encreafing Vine. 81 
Bel. It is great morning. Come away : Who’s there? 
Enter Cloten. 
Clo. 1 cannot finde thofe Runnagates, that Villaine 


Hath mock’d me. I am faint. 85 
81. with the] from thy Han. from Cam. Come; away. Johns. et cet. 
with the Ktly. from with thy Ktly con). 83. [Scene mt. Pope, Han. Warb. 
encreafing| increasing Han. Cap. Johns. 
et seq. Cloten.] F,. Clotten. F.F;. 
82. morning.| morning: Cap. 84. Runnagates,] runagates: Pope et 
Come away:|] Ff, Rowe, Pope. seq. 
Come, away: Theob. Warb. Come, Villaine] villain-slave or villain, 
away. Cap. Come; away! Coll. Sing. sure, Sta. conj. ; 


Come, away! Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo. 


‘entwine His perishing root, with thy increasing Vine.’ ‘And the meaning is,’ he 
says, ‘Grow patience! entwine your roots with those of grief, that whilst he lasts 
you may not be separated from him, but let his root be perishing, and your’s in= 
creasing.’ The propriety of my amendment of thy instead of ‘the’ will be evident 
if it be remembered that this speech is addressed to patience as a person, and that 
the vine is not a general emblem of patience—Knicut: The root of the elder 
is short-lived and perishes, while that of the vine continues to flourish and increase: 
let the stinking elder, grief, untwine his root which is perishing with (in company 
with) the vine which is increasing—WuITE: ‘His perishing root’ means ‘his 
root which causes to perish; ‘perish’ being used actively —Hupson: We have here 
an expression of exactly the same sort as one now, against propriety, growing into 
use; namely, ‘differing with another’ instead of ‘differing from another.’ In our 
time the proper language would be, ‘Let the elder twine his root with the vine’; 
or, ‘Let the elder untwine his root from the vine.’ To perish was sometimes used 
as a transitive verb. So here, perishing means destructive. ‘The stinking elder’ 
is the same as the poison elder; and I used to hear it called, and to call it, by either 
name indifferently—VAUGHAN (p. 478): The construction of this sentence is 
mistaken by all. The two lines convey either this, ‘Let the elder untwine its 
perishing root concurrently with the increase of the vine’ (‘with the increasing 
vine’), or, rather, ‘Let the elder untwine its root, which will perish as the vine 
increases’ (‘with the increasing vine’) ‘and by its increase.—DowpENn: In truth, 
no difficulty exists here: the meaning is with the increase of the vine, or as the 
vine increases, let the elder untwine his perishing root. The word ‘with’ is not to 
be connected with ‘untwine.’ [Is it not sad to see so much ingenuity, not to 
mention the ready invention of botanical facts, expended on lines which respect 
for Shakespeare forbids us, or forbids me, at least, to believe that he ever wrote? 
The lines from 70 to 81, with the absurdity of giving two separate consecutive 
speeches to the same character, are, to me, forced, stilted, and out of character. 
What knew Arviragus of winds that sailors rail at? And let him believe who lists 
that Shakespeare, with his love for daffodils, and violets, and primroses, and all the 
sweet flowers of the field, would ever use a simile drawn from ‘st —king elder’! 
Never did Belarius speak more to the purpose than when he put a stop to this 
dialogue —Eb.] 
82. It is great morning] Stervens: A Gallicism, Grand jour. 


ACT IV, SC. i1.] CYMBELINE 293 


Bel. Thofe Runnagates ? 86 
Meanes he not vs? I partly know him, ’tis” 
Cloten, the Sonne o’th’Queene. I feare fome Ambufh: 
I faw him not thefe many yeares, and yet 
I know ’tis he: We are held as Out-Lawes : Hence. 90 
Gui. He is but one : you, and my Brother fearch 
What Companies are neere : pray you away, 
Let me alone with him. 
Clot. Soft, what are you 
That flye me thus? Some villaine-Mountainers? 95 
I haue heard of fuch. What Slaue art thou? 
Gu. A thing| 
More flauifh did I ne’re, then anfwering 
A Slaue without a knocke. 99 


86-93. [Aside. Cap. 
86. Thofe Runnagates?] Ff. Those 
runagates! Rowe et seq. As a quota- 


94. Soft,] Fi, Rowe, Pope. Soff: 
Cap. Soft! Theob. et cet. 

95. Some] Sonne F:. 

villaine-Mountainers?| F2. Vil- 

lain Mountainers? F3F,. villain-Moun- 
tainers— Rowe, Pope.  villain-Moun- 
taineers— Theob. i, Han.  villain- 
Mountaineer. Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. 
villain mountaineers? Cap. et seq. 


87. him,] him; Rowe ii. et seq. 
88. o’th’] oth’ F.F;. o’the Cap. et seq. 
Queene.| Queen; Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. 
Ambujfh:| Fi. ambush— Rowe, 
+. ambush. Johns. et cet. 


90. We are] we're Theob. ii, Warb. 
Johns. 
Out-Lawes:| Ff (Out-laws: F,). 
out-laws. Johns. Ktly. 
92. away,| away; Theob. et seq. 
93. [Exeunt Bel. and Arvir. Rowe. 


97, 98. thing More] thing. More F>. 
thing, More F,F,. 

98. ne’re,| ne’er Dyce, Glo. Cam. 

99. A Slaue] As quotation, Mal. 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt, Sta. Dyce 
iii. 


92. What Companies] WALKER, in his valuable Article on the frequent inter- 
polation and omission of s in the Folio, quotes (Crit., i, 225) this line and asks, 
‘Why the plural? A little below we have “No company’s abroad.” And again, 
“what company Discover you abroad?’”’’?’ Dyce quotes Walker, without com- 
ment. I think the present example hardly within the scope of Walker’s Article; 
the verb shows that, whatever be the reason, the plural is intentional, and ought 
we then to change it? Scummr (Lez.) gives it as equivalent to ‘people.’—Ep. 

95. villaine-Mountainers] WALKER (Vers., 224): An erratum, I suspect, 
occasioned perhaps by the frequency of the form -er in this class of words; see 
‘Yeeld Rufticke Mountaineer,’ line 136, below——Dvyce (ed. ii.): I should have 
retained ‘mountainers,’ but that in the five other passages where the word occurs 
the Folio spells it with the double e. 

98, 99. then answering A Slaue without a knocke] M. Mason: Than 
answering that abusive word ‘Slave.’ ‘Slave’ should be printed in Italics [as a 
quotation].—Matone: See Rom. & Jul.: ‘Now, Tybalt, take the “villain” back 
again.’—III, i, r30.—Wyatt: ‘A slave’ is usually taken to mean ‘the epithet, 


204 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT IV, SC. il. 


Clot. Thou art a Robber, 100 
A Law-breaker, a Villaine : yeeld thee Theefe. 

Gui. To who? to thee? What art thou? Haue not I 
An arme as bigge as thine ? A heart,as bigge : 
Thy words I grant are bigger : for I weare not 
My Dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art: 105 
Why I fhould yeeld to thee? 

Clot. Thou Villaine bafe, 
Know’ft me not by my Cloathes? 


Gut. No, nor thy Taylor, Rafcall : 109 
tot. Viliaine:] villain. Coll. Ktly. Coll. i, ii, Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
thee Theefe.| F2. thee, Thief. 106. I fhould] should I Ingl. i. 
F;F, et seq. thee?] thee. Wan. Coll. iii, Ingl. 
102. who?]| whom? Ff, Rowe,-+, ii, Cam. 
Ran. Coll. 108. me not by my] not my Douce, 
103. bigge:] big? F, et seq. Vaun. 
tos. Say] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 109. No,] No Rowe ii, Pope. Om. 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. Say, Theob. et Steev. conj. 
cet. Rafcall:} Om. Pope. Rafcall, 


art:| art, F,, Rowe,+, Kant, Ff et seq. 


slave,’ on the false analogy [of the line just quoted by Malone from Rom. & Jul.]. 
It is evident that the use of the indefinite article here makes all the difference, and 
that Guiderius is hurling Cloten’s abusive epithet back, just as he does in line 121. 

102. To who?] See I, vii, 182. 

103. A heart, as bigge] Thus ‘heart’ is used when Orlando says to Adam, 
‘Why how now, Adam, no greater heart in thee?’ 

108. Know’st me not by my Cloathes?] IncLeBy: It is doubtful whether 
Cloten, unmindful of his disguise, expects Guiderius to recognise him as the Queen’s 
son; or whether he supposes a stranger would take him for Posthumus because he 
wore Posthumus’s clothes. Perhaps Shakespeare committed here the oversight he 
did in Wint. Tale [where, possibly, Florizel’s ‘swain’s wearing’ is spoken of as a court 
suit, IV, iv, 837, of the present ed.]. Such oversights are easily committed — 
Wyatt: Does Cloten in his anger forget for the moment that he is dressed in the 
garments of Posthumus? or does he expect to be recognised as Posthumus? Cloten’s 
next speech hardly settles the point, because Guiderius’s reply may well have made 
him look downward at his clothes and remind him that he was in borrowed gar- 
ments; but it precludes the third supposition, that of an oversight on the part of 
the dramatist—RoLre: Cloten simply means that he ought to be recognised as a 
gentleman, or a person from the court, as Posthumus had been before he was ban- 
ished.—DownpeEn: Is this the idea in Cloten’s mind, ‘Do you not know me, by 
reason, or in consequence, of my wearing these clothes?’—the clothes being, in fact, 
those of Posthumus? Every Briton should know the great Cloten, but the un- 
princely garments may conceal his majesty. 

tog. Rascall] Etze (p. 322): There is another reason [besides metrical] 
in favour of the omission [of ‘Rascal’], and this is the marked contrast between the 
two characters of Cloten and Guiderius. Cloten, from the very moment of his 
entrance, heaps the most abusive language on his adversary, whereas Guiderius 


ACW IV, SC. 11. | CYMBELINE 295 


Who is thy Grandfather ? He made thofe cloathes, 110 
Which (as it feemes) make thee. 
Clo. Thou precious Varlet, 
My Taylor made them not. 
Guz. Hence then, and thanke 
The man that gaue them thee. Thou art fome Foole, TS 
I am loath to beate thee. 
Clot. Thou iniurious Theefe, 
Heare but my name, and tremble. 
Guz. What’s thy name? 
Clo. Cloten, thou Villaine. 120 
Gut. Cloten, thou double Villaine be thy name, 
I cannot tremble at it, were it Toad, or Adder, Spider, 


’Twould moue me fooner. 123 
110. Grandfather?| grandfather, Rowe. 121. Villaine] villain, Theob. et seq. 
Grandfather: Ff et cet. godfather , 122. at it,] at it; Rowe et seq. 
Kinnear. were it] were’t Steev. Var. ’03, 
112. Varlet,| Varlet! Rowe,+. 13, Knt, Sta. Sing. Ktly. 
115. Foole,| Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. 122, 123. Lines end: Toad,...fooner. 
fool; Theob. et cet. (reading Adder, or spider, it would) 
116. I am] I’m Pope,+, Var. ’8s5, Han. 
Dyce ii, iii. 122. or Adder, Spider,| adder, spider, 
121. thou double] then double Pope. Pope,+, Varr. Ran. Om. Cap. 
then, double Theob.+. 123. me] Om. F;F,, Rowe i. 


studiously refrains from retaliating; only twice he retorts: in line 97 et seq. (‘A 
thing more slavish,’ etc., which is language moderate enough) and in line 121 (‘thou 
double villain’). I am, therefore, inclined to agree with Pope, not only because 
‘rascal’ spoils the metre, but because it contradicts the well-defined character of 
Guiderius. It is, no doubt, an actor’s addition. 

113. My Taylor] Ecctrs: ‘My’ here is emphatic; they were made by the 
tailor of Posthumus. 

117. Thou iniurious Theefe] That is, contwmelious, insulting. See ‘iniurious 
Romans,’ ITI, 1, 53. 

121. Cloten, thou double Villaine] DowprEN: Does Guiderius jestingly 
take ‘Cloten, thou villain’ as the name, and improve on it by his ‘Cloten, thou 
double villain’? or is ‘thou double villain’ only a retort for ‘thou villain’? 

122. Toad] Torsett (Hist. of Serpents, p. 193): All manner of Toades, both of 
the earth and of the water, are venomous, although it be held that the toades of the 
earth are more poysonfull then the toades of the water, except those Toades of the 
water which doe receiue infection or poyson from the water, for some waters are 
venomous. But the Toades of the Land, which doe descend into the Marshes, and 
so liue in both elements, are most venomous, and the hotter the country is, the more 
full they are of poyson. The Women-witches of auncient time which killed by poy- 
soning, did much vse Toades in their confections. . . . The byting of a Toade, 
although it be sildome, yet it is venomous, and causeth the body to swell and 
breake, eyther by Impostumation, or otherwise. . . . The spettle also of Toades is 


296 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Act Iv, SC. ii. 


Clot. To thy further feare, 124 


124. To] Then to Han. 124. further] farther Coll. 


venomous, for if it fall vpon a man, it causeth all his hayre to fall off from his 
head. 

122. Adder] TopseLt (Hist. of Serpents, p. 50): It falleth out in the particular 
Discourse of Serpents, that I expresse the most knowne Serpent to vs in England 
in the first place, according to Alphabetical order, that is, the Adder. For although 
I am not ignorant, that there be which write it Nadere, of Natrix, which signifieth 
a Water-snake, yet I cannot consent vnto them so readily, as to depart from the more 
vulgar receaued word of a whole Nation, because of some likelyhood in the deriua- 


tion from the Latine. . . . They are a craftie & Subtill beast, biting :uddently them 
that passe by them. . . . When she hath bitten, with her forked or twisted tongue 
shee infuseth her poyson. . . . S. Jerom saith, that when the Adder is thirstie and 


goeth to drinke, she first of all at the waterside casteth up her venome, least that by 
drinking it descend into her bowels and so destroy herself, but after she hath drunke, 
she licketh it up againe; even as a souldiour re-armed after he was disarmed. 

122. Adder, Spider] DowpEN: Could Shakespeare have written atter-spider, 
poisonous spider, remembering the word ‘atter-cop,’ spider? 

122. Spider] BATMAN vppon Bartholome (Lib. xviii, chap. ii, p. 345, verso): 
The venimous spinner is called Aranea, and is a worme that hath that name of feed- 
ing & nourishing of the aire, as Isidore sayth, and spinneth long thrids in short time, 
and is alway busie about weauing, and ceaseth neuer of trauaile. . . . The biting 
of the spinner that is called Spalangio, is venemous and slaieth, except there be 
remedie and succour the sooner: but the vertue of Plantaine slayeth the venyme 
thereof, if it be laid thereto in due manner . . . a maner spinner is called Spalana 

. and his smiting is more bitter and more sore, than the biting of the serpent 
Vipera. . . . Also another spinner is rough with a great head; . . . and by his 
biting the knees shake and fayleth, and also of his biting commeth blyndnes and 
spewing. [Thus far Bartholome. Batman hereupon adds, on his own authority, a 
gentle gird as Irishmen:] (Besides this large discourse of spiders, it hath been 
reported, that in Ireland be many spiders, and some verye great, and that being 
eaten of the Irishmen, have not performed any shewe of venime: it may be that 
the greater poyson subdueth the lesse.)—TopsELt (Hist. of Serpents, p. 246): 
All Spyders are venomous, but yet some more, some lesse. . . . The most dangerous 
& harmful Spyders are called Phalangia, if they byte any one, (for they never strike) 
their poyson is by experience found to be so perrillous, as that there wil a notable 
great swelling immediately follow thereupon. ... There is another kind of 
Phalangium Spyder . . . of a passing deepe redde colour, and counted far worser 
then the blew-Spyder, although the azure or blew-spyder onely by touching doth 
infect with poyson, and will breake any Christall glasse, if it runne ouer it though 
neuer so speedily, or doe but touch it in glauncing wise. [Topsell devotes more 
than fifteen folio pages to The Spyder. Let not the reader, however, suppose that 
all of them are filled with these terrifying details; on six or seven are set forth the 
virtues of ‘The Tame or House-Spider’—‘a very gallant and excellent wise crea- 
ture.’ I have merely selected a few sentences from the accounts of the worst~ 
species, that some idea may be gained of the horrible reputation which finds an 
echo in the following passages, which I gather from Bartlett’s Concordance—to 
which and to Schmidt’s Lexicon so many editors are indebted for their parallel 


ACTIV, SC. ii. CYMBELINE 207 


Nay, to thy meere Confufion, thou fhalt know 125 
I am Sonne to’th’Queene. 

Gut. Iam forry for’t : not feeming 
So worthy as thy Birth. 

Clot. Art not afeard ? 

Gut. Thofe that I reuerence, thofe I feare : the Wife: 130 
At Fooles I laugh : not feare them. 

Clot, Dye the death: 
When I haue flaine thee with my proper hand 
Ile follow thofe that euen now fled hence : 


d 


And on the Gates of Luds- Towne fet your heads: 135 
Yeeld Rufticke Mountaineer. Fight and Exeunt. 
Lnter Belarius and Aruragus. 137 
126, 127. I am| I’m Pope,+, Steev. Sta. Glo. Cam. 
Varr. Knt, Coll. Sta. Sing. Dyce it, ili, 131. laugh:] laugh, FF, et seq. 
Ktly. 132. death:] death! Theob.+, Sta. 
129. afeard| afraid Rowe,+. 134. hence:] hence, Rowe et seq. 
130, 131. Mnemonic Pope, Warb. 136. Rujfticke] Om. Han. 
130. feare:| F2. fear, F;F,, Rowe, Scene tv. Pope, Han. Warb. 


Han. Johns. Var. ’21, Coll. i, ii, Dyce, Johns. 


examples. Leontes, in Wint. Tale, exclaims, ‘There may be in the cup A spider 
steep’d, and one may drink; depart, And yet partake no venom, . . . but if one 
present Th’ abhorred ingredient to his eye, make known How he hath drunk, he 
cracks his gorge, his sides With violent hefts. J have drunk and seen the spider.’— 
II, i, 40 (54 of this ed.). Anne, in Richard the Third, prays ‘More direful hap betide 
that hated wretch . . . Than I can wish to adders, spiders, toads, Or any creeping 
venom’d thing that lives!’—I, ii, 19. (Note the same triplet as in Cymbeline.) 
King Richard thus apostrophises his native land: ‘Feed not thy soverign’s foe, 
my gentle earth, Nor with they sweets confort his ravenous sense; But let thy 
spiders, that suck up they venom, And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way. . . . 
And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower, Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking 
adder Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch Throw death upon thy 
soverign’s enemies.’—Rich. JT: TI, ii, 12. (Again the triplet.).—En.] 

125. meere] In its derivative Latin sense: pure, unmixed, unqualified. 

132. Dye the death] JonNson: This seems to be a solemn phrase for death 
inflicted by law.—Note on Meas. for Meas., II, iv, 165, and quoted in NV. E. D.— 
W. A. WricHt: Generally but not uniformly applied to death inflicted by law; 
for instance, it is apparently an intensive phrase in Sackville’s Induction, line 35: 
‘Tt taught me well all earthly things be borne To dye the death.’ Shakespeare, 
however, uses the expression always of a judicial sentence. Cf. Ant. & Cleop., IV, 
xiv, 26: ‘She hath betray’d me and shall die the death.’ Even when Cloten says 
to Guiderius ‘Die the death,’ he looks upon himself as the executioner of a judicial 
sentence in killing an outlaw. See Matthew, xv, 4.—Note on Midsummer N. Dream, 
I, i, 74 (of this present edition). 

133. proper hand] Aszorr (§ 16): That is, ‘with my own hand,’ as in French. 

135. the Gates of Luds-Towne] See III, i, 30. 


298 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acr Iv, sc. il. 


Bel. No Companie’s abroad ? 138 
Arui. None in the world : you did miftake him fure. 
Bel. cannot tell : Long is it fince I faw him, 140 


But Time hath nothing blurr’d thofe lines of Fauour 
Which then he wore: the fnatches in his voice, 
And burft of fpeaking were as his : I am abfolute 
’Twas very Cloten. 
Arut. In this place we left them ; 145 
I wifh my Brother make good time with him, 
You fay he is fo fell. 


Bel. Being fcarfe made vp, 148 
138. Companie’s] F,. companies Glo. 139. him fure] him, sure Theob. 
Cam. Company’s F;F, et cet. Warb. et seq. 
abroad?| Ff, Glo. Cam. abroad, 142. wore] wrote Pope. 
Cap. abroad. Rowe et cet. 143. I am] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. 
140-143. I cannot tell ...I1 am absolute] VAUGHAN (480): ‘I cannot 


tell’ is contradicted by ‘I am absolute.’ Belarius, however, is, in truth, thinking 
aloud; and each act of memory and reflection, which his speech indicates, leads him 
further from the doubt with which he commenced his speech, until at last he 
flatly contradicts it. But the passage is so punctuated as both to conceal this 
fact and to show that the speech is not thoroughly understood. [To render it 
‘thoroughly understood’ Vaughan proposes punctuation which differs from that 
before us merely by substituting a comma and dash for the colon after ‘cannot 
tell,” and by putting a full stop at the end of the line after ‘him,’ and a comma 
after ‘Fauour.’ I can find no editors who have thought it worth while to elucidate 
a passage which, whatever its punctuation or even with no punctuation at all, can 
fail to be understood. I suppose all deemed that a note thereon would be mere 
food for babes. What means Vaughan had for knowing that ‘the speech is not 
thoroughly understood’ it is not easy to imagine.—Ep.] 

141. lines of Fauour] This is nearly equivalent to Cloten’s own expression 
in the preceding scene where he speaks of ‘the Lines of my body.’ ‘Favour’ may, 
possibly, refer more especially to the features.—Ep. 

142. the snatches in his voice] DowpEN: Catches, seizures, meaning, I 
think, a violent check in speech, which is followed by a ‘burst of speaking.’ I know 
of no other example; but the Scottish and Irish word ‘ganch,’ verb and substantive, 
means as verb to stammer, and as substantive a snatch at anything, which illus- 
trates the double meaning. [Fluellen, in describing Bardolph to King Henry, says 
‘his lips blows at his nose. —Hen. V: III, vi, 113.—Ep.] 

143. burst of speaking] JoHNson: This is one of our Author’s strokes of 
observation. An abrupt and tumultuous utterance very frequently accompanies 
a confused and cloudy understanding. 

146. make good time with him] Ecctrs: That is, make good use or advan- 
tage of the time. 

148. Being scarse made vp] IncLtEBy: That is, imperfectly developed; 
as we say—‘not all there.” Cf Rich. III: I, i, 21, ‘scarce half made up.’ Cloten 
was then but a youth, though now a middle-aged man.— VAUGHAN (p. 480): Theo- 


ACT IV, SC. 11:} 


CYMBELINE 299 


I meane to man; he had not apprehenfion 
Of roaring terrors : For defect of iudgement 150 


Is oft the caufe of Feare. 


Enter Guiderius. 


But fee thy Brother. 


149. man;| man, Theob. et seq. 


150. roaring] daring Han. warring 
Bailey. 
150, 151. defect..caufe] th effect... 


cause Theob. Varr. Ran. Steev. Var. 
’o3, 713, Coll. i, Wh. Glo. defect...cure 
Han. Mal. Var. ’21, Coll. ii, Dyce, Sing. 
Hal. defect...sauce Sta.  defect...cease 
Herr, Sprengel, Dowden, Dtn, Vaun. 


153 


ap. Cam. reflex of...cause Bulloch ap. 
Cam. 
150. defect of] defective Coll. conj. 
151, 153. As one line, Rowe et seq. 
151-153. Feare....Brother.| fearless- 
ness. But see! Thy brother. Elze. 
152. Enter...] After line 153, Rowe. 
Enter...with Cloten’s Head. Theob. 
Re-enter... Cap. 


defect...salve Cartwright. act of...cause 153. fee thy] see, thy Theob. Warb. et 
Crosby, Huds.  defect...Joss Nicholson seq. 


bald does not correctly explain this passage [see next note] when he says ‘Being 
scarce then at man’s estate,’ etc. Shakespeare was describing rather a constitutional 
than a temporary peculiarity of Cloten, and intended to say, that being hardly 
endowed with the full measure of human qualities, he lacked the power of appre- 
ciating the most terrible dangers. The ‘making up’ of Shakespeare is the pre-natal 
completeness rather than the post-natal maturity. So in Rich. ITJ., ‘Sent before 
my time Into this breathing world, scarce half made up.’—1, i, 21. It is consonant 
with this that Belarius says of him hereafter that there might be a report in London 
of their wild life: ‘Which he hearing, As it is like him, might break out and swear 
He’d fetch us in.’ Belarius would not have argued this from what he had been to 
what he now was, if what he had been was the effect entirely or mainly of youth, 
and therefore transient —THISELTON (p. 38): The passage from Rich. IIT, quoted 
by Vaughan, might be regarded as negativing his interpretation, for the addition 
here of ‘I meane to man’ may be designed to exclude it. It seems better, then, to 
take Belarius as referring to the time when Cloten was scarcely full grown. Cf. 
‘T saw him not these many yeares,’ line 89; and ‘Many yeeres (Though Cloten then 
but young), you see, not wore him From my remembrance.’—IV, iv, 31. Unless 
Belarius remembered Cloten as nearly full grown, he would scarcely have recognised 
him after ‘twenty years’ (III, iii, 76). (It may be mentioned, by the way, that as- 
suming Cloten to have been, say, 17 years of age when Belarius last saw him before, 
he will now be 37; and since he himself says that he is ‘no lesse young’ than Posthu- 
mus (IV, i, 12), Posthumus must be at least that age, while it is natural to conclude 
that Imogen is considerably younger.) [For the conclusion of Thiselton’s remarks, 
see the next note.|—Downen: I think the meaning is ‘ Being congenitally half a fool.’ 

149-151. he had not . . . cause of Feare] Turosatp: If I understand this 
passage, it is mock-reasoning as it stands, and the text must have been slightly cor- 
rupted. Belarius is giving a description of what Cloten formerly was, and in answer 
to what Arviragus says of ‘his being so fell.’ ‘Ay,’ says Belarius, ‘he was so fell, and 
being scarce then at man’s estate, he had no apprehension of roaring terrors,’ 7. e., 
of anything that could check him with fears. But then, how does the inference 
come in, built upon this? For defect of judgement is oft the cause of fear. I think 
the Poet means to have said the mere contrary. Cloten was defective in judge- 


300 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT Iv, SC. il. 


[149-151. he had not . . . cause of Feare] 


ment, and therefore did not fear. Apprehensions of fear grow from a judgement in 
weighing dangers. And a very easy change, from the traces of the letters, gives us 
this sense, and reconciles the reasoning of the whole passage: ‘For th’effect of judge- 
ment,’ etc.—JoHNSON: Sir T. Hanmer reads with equal justness of sentiment: ‘the 
defect of judgement Is oft the cure of fear.’ But, I think, the play of ‘effect’ and 
‘cause’ more resembling the manner of our Author.—CAPELL (p. 115): ‘For defect 
of judgement,’ etc. This is a true maxim; and the editor has, upon this very occasion, 
proved the truth of it in himself; for, while he feared to be too free with his Author, 
he has run into an absurdity. The pointing of both Folios led him to think the speech 
incompleat; and then he knew there were many ways of ending it so as to make the 
reasoning consistent; but he now sees that this cannot be admitted: the sentence 
is compleat, though the speech were not; and we ought not to suppose that such a 
writer as Shakespeare could break off with what has the face of an inference, and yet 
is contrary to the premises it is drawn from. It follows, then, that the speech is 
compleat; the Folio pointing wrong, and some word in the sentence. The best 
amendment that offers is [Hanmer’s]—To tet: If ‘fear, as in other passages of 
Shakespeare, be understood in an active signification for what may cause fear, it 
means that Cloten’s defect of judgement caused him to commit actions to the terror 
of others, without due consideration of his own danger therein. Thus in 2 Hen. IV: ‘all 
these bold fears, Thou see’st with peril I have answered.’ [IV,v, 197.}—MAtone: It 
is undoubtedly true that defect of judgement, or not rightly estimating the degree of 
danger, and the means of resistance, is often the cause of fear, as he who maturely 
weighs all circumstances will know precisely his danger; while the inconsiderate 
is rash and fool-hardy, but neither of these assertions, however true, can account for 
Cloten’s having no apprehension of roaring terrors; and therefore the passage must 
be corrupt. [As to Theobald’s correction] I do not think it probable that Shake- 
speare would say the effect was the cause; nor do I think the effect and the defect 
likely to have been confounded. I have, therefore, adopted Hanmer’s emendation. 
—Knicat reads, ‘Being scarce made up, I mean to man, he had not apprehension 
Of roaring terrors, for defect of judgement, As oft the cause of fear’; and notes, 
‘we adopt the very ingenious suggestion of the author of a pamphlet printed at 
Edinburgh, 1814, entitled, ‘Explanations and Emendations of some passages in the 
Text of Shakespeare,” etc. In this reading of As for “Is,” Belarius says that 
Cloten, before he arrived at man’s estate, had not apprehension of terrors on 
account of defect of judgement, which defect is often the cause of fear.—Drttus: 
Possibly Knight’s emendation should be adopted as far at least as that ‘as oft the 
cause of fear’ should refer only to ‘judgement.’—StyuitEs (N. & Q., I, xi, 278, April, 
1855): It appears to me that ‘judgement’ (not the want of it) is represented as ‘oft 
the cause of fear,’ and that the sentence ought to be read as meaning that ‘Cloten 
had not apprehension of terror, on account of his want of a quality, judgement; 
which, however good in other respects, is often a cause of fear.’ In this view ‘as’ 
[Knights’ reading] signifies ‘as being,’ and is the adverb which puts ‘judgement’ and 
‘cause’ in opposition.—H. C. K. (Ibid., p. 359, May, 1855) opines that Belarius had 
not finished what he was saying when the entrance of Guiderius caused him to 
stop abruptly; he therefore suggests a dash after ‘fear,’ and thinks that ‘Shake- 
speare gives his hearers credit for being able to fill up what remains unuttered by 
Belarius.’ He himself suggests, ‘but it is a fear of imaginary more than of real 
dangers.’—WauItE (ed. i.): Hanmer read cure, regardless of the incongruity between 


ACT IV, SC: il. } CYMBELINE 301 


[149-151. he had not . . . cause of Feare] 


a negative condition and an active remedial agent.—Dvce (ed. ii.) characterises this 
note of White as ‘over-subtle.—Sraunton: The old text has ‘the cause of fear,’ 
the direct opposite of which is meant. The difficulty appears to be attributable 
to a very common metathesis; the letters s and c being displaced. Sauce, which 
we take to have been the Poet’s word, is used here in the sense of a corrective or 
antidote, as in Tro. & Cress.: ‘His folly sauced with discretion.’—I, ii. In the same 
way Shakespeare occasionally employs the word ‘physic.’ ‘The labour we delight 
in physics pain.—Macb., III, iti—mHarrrwett: Hanmer’s emendation is the 
best which has been suggested—The Camprincr Eprrors: Since none of the pro- 
posed emendations are satisfactory, we leave this passage as it stands in the Folio. 
Possibly, as some editors have suggested, the Author may, through inadvertence, 
have said the reverse of what he meant. Or a whole line, ending with the word 
‘judgement,’ may have dropped out, and the original sentence may have been 
to the following purport: ‘for defect of judgement supplies the place of courage, 
while true judgement is oft the cause of fear.—IncLEBy (Am. Bibliopolist, Oct.., 
1876) says, in substance, that all commentators have taken ‘defect of judgement’ 
as meaning the total absence of judgement, whereas it means the defective use of judge- 
ment. They were misled also by interpreting ‘scarce made up to man’ as if it 
referred to Cloten’s youth, whereas Cloten was a middle-aged man. The phrase, 
“made up to man,’ really signified: in the full possession of man’s judgement. 
Cloten, being ‘scarce made up,’ took no heed of terrors and thus braved danger; 
for it is the defective use of judgement which is oft the cause of fear.—ROLFE 
quotes Ingleby with approval—HeErr (p. 140): ‘The cause of fear’ is undoubt- 
edly erroneous; the direct opposite is clearly meant to be expressed. It is an 
allusion to Cloten, whose weak or defective judgement blinded him to true danger; 
whereas had he possessed a sound judgement, it would have better taught him to 
realise his peril, and thus, possibly, have restrained him from venturing alone 
among ‘outlaws and villain mountaineers.’ The textual error lies in the word 
‘cause,’ which should give way to cease. That is, ‘for defect of judgement often 
produces the lack of fear’: just as sometimes with children and fools, who, 
being deficient in judgement, do not know when and where to look for, or ward off, 
danger, and thus rush frequently into it. [Herr gives many examples of cease.]J— 
SPENCE (NV. & Q., VI, i, 91, Jan., 1880) regards ‘being scarce made up’ as referring 
to Cloten. Guiderius, with the rashness of youth, would rush into danger; and 
Cloten was specially to be dreaded, because he was little other than a maniac, with 
a maniac’s supernatural bodily strength—Hvupson: The meaning clearly is that 
Cloten, before he grew to manhood, was too thick-skulled to be sensible of the 
loudest, that is, the most evident or most threatening dangers. But a foolhardy 
boldness, springing from sheer dulness or paralysis of judgement, is no uncommon 
thing —TutsELTon: The force of this passage may, then, be ‘you may expect him 
to be “fell,” for at an age when lack of judgement, springing from inexperience, 
usually gives rise, in the presence of “roaring terrors,” to fear which further ex- 
perience shows to be unjustified, he was absolutely unaffected by them.’ . . . The 
conjecture cease for ‘cause’ is peculiarly unfortunate, for surely Belarius is not 
referring to the cessation of what has once been in existence, but rather an absence 
of fear from the first—DowpbEN: We may interpret, ‘You have just grounds to 
be anxious about Guiderius, for a half rational creature, like Cloten, is often to be 
dreaded.’ Compare Cor., IV, vii, 39-47, where it is suggested that ‘defect of judge- 


302 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. il. 


Gui. This Cloten was a Foole, an empty purfe, 
There was no money in’t : Not Hercules 
Could haue knock’d out his Braines, for he had none : 
Yet I not doing this, the foole had borne 
My head, as I do his. 

Bel. What haft thou done? 

Gui. Iam perfeét what : cut off one Clotens head, 
Sonne to the Queene (after his owne report ) 
Who call’d me Traitor, Mountaineer, and fwore 
With his owne fingle hand heel’d take vs in, 
Difplace our heads, where (thanks the Gods) they grow 
And fet them on Luds-Towne. 


155 


160 


165 


154. Foole,| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce, June, 1873). traitor mountaineer, Ingl. 


Sta. Glo. Cam. fool; Johns. et cet. 
purfe,| purse; Ecl. Coll. ii, Glo. 
Cam. 
perfect] perfect, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Varr. Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt. 
161. report)| report, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
report; Theob. Warb. et seq. 
162. Traitor, Mountaineer,| traitor, 
mountaineer; Cap. et seq. traitor- 
mountainer Sta. conj. (Atheneum, 14 


conj. 
163. fingle] Om. F3;F,, Rowe. 
vs in,| us in; Theob. Warb. 


Johns. 
164. (thanks the Gods)| F2. thanks to 
th'Gods ¥;F, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 


Han. Warb. Cap. Mal. thanks ye Gods, 
Johns. thank the gods Var. ’73 et cet. 
165. Luds-Towne] Luds’ gate Cap. 
conj. Lud’s-town gates Sta. conj. 
(Atheneum, 14 June, 1873). 


ment’ in Coriolanus ‘made him fear’d.’ 


But the run of the passage makes it 


probable that these words assign a reason for the absence of fear in Cloten. I 


still think that the proposal cease, which I made, independently of others, in the 
Parchment Shakespeare, is not unhappy.—Craic: This passage, I think, must be 
wrong. The conjecture cease seems most happy. [Belarius is giving the reasons 
why Cloten is so ‘fell.’ He is a fool, and that fools are the cause of fear is as old 
as Solomon: ‘A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fool’s wrath is heavier 
than them both.’—Proverbs, xxvii, 3.—Ep.] 

156. Braines, for he had none] STEEVENS: Compare, ‘Hector shall have a 
great catch, if he knock out either of your brains, a’ were as good crack a fusty 
nut with no kernel.’—Tro. & Cress., II, i, 111. 

160. I am perfect what] Jonnson: I am well-informed, what. So, in this 
play, ‘I am perfect, that the Pannonians ... are now in Armes.’—III, i, 80. 
[This can hardly be called one of Dr. Johnson’s happiest definitions. The word, 
however, needs none.—Ep.] 

163. heel’d take vs in] Jounson: To ‘take in’ was the phrase in use for 
to apprehend an outlaw, or to make him amenable to public justice —STEEVENS: 
To ‘take in’ means, simply, to conquer, to subdue. Soin Ant. & Cleop., ‘quickly 
cut the Ionian sea, And take in Toryne.’—III, vii, 24—Matone: Cloten had not 
threatened to render these outlaws ‘amenable to justice,’ but to kill them with 
his own hand. See line 133, above. In line 185 ‘fetch us in’ is used in the sense 
assigned by Dr Johnson to the present phrase. 


ACT IV, SC. ii.] CYMBELINE 303 
Bel. Weare all vndone. 166 


Git. Why, worthy Father, what haue we to loofe, 
But that he fwore to take, our Liues ? the Law 
Protects not vs, then why fhould we be tender, 
To let an arrogant peece of fteth threat vs ? 170 
Play lud ge, and Executioner, all himfelfe ? 
For we do feare the Law. What company 
Difcouer you abroad ? 


Bel. No fingle foule 
Can we fet eye on : but in all fafe reafon 175 
He muft haue fome Attendants. Though his Honor 
Was nothing but mutation, I, and that 77. 


m.! 166. We are] We’re Pope,+, Dyce ii, Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. himself?...the 
ili. law? Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. himself;... 
167. loofe,| F2F;. lose Dyce ii, iii. the law? Mal. Steev. Varr. Sing. 


lose, F, et cet. 

168. that] what Pope,+. 

take, our] F,. take our F,F,. 

169. not vs,] not us; Pope et seq. 

170. vs?] us Johns. ws; Mal. Steev. 
Var. Knt, Coll. Sing. ws, Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. 

171,172. himfelfe?...the Law.] Theob. 


172. do feare| dof here Warb. conj. 
(N. & Q., VIII, iii, 263). 

175. on:] Ff, Rowe,+, Dyce, Glo. 
Cam. on, Cap. et cet. 

176. Honor] F:. Honour F,F,, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. i, Warb. Varr. Mal. 
humour Theob. ii. et cet. 

177. mutation,| Ff, Rowe,+, Knt, 


Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. mutation; Cap. 
eL cet: 
T,] ay, Rowe. 


Warb. himfelfe?..no Law. Fi, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Cap. shimself...the law 
Johns. simself...the law? Knt, Coll. 


170. an arrogant peece of flesh] Feste says, ‘thou wert as pretty a piece 
of Eve’s flesh as any in IIlyria.—Twelfth Night, 1, v, 30—DOWDEN quotes Dog- 
berry, who says that he himself is ‘as pretty a piece of flesh as any in Messina.’— 
Much Ado, IV, ii, 85. 

172. For] Other examples of ‘for’ used as here, in the sense of because, may be 
found in ABBort, § 151; but this special sense is not needed by those editors who 
adopt the text of F., which Hunter (ii, 297) says is ‘clearly the true reading.’ 
A majority of the best editors do not, however, agree with him.—DEIGHTON thus 
interprets the text before us: ‘We do not enjoy the protection of the law; then 
why should we be of such tender conscience as to let an arrogant lump of clay 
like this threaten us, act the part of judge and executioner all in one, simply be- 
cause of our respect for law?’ z. e., we do not enjoy the benefits of the law, why 
should we submit to insults, etc., which those who do enjoy them are bound to 
submit to; why not take the law into our own hands, seeing it will not help us to 
redress?—[In the Text. Notes Capell’s text is correctly set down as following Rowe. 
In his Errata, however, he withdraws it, and anticipates the Var. ’78.—Ep.] 

176, 177. his Honor Was nothing but mutation] THEoBaLp: What has his 
‘Honor’ to do here, in his being changeable in this sort? in his acting as a madman 
or not? I have ventured to substitute kwmour; and the meaning seems plainly 
this: ‘Tho’ he was always fickle to the last degree, and governed by Humour, not 
sound sense; yet not madness itself could make him so hardy as to attempt an 


THE TRAGEDIE OF [act Iv, SC. ii. 


304 

From one bad thing to worfe : Not Frenzie, 178 
Not abfolute madneffe could fo farre haue rau’d 

To bring him heere alone : although perhaps 180 


It may be heard at Court, that such as wee 

Caue heere, hunt heere, are Out-lawes, and in time 

May make fome ftronger head, the which he hearing, 

(As it is like him) might breake out, and {weare 

Heel’d fetch vs in, yet is’t not probable 185 
To come alone, either he fo vndertaking, 

Or they fo fuffering : then on good ground we feare, 

If we do feare this Body hath a taile 


More perillous then the head. 189 
178,179. From...Not] One line, Cap. 183. head,| head: Pope et seq. 
et seq. 185. Heel’d] F.. Held F;3, Glo. 
178. worfe:] worse, Knt, Sta. Cam. Cam. “He'd Eyet cet: 
Not Frenzie,| yet not his frenzy, in,| Ff, Coll. in; Rowe et cet. 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 186. To] He’ld Daniel. 
179. Not] Nor Han. ii. either he fo] either fo F;F,, Rowe. 
madneffe]| madness, Pope,+, nor he so Pope,+. 
Coll. 187-190. Three lines, ending: ground 
180. alone:] alone F2. alone,. F3Fy, ...hath...Ord’ nance Vaun. 
Rowe. _ 187. Or] Nor Pope,+. 


182. hunt] haunt F;F,, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. 


we| I Theob. ii, Warb. 
188. feare] fear, Theob. Warb. 


enterprise of this nature alone, and unseconded.’ The like mistake of ‘honor’ 
for humour had taken place in a passage of The Merry Wives, I, iii, 92, which I cor- 
rected from the sanction of the old Qto.—WarpurTon: The text is right, and 
means that the only notion he had of honour was the fashion, which was per- 
petually changing—Mason (p. 334): The sense absolutely requires Theobald’s 
amendment. Belarius is speaking of Cloten’s disposition, not of his principles; 
and this agrees with what Imogen calls him, at the end of this scene, ‘that zrregu- 
lous devil, Cloten.—MatoneE: What decisively entitles Theobald’s amendment to 
a place in the text is [the example from The Merry Wives, cited above.] Again, in 
the Qto of Rom. & Jul., 1597, we find, ‘Pursued my honor not pursueing his.’ 
And again, immediately afterwards: ‘Black and portentous must this honor prove.’ 
—TuisEtton: A nobleman,—who would be referred to as ‘his Honor,’—might, 
of course, be expected under the circumstances to be not unaccompanied by at- 
tendants.—PorTER-CLaRKE also hold that by ‘his Honor’ Cloten is meant,— 
‘a title all the more scornful that it is untrue in itself and denotes nothing but the 
respect his rank gives him.’ They may be right.—Ep. 

185. Heel’d fetch vs in] See line 162, ‘heel’d take vs in.’ 

186. either] ‘Perhaps, in some measure,’ says WALKER (Vers., 103), ‘all words 
in -ther are frequently used as monosyllables, or so nearly such that in a metrical 
point of view they may be regarded as monosyllables. Some, as whether, were 
undoubtedly contracted, whe’r. This usage is more frequent in some words than 
in others, e.'g., in whether than in hither, whither, etc. Either occurs not unfre- 
quently even in the unaccented places.’ 


ACTLTV SCs. i. | 


Arut. Let Ord’nance 


CYMBELINE 305 


190 


Come as the Gods fore-fay it : howfoere, 


My Brother hath done well. 
Lel. had no minde 


To hunt this day : The Boy Fideles fickneffe 


Did make my way long forth. 
Guz. With his owne Sword, 


195 


Which he did waue againft my throat, I haue tane 
His head from him: Ile throw’t into the Creeke 
Behinde our Rocke, and let it to the Sea, 


And tell the Fifhes, hee’s the Queenes Sonne, Cloten, 


That’s all I reake. 


Bel. J feare ’twill be reueng’d: 


190. Ord’nance] Fi, Sta. ordinance 
Pope et cet. 
191. Come] Come, F;F,, Rowe,+. 
fore-fay it:] F.. fore-fay it, 
F;F,. foresay it, Rowe, Pope. foresay 
a; Dheob: et cet: 


200 
Exit. 
202 


199. Rocke,] Fi, Rowe, Johns. Cam. 
rock; Pope et cet. 
200. And tel}] To tell Anon. ap. Cam. 
Cloten,] Cloten. Pope,+. Clo- 
ten: Cap. et seq. 


201. reake] FF; reak F,, Rowe. 


197. I haue] I’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, reck Pope et seq. 
iii. 202. reueng’d:| reveng’d. Johns. 


190. Ord’nance] Murray (NV. £. D.): That which is ordained or decreed by the 
Deity or Fate. [Present passage here quoted.] 

191. fore-say] Murray (NV. £. D.) defines this word by ‘to say beforehand,’ 
‘foretell,’ ‘predict.—DOowbEN suggests, and I agree with him, that it here means 
‘to determine,’ ‘will,’ rather than ‘predict.’ 

193-194. I had no minde To hunt this day] Eccies: Belarius seems to 
regret his having been induced to depart from home, as if the misfortune he laments 
had been the consequence of his absence from thence, when it is evident, from their 
first appearance in this scene, together with Imogen, when they were only prepar- 
ing to set out, they have never departed from the cave, except during the short 
period while he and Arviragus go out to search for the companions of Cloten; and 
the latter goes off fighting with Guiderius and Cloten is killed. This appears 
to have been a very unaccountable oversight in the writer. [Where is the ‘over- 
sight’? It is a dramatic necessity that they should be as near as may be to the 
cave.—ED.] 

195. Did make my way long forth] Jounson: Fidele’s sickness made my 
walk forth from the cave tedious. 

198. throw’t into the Creeke] DowpENn’s comment on ‘Creeke,’ that it 
‘probably means a “stream,” see line 238,’ sounds strange enough to us Americans, 
to whom ‘creek,’ as the designation of a small stream, is familiar enough. What 
are ‘rivers’ in England, such as the Thames, would be probably here called ‘creeks.’ 
‘Gunpowder Creek,’ which every traveller in the cars from the North to Washing- 
ton crosses, is five thcusand one hundred feet wide,—that is, almost exactly a 
mile.—Eb. 


20 


306 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT Iv, SC. 1. 


Would (Polidore) thou had’ft not done’t : though valour 203 
Becomes thee well enough. 
Arui.. Would I had done’t : 205 
So the Reuenge alone purfu’de me : Polidore 
I loue thee brotherly, but enuy much 
Thou haft robb’d me of this deed: I would Reuenges 
That poffible ftrength might meet, wold feek vs through 
And put vs to our anfwer. 210 
Bel. Well, ’tis done: 
Wee’l hunt no more to day, nor feeke for danger! 
Where there’s no profit. I prythee to our Rocke, 
You and Fidele play the Cookes : Ie ftay 


Till hafty Polidore returne, and bring him 215 
To dinner prefently. 
Arut. Poore ficke /idele. 217 
203. Would] Woul F,. et cet. 
203, 206, 215. Polidore] Paladour 208. Thou haft] Thou’st Pope,+. 
Theob.+, Cap. Reuenges] revenges, Cap. et seq. 
203. done’t:] Ff, Rowe. done’t, Coll. 209. wold] F2 would F3F,. 
done’t! Pope et cet. through| F.F;, Knt, Glo. Cam. 


205. done’t:] done’t, F,, Rowe et seq. thro’, Rowe ii,+, through, F, et 
206. me:] Ff, Rowe. me. Coll. me! cet. 


Pope et cet. 213. I prythee| Pr’ythee Pope, Theob. 
207. brotherly,| Fi, Rowe,+, Coll. Han. Warb. Hie, prythee Ingl. conj. 
Glo. Cam. brotherly; Cap. et cet. Rocke,| rock; Cap. et seq. 
much] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, 217. Poore|] Pore F2. 
Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. much, Theob. Fidele.] Fidele! Rowe et seq. 


208, 209. Reuenges That possible strength might meet] Jonnson: Such 
pursuit of vengeance as fell within any possibility of opposition—VAuUGHAN 
(p. 484): I should expound, ‘I would that such a punishing force would seek us 
out as the full amount of strength which it is possible for any three men to possess 
could cope with.’ It is the strength, and not the ‘meeting’ or ‘opposition,’ which 
is ‘possible.’ But the passage would be more suggestive of its own meaning if 
read, as not improbably it was written, thus: ‘That possible strength might meet, 
would seek us three, And put us,’ etc. Polydore wishes first to have done the deed 
himself that he might answer for it alone; then he wishes that as Polydore [Qu. 
Guiderius?] has done it, so many as the possible strength of three could meet, 
might call the three to answer for it. ‘To seek us through’ for ‘to find us’ is not, 
so far as I am aware, an expression proper to this age or to Shakespeare: ‘Seek us 
out’ would be the right phrase. ‘Seek out’ occurs twenty times in the sense here 
necessary to apply; to ‘seek through’ in the same sense occurs, I believe, nowhere. 
‘Three’ in Shakespeare’s MS. might be misread or misprinted ‘thro.’ ‘Three’ 
is needed to give meaning to ‘possible strength.’ Two such wishes are as noble 
as the character which gives speech to them. 


INET ‘ate, Geb stG]| CYMBELINE 307 


Ile willingly to him, to gaine his colour, 218 
I'd let a parith of fuch Clotens blood, 
And praife my felfe for charity. Exit. 220 


Bel. Oh thou Goddeffe, 
Thou diuine Nature ; thou thy felfe thou blazon’ft 
In thefe two Princely Boyes : they are as gentle 


As Zephires blowing below the Violet, 224 
218. to him,| him; Rowe et seq. 85. Nature; thy Fi. Nature! thy 
his| him Daniel. Rowe. Nature! how thy Pope et cet. 
21g. Il’d] F.. Ild F;, Glo. Cam. 223. Boyes:| boys? Pope. boys! 
Fil Var. 85. I’d F, et cet. Theob. et seq. 
parifh| marish Warb. Han. 223-233. Mnemonic Pope, Warb. 
220. charity.| charity, Ff. 224. Zephires| zephyrs Rowe. Zephyr 


222. Nature; thou thy] Var. ’73, ’78, Blair ap. Cam. 


218. to gaine his colour] STEEVENS: That is, to restore him to the bloom of 
health, to recall the colour of it into his cheeks. 

219g. Il’d let a parish of such Clotens blood] WarsurtTon: This non- 
sense should be corrected thus, ‘I’d let a marish,’ etc., 7. e., a marsh or lake. So 
Smith, in his account of Virginia, ‘Yea, Venice, at this time the admiration of 
the earth, was at first but a marish, inhabited by poor fishermen.’—JoHNSON: The 
learned commentator has dealt the reproach of nonsense very liberally through 
this play. Why this is nonsense I cannot discover. I would, says the young 
Prince, to recover Fidele kill as many Cloten’s as would fill a ‘parish. —EpWwarps 
(p. 62): The sense of the passage is that I would bleed any number of such fellows 
as Cloten; not that I would let out a parish of blood; so that Mr Warburton may 
keep his marish to be inhabited, as he says Venice was, by poor fishermen, with- 
out letting it blood, which might make it agueish. But if the reader approves his 
‘correction’ it will lead us to another passage in V, v, 359, where in ‘hath More of 
thee merited, than a Band of Clotens Had euer scarre for’ we may read instead, 
‘than a pond of Clotens Had ever shore for.’ 

222. diuine] Accented on the first syllable; it precedes the noun. See also 
II, i, 56. 

222. Nature; thou thy selfe thou blazon’st] Popr’s change of ‘thou 
thyself’ to ‘how thyself’ was, through an unusual forgetfulness, claimed by MALongE, 
and also suggested as a new reading by MAson.— VAUGHAN (p. 486) asserts that it 
is wrong. ‘The line in the Folio should be retained, but thus punctuated: ‘Thou, 
divine Nature thou, thyself thou blazon’st.’ [The repetition of ‘thou’ three times, 
with ‘thyself’ thrown in between, in one line, sounds nautical,—like boxing the 
compass.—Eb.] 

224. blowing] In WALKER’s Versification (p. 119) there is an article which 
should be, I think, carefully avoided by all who believe that there is really such a 
thing as a well of English pure and undefiled. In it he promulgates the idea that 
words wherein a short vowel is preceded by a long one may be frequently con- 
tracted, and participles almost always. In the present instance he would have 
us pronounce ‘blowing’ as a monosyllable. How it can be done, without recourse 
to the speech of The Bowery or Whitechapel, it is not easy to see. But ha’ng laid 
down this jew’l of a rule he is able to regard some po’ms written by po’ts as un- 
dy’ng po’try.—Eb. 


308 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. il. 


Not wagging his fweet head ; and yet, as rough 225 

(Their Royall blood enchaf’d) as the rud’ft winde, 

That by the top doth take the Mountaine Pine, 

And make him ftoope to th’Vale. ’Tis wonder 

That an inuifible inftiné&t fhould frame them 

To Royalty vnlearn’d, Honor vntaught, 230 

Ciuility not feene from other : valour 

That wildely growes in them, but yeelds a crop 

As if it had beene fow’d : yet ftill it’s ftrange 

What CZotens being heere to vs portends, 

Or what his death will bring vs, 235 
Enter Guidereus. 


Gut. Where’s my Brother? 

I haye fent Clotens Clot-pole downe the ftreame, 238 
226. rud’ft] rude Pope, Han. rudest Varr. Dyce, Sing. 

Ktly, Glo. Cam. 231. other:] other, Johns. Coll. Ktly, 
228. th’Vale] ih’ Vaile F.F;. th’ Vail Glo. Cam. 


F,, Rowe. the vale Cap. et cet. 
’Tis| It is Nicholson ap. Cam. 
Vaun. 
wonder] wonderful Pope,+, Cap. 
Varr. Ran. Steev. Varr. Ktly. 
230. wnlearn’d,...vntaught,| unlearn’d; 


valour] F2, Johns. Coll. Glo. 
Cam. valour, F;F, et cet. 
233. fow’d:] sow’d. Pope,t+, Dyce, 
Glo. Cam. sow’d/ Cap. et cet. 
~ 234, 238. Clotens] Cloten’s Rowe. 
235. vs.] us? Pope. 


..untaught; Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. 238. Clot-pole] clotpoll Steev. et seq. 


227. by the top doth take the Mountaine Pine, etc.] Compare Anto- 
nio’s remonstrance: ‘You may as well forbid the mountain pines To wag their 
high tops and to make no noise. When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven.’ 
—Mer. of Ven., IV, i, 75.—See Ruskin’s note on the pine tree, IV, ii, 78. 

228. ’Tis wonder] WALKER (Crit., iii, 327): Of course,—wonderful. [Of 
course, Walker was unaware that Pope had anticipated him long before. Lerrrsom, 
in a foot-note, remarks, ‘Most subsequent editors, against the authority of the 
Folio, give “the vale” for “th’vale,” thus ruining the verse, which, in the old 
copies, is metrical as far as it goes, but obtaining ten syllables of prose.’ It was 
Capell, the unpitying foe of the abbreviated th’, who wrote ‘the’ in full. The 
original line is metrical, if we properly make allowance for a mora vacua after 
‘Vale.’—Ep.] 

229. inuisible instinct] WARBURTON: One not well acquainted with Shake- 
speare’s manner, in the licentiousness of his language and the profoundness of his 
sense, would be apt to think he wrote invincible, i. e., that bore down all before it.— 
Heatx (p. 484): That is, an instinct the cause of which was unknown, and which, 
therefore, could not be discovered, or even suspected, till it manifested itself 
on a sudden by its effects. The metre would be much improved by the slight 
transposition, ‘an instinct invisible. —MaLone: Probably Heath did not perceive 
that in Shakespeare’s time the accent was laid on the second syllable of the word 
‘instinct.’ So, ‘As if by some instinct the wretch did know.’—Sonn., 1, 7. 

238. Clotens Clot-pole] The grim jingle here is plain. Murray (WN. E. D.) 


ACE IV SC. 1s] CYMBELINE 309 


In Embaffie to his Mother; his Bodie’s hoftage 


For his returne. Solemn Mufick. 240 
Bel, My ingenuous Inftrument, 
(Hearke Polidore)it founds : but what occafion 


Hath Cadwal now to giue it motion? Hearke. 243 
239. Bodie’s] Bodies F;F,. Body’s et seq. 
Rowe. 242. Polidore] Paladour! Theob. 
hoftage] hoaftage F.. Warb. Johns. 
241. ingenuous| ingenious Rowe. founds:| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. 
Injflrument,| imstrument! Pope sounds! Cap. et cet. 


finds in 1606, in Tro. & Cress., ‘V’ll see you hanged, like clotpoles, ere I come 
any more to your tents.’—II, i, 128. Its earliest use, ‘a thick wooden head,’ is 
in the present passage. The word seems, therefore, to be a bantling of Shake- 
speare.—ED. 

241. ingenuous Instrument] HuNTER (ii, 297): Without having had the 
opportunity of investigating the history of the invention of the Atolian Harp, I 
believe that this is the instrument of which Belarius speaks, and which produced 
the ‘solemn music.’ ‘Hark, Polydore, it sounds!’ The instrument itself without 
the intervention of a player. ‘But what occasion Hath Cadwal now to give it 
motion? Hark!’ to open the box and expose the wires to the breeze, not to play 
upon it; for we are next informed, as if it were the Poet’s intention to show us that 
the instrument produced the music without the aid of any performer, that Cad- 
wal was gone. ‘Is he at home?’ ‘He went hence even now.’ And Imogen, the 
only other person who could have been playing on it, was dead, and is almost 
immediately afterwards brought in by Cadwal. It is to prepare us for this affect- 
ing incident that the music is introduced. There is further preparation in the 
reference to the death of Euryphile. I know not that this has ever before been 
. suggested, or that the passage has ever before been rightly explained.—WALKER 
(Crit., i, 100) quotes examples of the use of enginous by Webster, Dekker, and 
Middleton, and adds: ‘in Shakespeare, as in these examples, the meaning is, 
ingenio factum, artificial, constructed by art; write, therefore—postulante etiam meiro 
(for the elision of y in my is not in Shakespeare’s way)—enginous or inginous. . . 
Ingine or engine, as is well known by those conversant in our old writers, was used 
by them to denote a contrivance, whether in the form of an artifice or strategem, 
or of a weapon, instrument, or piece of machinery. From the former sense, we have 
the name Malengin in Spenser, F. Q., B. v, C. ix, St. v; and so understand Bacon, 
Essay on Superstition, “—the schoolmen were like astronomers, which did feign 
eccentrics and epicycles, and such engines of orbs, to save the phenomena, though 
they knew there were no such things”—devices. I find it used in the latter sense 
as late as the Pilgrim’s Progress, P. i., Christian’s visit to the House Beautiful,— 
“they also shewed him some of the engines with which some of his (their Lord’s) 
servants had done wonderful things. They showed him Moses’s rod; the hammer 
and the nail with which Jae] slew Sisera,” etc. For engine, as is well known, they 
sometimes used gin. . . . Engine is also used in the strict sense of ingeniuwm.’— 
Dyce (ed. ii.): Though ingenious was often used for ‘ingenuous’ (and in rare 
cases the latter for the former), Shakespeare would not have written ‘ingenuous’ 
here. 


310 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT IV, SC. ii. 


Gui. Is he at home? 

Bel. He went hence euen now. 245 

Gui. What does he meane ? 
Since death of my deer’ft Mother 
It did not {peake before. All folemne things 
Should anfwer folemne Accidents. The matter? 
Triumphes for nothing, and lamenting Toyes, 250 
Is 10llity for Apes, and greefe for Boyes. 
Is Cadwall mad ? 

Enter Aruigarus, with Imogen dead, bearing 
her in jas Armes. 254 


Looke| mad? 
Mad? 


246, 247. One line, Pope et seq. 252-255. mad?...Bel. 

247. death] the death Ktly conj. Bel. Cadwal!—Look Walker. 
deer’ ft} dear Pope, Han. dear- Cadwal! Bel. Look Elze. 

est Varr. Mal. Ran. Ktly.. dear’/t Ff 253. Enter...) After line 257, Re- 


eticet: 
250-252. In margin, Pope, Han. 
250. lamenting] laments im Anon. 


-enter... Dyce, Glo. 
Scene v. Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. 


ap. Cam. : dead] as dead Cap. et seq. 


250, 251. Triumphes for nothing ... greefe for Boyes] CapELL (p. 
116): It may be right to give the reader some notice of a liberty that is taken 
by [Pope and Hanmer] of rejecting [this] couplet, and two others before it, [lines 
32-37 and 45-47]; licenses of this sort ought never to be taken at any time with- 
out reasons that carry instant conviction, which cannot be urged for any of the 
above-mentioned couplets; whose meanness (the cause, in all likelihood, of their 
being rejected) may have a source they were not aware of, namely, that they 
are only quotations; they have the air of it, each of them; and what at present is 
only conjecture, may very possibly be turned into truth by the happy diligence 
of some future researcher. [It is certainly a step in the right direction to acknowl- 
edge that these couplets may be ‘only quotations’ and none of Shakespeare’s. 
They are all not only wretched stuff in themselves, but the hand which inserted 
the present lines in this solemn passage is little short of sacrilegious. No matter 
what ‘apes’ may mean, whether boys or simians, the very word is grating discord. 
I do not forget how Iachimo uses it in Imogen’s chamber,—it is not there in the 
plural, but is almost a verb.—Ep.] 

250. lamenting Toyes] DowpEN: That is, lamentation for trifles. 

251. Apes] Murray (NV. E. D., s. v. 4.) quotes this passage under the defini- 
tion ‘A fool.’—DowpEN: Often used specially of sportive youngsters. So in 
The Pilgrimage to Parnassus (ed. Murray, p. 21), a schoolmaster is described as 
‘interpretinge pueriles confabulationes to a companie of seaven-yeare-olde apes.’ 

252. Is Cadwall mad ?] TxIsELTon (p. 39): Guiderius thinks that Arviragus 
has set the ‘ingenuous instrument’ going either to celebrate his (G.’s) victory over 
Cloten or by way of threnody for Cloten’s death. 

253. with Imogen dead] Capell was afflicted with a chronic propensity to 
insert stage directions. Possibly in his secret soul he believed that in him the 
world had lost a consummate actor. However this may be, he certainly had no 


ACE. DY.) SCs 1, | CYMBELINE 311 


Bel. Looke, heere he comes, 255 
And brings the dire occafion in his Armes, 
Of what we blame him for. 

Arui, The Bird is dead 
That we haue made fo much on. JI had rather 


Haue skipt from fixteene years of Age, to fixty : 260 

To haue turn’d my leaping time into a Crutch, 

Then haue feene this. 262 
255. comes,| comes! Pope,+. 261. To haue] And Pope,+. Var. ’78, 
257. for.| Fi, Rowe,+, Cap. Coll. 85. Dhave Dyce ii, iii. 

Ktly, Glo. Cam. comes! Var. ’78 et leaping time] leaping-time Dyce, 

cer Glo. Cam. Jeaping-pole Ktly conj. 
258-262. Mnemonic Pope. leaping pine Coll. iii. conj. 

259. on.] on! Pope,+. time into] timber to Vaun. 


faith in the intelligence of the public. If, in any one of the plays, a speaker should 
say, ‘Here, take this purse,’ Capell was instantly at hand with a kind of double 
dagger of his own device, which he added to the speech to indicate to his readers 
that something was here offered. Thus, in the present instance, it were pity of his 
life that the public should be for one minute deceived as to Imogen’s true condi- 
tion; wherefore, when the original text says with ‘Imogen dead,’ Capell’s busy and 
tender heart softened the blow to his readers by saying ‘as dead.’ And from that 
day to this he has been followed by a long array of equally tender-hearted editors, 
with, as far as I know, J. W. Craig as the only stony hearted exception.—Eb. 

258. The Bird is dead, etc.] VERPLANCK quotes the following from Mrs 
Rapcuirre: ‘No master ever knew how to touch the accordant springs of sym- 
pathy by small circumstances like our own Shakespeare. In Cymbeline how finely 
such circumstances are made use of to awaken, at once, solemn expectations and 
tenderness, and, by recalling the softened remembrance of a sorrow long past, to 
prepare the mind to melt at one that is approaching; mingling at the same time, 
by means of a mysterious occurrence, a slight tremor of awe with our pity. Thus, 
when Belarius and Arviragus return to the cave where they had left the worn-out 
Imogen to repose, while they were yet standing before it, and Arviragus—speaking 
of her with tenderest pity as “‘poor sick Fidele’’—goes out to inquire for her, solemn 
music is heard from the cave, sounded by that harp of which Guiderius says, 
“Since the death of my dearest Mother, it did not speak before.” ‘All solemn 
things should answer solemn accidents.” Immediately Arviragus enters with 
Fidele senseless in his arms: ‘‘ While summer lasts, and I live here, Fidele, Vl 
sweeten thy sad grave.’’ Tears alone can speak the touching simplicity of the 
whole scene.’ 

260. from sixteene yeares of Age, to sixty] Hertzperc: If Arviragus 
here puts his own age at sixteen, it will well accord with what he says of both their 
voices, that they ‘have got the mannish cracke’ (line 307); but not at all with the 
accounts of Belarius (III, iii, 76, and III, iii, 110) and the Nobleman (I, i, 69); 
according to these Guiderius must be twenty-three years old and Arviragus twenty- 
two. 

261. leaping time] That is, the time of leaping, which is as symbolic of sixteen 
years and youth as a crutch is of sixty years and old age.—Eb. 


312 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


fact IV, SC. ii. 


Gui. Oh {weetett, fayreft Lilly : 263 
My Brother weares thee not the one halfe fo well, 


As when thou grew’ft thy felfe. 


Bel. Oh Melancholly, 


265 


Who euer yet could found thy bottome? Finde 
The Ooze, to fhew what Coaft thy fluggifh care 268 


263. Lilly:] lilly! Rowe et seq. 
264. the one] one Rowe ii,+. 
266. Melancholly,| Melancholy! Pope 


268. what] that Ff. 
268, 269. Coaft thy...care Might’ft 
shore thy...crare Could or shore his... 


et seq. crare Might Vaun. 
267. found thy] sound the Eccles 268. thy fluggifh care] thou, sluggish 
conj. care, Cap. thou, sluggish crare, Mal. 
found thy bottome? Finde] conj. 
round thy bottom find Vaun. care| carrack Theob. Warb. 
268. The Ooze] Thy ooze Huds. Johns. carack Han. crave Sympson, 
Ooze, to] Ooze? or Cap. 00ze, or Var. *73 et seq. 


Ran. 


264. the one] WALKER (Crit., ii, 91): ‘One,’ in Shakespeare’s time, was com- 
monly pronounced wn (a pronunciation not yet obsolete among the common folk), 
and sometimes, apparently, on. [In the present line] euphony, or correct pro- 
nunciation, requires the pronunciation um. Write, of course, ‘th’one.’ [We still 
have the pronunciation of one in the words where it survives in combination, as in 
alone, atone—but happily this is not exactly Walker’s wn.—Ep.] 

267, 268. Finde The Ooze] STAUNTON (Atheneum, 14 June, 1873): This 
should possibly be ‘fine the ooze.’ To sound the bottom and clear the ooze, or 
floating scum, may be needful operations in seeking harborage on a strange coast, 
but what can be meant by ‘find the ooze’? The passage, however, is altogether 
ambiguous; even after these changes [that have been proposed] it sadly wants 
explication. 

268. thy sluggish care] WARBURTON: All those who know anything of good 
writing will agree that our Author must have wrote ‘thy sluggish Carrack.? [In 
Beaumont and Fletcher’s The Captain, I, i, Frank (a woman) says of a suitor, ‘Let 
him venture In some decay’d Crare of his own.’ Whereon Sympson has this note: 
‘Crare here signifies just what Carack does, being the name of a trading vessel 
then, tho’ I believe at this time ’tis entirely disused.’ In the Addenda to the volume 
Sympson refers to Warburton’s emendation ‘Carrack’ in the present passage, and 
says that it ‘certainly continues and compleats the metaphor, but we may come 
much nearer the traces of the letters by reading “thy sluggish Crare.”’ It has 
been supposed that whatever credit attaches to the suggestion of crare is, in reality, 
due to Capell, who gives the word in his Glossary as of this present passage. But 
Capell’s Glossary was published on the 3rd of March, 1779, and Sympson’s edition 
of Beaumont & Fletcher in 1750. Moreover, Capell admired Heatu, and not 
infrequently quotes him; and Heath refers with approval to Sympson’s emenda- 
tion, crare—Murray (N. E. D., s. v. crayer. Adopted from Old French, in medi- 
eval Latin craiera): A small trading vessel. [Present passage quoted.]|—Caprti’s 
text reads thus: ‘O Melancholy! Who ever yet could sound thy bottom? find 
The ooze? or shew what coast thou, sluggish care, Might’st easil’est harbour in?’ 
And his own note thereon, thus: ‘The editor, who has no other object in view but 


ACT IV, SC. ii.] CYMBELINE 313 


Might’ft eafileft harbour in. Thou bleffed thing, 269 
269. Might’ji eafileft] Might eafil’p 269. in.] in! Rowe ii. in? Rowe i. 

F.F;. Might eas’lieft Pope,+. Might’st elicet. 

easil’est Cap. Might eafilieft F, et cet. thing,| thing! Pope et seq. 


that of doing his author all possible justice, will never be tender of owning that he 
has erred in his judgement so soon as he has made the discovery. When the cor- 
rection was made in this period, [that is, when the changes from the original text 
were made in his published text.—Ep.], it appeared the fittest and easiest that the 
place would admit of: “Might’st,’”’ a reading of the First and best Folio, pointed 
plain to a vocative; after which the leading word “care” seem’d no longer ex- 
ceptionable, changes being made in “thou” and “to,” which may be often seen put 
by mistake for the very words which they are now chang’d to. Such was the 
reasoning that gave birth to the present correction; but its foundation is wrong. 
“ Might’st” is more probably a compositor’s blunder, who fetch’d it from the line 
underneath, and made another in “care,” where his copy had “crare”; an un- 
common word of which he knew not the meaning; admitting it, all other emenda- 
tion is needless and even hurtful; for the metaphor is much more entire by reading 
—“or shew what coast thy sluggish crare Might easil’est harbour in?’”’’? This 
reading was adopted by RANN, except for ‘easil’est’ he has ‘easiliest.. The Cam- 
BRIDGE Epirors tell us that ‘in Capell’s copy of his own edition he has altered 
these lines in MS.; only, however, in changing ‘or shew’ to ‘to shew.’-—Dr Dopp 
(quoted by Eccles): I can by no means think that carrack is our Author’s word; 
a much more natural word (was there need of alteration) perhaps many readers 
would have thought bark; yet that nor any other seems necessary to the sense and 
beauty of the passage: ‘Oh, melancholy (thou deep sea), who ever yet could sound 
thy bottom? who ever yet could find the ooze, to shew what coast they sluggish 
“care” (or charge) might easiliest harbour in?’ Melancholy is represented to us 
under the allegory of a deep sea, and the grief or affliction that occasions the falling 
into melancholy is beautifully supposed; its sluggish care, its burden or charge sailing 
over that sea, and seeking some harbour to land, 7. e., to get free from the waters 
of melancholy which the Poet, by a beautiful interrogation, acquaints us, cannot 
be done; when once sorrow embarks, and grief launches her heavy-laden vessel in the 
ocean of melancholy, no bottom is to be found, no harbour to be made, no deliver- 
ance to be obtained from this fathomless and boundless sea. This appears to me 
the true and, I think, exquisitely fine sense of the passage-—HERR (p. 141): We 
apprehend that cave should be substituted for ‘care,’ and that the words in the 
line need readjustment, thus: ‘find The coast, to show what cave thy sluggish 
ooze Might’st easiliest harbour in. —THIsELTON (p. 39): Belarius’s thought is, how 
powerless the most friendly well wisher is to put one who is suffering from Melan- 
choly in the way of getting rid of the clogging load of care. ‘To sound the bottom’ 
seems to be a stock phrase. . . . The conjecture crare for ‘care’ is a very irritating 
one, and owes its acceptance, I believe, to the fact that crave is an obsolete word, 
and, therefore, lends some apparent excuse for the—as I think—gratuitous boggling 
over the interpretation of a passage which is, in reality, as clear as the noonday.— 
DowpeEn: I have removed the note of interrogation from ‘bottom’ to the end of 
the sentence, have accepted ‘Might’ of F. for ‘Might’st’ of F,, and the emendation 
crare. The meaning is: Who can cast the lead so deep as to touch the dull bottom 
of the sea of melancholy, and so find the way to a harbour of the craft that sails 


314 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, Sco 


Ioue knowes what man thou might’ft haue made : but I, 270 
Thou dyed’ft a moft rare Boy, of Melancholly. 
How found you him ? 


Brut. Starke, as you fee: 
Thus {miling, as fome Fly had tickled flumber, 274 


270. but I,] but ah! Rowe ii, Pope, 271. Melancholly.] melancholy! Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Var..’73, Sta. Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Varr. Mal. 
Huds. but, aye! Nicholson ap. Cam. Steev. Varr. Knt, Dyce. 


but ay! Ingl. 272. How] Tell me, how Han. 
271. dyed’fi] Ff. dy’st Var. ’73. 274. flumber,| slumber; Theob. i. 
dy’dst or diedst Rowe, Steev. et cet. slumber! Theob. ii, Warb. 


moft] more F;F4, Rowe i. 


upon this sea and is its proper voyager? Melancholy is not compared to a sea 
‘and’ a crare; the crare is called ‘thy crare,’ as we might say ‘O sky, thy stars.’ 

270. what man] For the omission of a after ‘what,’ in the sense of ‘what 
kind of,’ see ABBOTT, § 86. 

270. but I] Tyrwuitt: That is, ‘Jove knows, what man thou might’st have 
made, but I know, thou died’st,’ etc—MAtone: I believe ‘but ah!’ to be the true 
reading. Ay is throughout the First Folio, and in all books of that time, printed 
instead of ak! Hence probably ‘J,’ which was used for the affirmative particle ay, 
crept into the text here—The CamBripce Eprrors record ‘aye!’ as a conjecture of 
Nicholson (presumably Dr. Brinsley Nicholson).—INGLEBY thus records the same 
conjecture: ‘Ay! [z. e., Ah/] Nicholson conj.’ [I do not know that this con- 
jecture is anywhere to be found in print. Many of Dr Nicholson’s admirable 
emendations are to be found only in his correspondence.—Ep.]—VAUGHAN (p. 490): 
‘I’ was the usual way of printing ‘ay’ in the seventeenth century. . . . It means 
surely. Belarius says naturally, ‘What a man thou wouldst have made is known 
to God alone; but that thou died’st a most rare boy is a matter of certainty.’ [I 
think Nicholson and Vaughan are right.—Eb.] i 

274, etc. Thus smiling, etc.] Speppinc (Trans. New Sh. Soc., 1874, p. 20): 
Though I think Shakespeare could at any time of his life have written a play with 
or without songs in it, either in prose or in verse, and in either blank or rhyme,— 
and might have been induced to do it for the good of the theatre,—I do not believe 
that he could have been induced, after he was 40, to write either rhyme or blank, 
resembling in metrical structure or rhythmical effect, that which he used to write 
before he was 25, or even 30. The regular cadence and monotonous sweetness 
had grown tiresome to his ear; his imagination and intellect had become impatient 
of the luxuriance of beautiful words and superfluous imagery. It had become a 
necessity for him to go to the heart of the matter by a directer path, and to pro- 
duce his effects of beauty and sweetness in another way,—a way of hisown. Com- 
pare the description of a similar object in three different plays, belonging to dates 
considerably distant from each other; the face of a beautiful woman just dead; 
there being nothing in the character of the several speakers to explain the difference: 
1. Rom. & Jul., second ed. (1599); not in the first ed., therefore presumably written 
between 1597 and 1599: ‘Death lies on her like an untimely frost Upon the fairest 
flower of all the field.’ 2. Ant. & Cleop. (1608, according to Mr Fleay): ‘but she 
looks like sleep, As she would catch another Anthony In her strong toil of grace.’ 
3. Cymbeline (date disputed, but I say one of the latest): ‘Thus smiling, as some 


ACTELVgESCalll CYMBELINE 315 


Not as deaths dart being laugh’d at : his right Cheeke 275 
Repo fing on a Cufhion. 

Gut. Where? 

Arut. O’th’floore: 
His armes thus leagu’d, I thought he flept, and put 


My clowted Brogues from off my feete, whofe rudeneffe 280 
Anfwer’d my fteps too lowd. 
Gu. Why, he but fleepes : 282 
275. Cheeke] Checke F». Pope et cet. 
278. Oth] O’the Cap. et seq. 279. flept,| slept; Theob. Warb. et 
279. leagu’d,| Fi, Rowe. leagu’d. seq. 
Johns. Jleagued, Glo. Cam. leagw’d; 280. whofe] wYofe Fo. 


fly had tickled slumber, Not as death’s dart being laughed at.’ The difference in 
the treatment in these three cases represents the progress of a great change in man- 
ner and taste; a change which could not be put on or off, like the fashion, but was a 
part of the man. Yet none of Mr Fleay’s tests seem to touch it. The ‘double- 
ending’ test would place the passage in Ant. & Cleop. before that in Rom. & Jul.; 
and that of Cymbeline at the same time with it. And the other tests say nothing. 
Look again at the structure of the verse a few lines further on: ‘Thou shalt not 
lack,’ etc., down to ‘Outsweetened not thy breath.’ Here by ‘the double-ending’ 
test [lines 289 and 290] would count as indications of early composition. Whereas 
I doubt whether you will find a single case in any of Shakespeare’s undoubtedly 
early plays of a line of the same structure. Where you find a line of ten syllables end 
with a word of one syllable,—that word not admitting either of emphasis or pause, 
but belonging by construction to the next line and forming part of its first word- 
group,—you have a metrical effect of which Shakespeare grew fonder as he grew 
older; frequently in his latest period, up to the end of his middle period, so far as 
I can remember, unknown. 

275. Not as deaths dart being laugh’d at] CapPErL (p. 116): ‘Being 
laugh’d at’ means ‘for I saw it laugh’d at,’ and is a reason why he could not think 
it was the ‘dart’ that had struck him.—Ecctrs: I would amend by reading ‘been 
laugh’d at,’ that is, ‘As if some fly had only tickled slumber, not as zf death’s dart 
had been laughed at.—VAUGHAN (p. 490) proposes the same emendation, with the 
explanation that ‘had’ is to be carried on from ‘tickled’ to “being laugh’d at.’ 

279. His armes thus leagu’d] Scummt (Lex.) defines ‘leagu’d’ as ‘joined, 
folded together.’—I suppose across the breast. This example and this use of the 
verb seems to have escaped both WuItNEY (Century Dict.) and Murray (N. E. D.). 

280. clowted Brogues] * ‘brogue,’ according to Murray (N. £. D.), is ‘a 
rude kind of shoe, generally made of untanned hide, worn by the inhabitants of the 
wilder parts of Ireland and the Scotch Highlands.’ And a ‘clowted brogue,’ by 
the same authority, is a ‘shoe having the sole protected with iron plates or studded 
with large-headed nails (it may also mean a patched shoe).’ In both definitions 
the present example is quoted. 

282. Why, he but sleepes] STEEVENS: I cannot forbear to introduce a 
passage somewhat like this, from Webster’s White Devil, or Vitteria Corombona, 
1612, on account of its singular beauty: ‘Brachiano. O thou soft natural death, 
that art joint-twin To sweetest slumber! no rough-bearded comet Stares on thy 


316 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. ii. 


If he be gone, hee’! make his Graue, a Bed: 283 
With Female Fayries will his Tombe be haunted, 
And Wormes will not come to thee. 285 


Arui. With fayreft Flowers 


285. to thee] near thee Pope, Theob. Warb. near him Han. there Cap. to him 
Ran. to them Sing. thither Anon. ap. Cam. 


mild departure; the dull owl Beats not against thy casement; the hoarse wolf 
Scents not thy carrion: pity winds thy corse, Whilst horror waits on princes.’— 
[p. 129, ed. Dyce. Brachiano, be it remembered, was dying of poison and is con- 
trasting his own frightful agony with the peacefulness of a natural death.—Eb.] 

283. hee’l make his Graue, a Bed] VAUGHAN (p. 491): That is, ‘If he be 
really dead, yet his personal purity will keep his body from corruption, and so con- 
vert his grave into a mere couch.’ Shakespeare here adopts (perhaps not im- 
properly) into the heathen creed of the Britons the medieval and Catholic theory 
that perfect virginal integrity of mind and body during life saves the corpse from 
its natural decay after death. [It is so arrogant to say what Shakespeare did or did 
not think, that it is impossible to deny Vaughan’s interpretation. Yet the humble 
inquirer might perhaps modestly ask whether or not it is in accordance with the 
‘Catholic theory’ that Fidele’s bed should be haunted by ‘female fairies’? —Ep. 

285. will not come to thee] This change of persons after ‘he,’ ‘he,’ ‘he’l,’ 
‘his,’ has induced the belief that ‘thee’ is a corruption, and the Text. Notes display 
the result—MALongE, however, justifies it for the same reason that we accept the 
change of person in ‘Euriphile, Thou was’t their nurse, they took thee for their 
mother And every day do honour to her grave.’—III, iii, 112. There is a similar 
change in ‘Remain thou heere, while sense can keep it on.’—1, ii, 58. Also in, 
“You married ones . . . than themselves,’ V, i, 6. VAUGHAN (p. 491) asserts that 
““To thee” admits of no justification.’ Is it then beyond the reach of imagination 
that Guiderius addresses the first lines, almost appealingly, to his father and 
brother, and then, casting his eyes down on the lovely lifeless form, breaks into an 
apostrophe to it? I had written this note before I discovered that the CowpEN- 
CLarKES had given the same interpretation more exquisitely: ‘Guiderius replies to 
his brother’s remark that Fidele’s looking but as if asleep, and continues speaking 
of the gentle lad in the third person, until, looking upon the beautiful form that lies 
apparently dead before him, a sense of its loveliness and his own impassioned regret 
at having to consign it to the grave, comes full upon him, and he ends with ad- 
dressing it, rather than speaking of it.—Downen, also, has a note to the same effect: 
‘Guiderius,’ he says, ‘growing more impassioned as he speaks, passes into an ad- 
dress to Fidele.’ It is purely an antagonism to the dogmatic, Warburtonian asser- 
tion of Vaughan that induces me to retain my own note. Dowden adds the con- 
jecture: ‘Possibly, the speech of Arviragus should take up that of Guiderius, and 
begin with “And worms,”’’ etc.—SINGER upholds his reading with the remark that 
‘where fairies resort, it was held that no noxious creature would be found. It 
appears that the’, as it was usual to write and print them, has been mistaken for 
“thee.” ’—Ep. 

286. fayrest] WALKER (Vers., p. 170): I think we should write faust. (Tt 
is not easy to detect what is acquired by this abbreviation other than the forma- 
tion of an ill-sounding word, which, if heard from the stage, would be mistaken for 
an Elizabethan pronunciation of first. Possibly Walker held that fair should be 


INE 10% SC alg] CYMBELINE 317 


Whil’ft Sommer lafts; and I liue heere, Fidele, 287 
Ne fweeten thy fad graue : thou fhalt not lacke 
The Flower that’s like thy face. Pale-Primrofe, nor 


The azur’d Hare-bell, like thy Veines: no, nor 290 
The leafe of Eglantine, whom not to flander, 
287. W hil’ fi} Ff. ’Whilst Theob. ii. 290. azur’d] azure Huds. 
(misprint), Warb. 291. The leafe of] The leafy Coll. ii, 
288. graue:] grave. Pope,+. iti, (MS.). 
289. face.] face, Rowe et seq. whom] which Pope,t. who 
Pale-Primrofe,| Fi. pale prim- Eccles conj., Ktly, Huds. 
rose, Pope, Han. Sta. Glo. Cam. Ingl. flander,) F;F,.  flander. F.. 
pale primrose; Rowe et cet. slander’t Han. Eccles. 


always pronounced as a disyllable, fair; fairest would consequently become a tri- 
syllable, and unbefitting the line. It is not easy to resist the suspicion that at 
times Walker was wanton in his zeal for absolute prosody, for which he was willing 
to pay at the price of a slovenly pronunciation —Eb. 

287. Whil’st] As a proof of Warburton’s confidence in the excellence of the 
text in Theobald’s ed. ii, note how slavishly he follows it, even to retaining its 
misprints. See Text. Notes. Again in ‘door pickaxes’ in line 479.—Eb. 

287. Whil’st Sommer lasts] STEEVENS: So in Pericles: ‘Marina. No, I will 
rob Tellus of her weed To strew thy green with flowers: the yellows, blues, The 
purple violets, and marigolds, Shall, as a carpet, hang upon thy grave, While 
summer days do last.’—IV, i, 17. 

289. face.] THIsELTON: The full stop after ‘face’ should probably be a colon, 
[for the reason] that the semi-colon and colon are used where what follows is of the 
nature of an explanation, or of an extension, of what precedes. The mistake was no 
doubt helped by the initial capital in ‘Pale-Primrose.—PoRTER-CLARKE: The 
sense being understood, the full stop in the Folio may convey a suggestion as to the 
way the line may he effectively spoken; that is, with a drop of the voice after ‘face,’ 
and a slight pause, bringing out more prominently ‘ Pale-Primrose,’ etc. 

289. Primrose] See I, vi, 08. 

290. Hare-bell] ExrtacompBe: This is undoubtedly the Wild Hyacinth (Scilla 
nutans), though we must bear in mind that the name is applied differently in various 
parts of the island; thus ‘the Harebell of Scotch writers is the Campanula, and the 
Bluebell, so celebrated in Scotch song, is the wild Hyacinth or Scilla; while in 
England the same names are used conversely, the Campanula being the Bluebell, 
and the Wild Hyacinth the Harebell’—(Poets’ Pleasaunce)—but this will apply 
only in poetry; in ordinary language, at least in the south of England, the Wild 
Hyacinth is the Bluebell, and is the plant referred to by Shakespeare as the Hare- 
bell—Mourray (NV. E. D.): Perhaps from growing in places frequented by hares. 

291. Eglantine] ELLAcoMBE: There can be no doubt that the Eglantine in 
Shakespeare’s time was the Sweet Brier,—his notice of the sweet leaf makes it 
certain. In the earlier poets the name seems to have been given to any wild Rose, 
and Milton certainly did not consider the Eglantine and the Sweet Brier to be iden- 
tical. He says: ‘Through the sweet-briar or the vine, Or the twisted eglantine.’— 
L’ Allegro, 47, 48. But Milton’s knowledge of flowers was very limited... . It 
was the emblem of pleasure mixed with pain—‘Sweet is the Eglantine, but pricketh 


318 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. ii. 


Out-fweetned not thy breath : the Raddocke would 292 
With Charitable bill (Oh bill fore fhaming 
Thofe rich-left-heyres, that let their Fathers lye 


Without a Monument) bring thee all this, 295 

292. Out-fweetned| Out fweetned Fy. 293. fore  fhaming]  sire-shaming 

Out-sweetn’d Rowe et seq. (subs.) Theob. ii. et seq. foreshaming or for- 
breath:] breath. Pope,-+. shaming Walker. 

Raddocke] F2. Raddock F.F,, 204. rich-left-heyres] F.F; (heires F3). 

Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. Cap. rich-left-heirs F,. rich-left heirs Rowe. 

ruddock Han. et cet. 295. this,] this; Theob. Warb. et seq. 


sore.’—Spenser, Sonnet, xxvi; and so its names pronounced it to be; it was either the 
Sweet Brier, or it was Eglantine, the thorny plant (French, aiglentier). 

201, 292. whom not to slander, Out-sweetned not thy breath] ABBOTT 
(§ 246): The relative is here attracted to a subsequent implied object. That is, 
‘the leaf which, not to slander it, would not out-sweeten,’ etc. [See this same 
section for other examples of the omission of the relative and attraction of the 
antecedent.| 

292. Raddocke] WiLtucHBY (p. 219): The Robin-red-breast or Ruddock, 
Rubecula sive Erithacus, Aldrov., is so well known in almost all countries that it 
needs no long description. . . . In Winter-time to seek food it enters into houses 
with much confidence, being a very bold bird, sociable and familiar with man. 
In the Summer-time (as Turner saith) when there is plenty of food in the Woods, 
and it is not pinched with cold, it withdraws itself with its Brood into the most 
desert places—STEEVENS: The office of covering the dead is ascribed to the 
ruddock by Drayton, in his poem called The Owl: ‘Covering with moss the deads 
unclosed eye, The little red-breast teacheth charitie.? See also Luptons’ Thousand 
Notable Things, b. i. p. 10 (1576?).—HALLIWELL gives this extract from Lupton: 
‘A Robbyn read breast fynding the dead body of a man or woman, wyll cover the 
face of the same with mosse, and, as some holdes opinion, he wyld cover also the 
whole body.’—FarMER: Compare Webster, Vittoria Corombona: ‘Call for the 
robin-red-breast and the wren, Since o’er shady boughs they hover, And with 
leaves and flowers do cover The friendless bodies of unburied men. Call unto his 
funeral dole The ant, the field-mouse, and the mole, To rear him hillocks that 
shall keep him warm, And (when gay tombs are robb’d) Sustain no harm; But keep 
the wolf far hence; that’s foe to men, For with his nails they’ll dig them up again.’— 
[p. 146, ed. Dyce].—Perrcy: Is this an allusion to the ‘Babes in the Wood,’ or was 
the notion of the red-breast covering dead bodies general before the writing of 
that ballad? 

293. With Charitable bill] Tuiserton: It is interesting to find Geffray 
Mynshull reflecting this passage before the First Folio was printed: ‘Robin-red- 
breasts that bring strawes in their charitable bils to cover the dead.’—Essayes and 
Characters of a Prison and Prisoners, Tait’s Reprint, p. 46. 

293-295. (Oh bill sore shaming ... a Monument)] Whoever believes that 
Shakespeare wrote these utterly irclevant lines, possibly containing a local allu- 
sion, and, at this solemn moment, put them in the mouth of a youth who had never 
seen anything of the world and had never wing’d from view o’th’nest »—whoever 
believes this, will believe anything —Ep. 


AGTEIV,}SC- 11.1] CYMBELINE 319 


Yea, and furr’d Moffe befides. When Flowres are none 206 
To winter-ground thy Coarfe——— 


206. befides. When] besides, when winter-guard Coll. ii, iii. (MS.), Huds. 


Theob. et seq. To weather-fend Bailey. To winter- 
none| none F 3. grace Kinnear. To round thy wither’d 
207. To winter-ground| To winter Sprengel. -To twine around Ingl. conj. 
ground F,. To winter-gown Theob. i, To wind around Ingl. and Elze conj. 
Han. Warb. Cap. Those winter-gown 297. Coarfe ] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
Theob. ii. To winterground Johns. To coarse.— Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. 
winter-green Douce, Verplanck conj. To corse. Cap. et cet. 


290. furr’d Mosse besides. When Flowres are none] Hunter (ii, 200), 
referring to the full stop after ‘besides,’ remarks: ‘Now can anything be more 
certain than that this [punctuation] gives us the most clear and beautiful meaning? 
Arviragus says what he will do in the summer season, when flowers are abundant; 
and having finished what on this head he meant to say, he is proceeding to describe 
what should be done to the grave in winter, when he is interrupted by Guiderius, 
and breaks off his discourse abruptly.’ [I think Hunter’s interpretation is em- 
phatically just. It includes naturally the unusually long dash after ‘Coarse,’ 
indicating an interruption. THEOBALD and CapELr are responsible for leading 
astray all subsequent followers.—Eb.] 

297. To winter-ground] WARBURTON: The epithet ‘furr’d’ to ‘moss’ directs 
us plainly to another reading: ‘To winter-gown thy coarse,’ 7. e., the summer 
habit shall be a light gown of flowers, thy winter habit a good warm ‘furr’d gown’ 
of ‘moss.—WALKER (Crit., i, 141) accepts (or is it dons?) Warburton’s gown. 
‘Or,’ he says, ‘indeed gowne may have been written in the MS. gownd, as the final e 
is often printed d in the Folio..—Strrvens: I have no doubt that [Warburton’s] 
rejected word was Shakespeare’s, since the protection of the dead, and not their 
ornament, was what he meant to express. To ‘winter-ground’ a plant is to pro- 
tect it from the inclemency of the winter season by straw, etc., laid over it. This 
precaution is commonly taken in respect of tender trees or flowers, such as Aviragus, 
who loved Fidele, represents her to be.—Cottrer (ed. ii.): ‘To winter-gward’ is 
a welcome emendation of the MS. . . . The fact turns out to be that ‘ground’ 
was merely a misprint for gward, two words readily mistaken when written at all 
carelessly. Nothing can be more appropriate than the compound winter-guard, 
and it must be accepted by all who, having taste and judgement, are not bigoted 
to bygone blunders.—Assorr (§ 435): ‘To winter-ground’ is, perhaps, ‘to inter 
during winter.’ So ‘to winter-rig’ is said (Halliwell) to mean ‘to fallow land during 
winter.’—Hvupson: ‘Winter-ground’ does not tell its own meaning; and as it is not 
met with elsewhere, we have no means of explaining it. Two other good corrections 
have been proposed by Warburton and Verplanck; [Douce anticipated Verplanck]. 
I find it not easy to choose between the three.—W. W. Luoyp (NV. & Q., VU, i, 285, 
1886): Collier’s MS. gives the right word, but Collier gives a wrong explanation. 
‘Protection’ was not the purpose of the flowers, but graceful decoration. Guard 
here is used in the sense of enriched trimmings or borders, as so frequently in Shake- 
speare: ‘Give him a livery more guarded than his fellows,’ Mer. of Ven.; ‘To guard 
a title that was rich before, To gild refined gold, to paint the lily..—King John. 
The epithet ‘furr’d,’ given to moss, and so expressive of its thick close growth, is 
allusive to the fur trimmings of winter clothes.—Br. NicHoLson (Ingleby, Rev. ed.): 


320 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Iv, SC. il. 


Gui. Prythee haue done, 298 
And do not play in Wench-like words with that 
Which is fo ferious. Let vs bury him, 300 


And not protract with admiration, what 
Is now due debt. To’th’graue. 


Arui. Say, where fhall’s lay him ? 303 

298. Prythee] F2  Prethee FF, 302. To’th'] F, To th F;F,, Rowe, 
Pr’ ythee Pope. +. To the Cap. et seq. 
done,| done; Theob. Warb. et seq. 303. where] where’s F3. 


That is, to winter-floor, to floor it in winter when there were no flowers.—DEIGHTON: 
Steevens gives, no authority for his statement, and no other instance of the word 
has been discovered. Probably it is one of Shakespeare’s coinages.—THISELTON 
(p. 40): It is probably better to accept Steevens’s explanation,—even if a mere 
guess,—than to alter the text. Douce’s excellent conjecture is worthy of mention, 
as it is not unsupported by the ductus literarum. [Is not Thiselton’s conclusion 
the wisest? Even if Steevens’s explanation be mere guesswork (as is most likely), 
is it not better to accept it than desert the Folio, which would be simply exchang- 
ing one guess for another? Of all the emendations, however, I prefer Collier’s 
guard, with Lloyd’s interpretation of it.—Ep.] 

299. Wench-like words] BatHurst (p. 136): Shakespeare criticises the kind 
of words and turn of thought, or, at least, the application of it, which he himself so 
often adopts.—RUSKIN (vol. iv, p. 388): So far as nature had influence over the 
early training of [Shakespeare], it was essential to his perfectness that the nature 
should be quiet. No mountain passions were to be allowed him. Inflict upon 
him but one pang of the monastic conscience; cast upon him but one cloud of the 
mountain gloom, and his serenity had been gone for ever—his equity—his infinity. 
You would have made another Dante of him. . . . Shakespeare could be allowed 
no mountains, nay, not even any supreme natural beauty. He had to be left with 
his kingcups and clover—pansies—the passing clouds—the Avon’s flow—and the 
undulating hills and woods of Warwick; nay, he was not to love even these in any 
exceeding measure, lest it might make him in the least overrate their power upon 
the strong, full-fledged minds of men. He makes the quarrelling fairies con- 
cerned about them; poor lost Ophelia find some comfort in them; fearful, fair, wise- 
hearted Perdita trust the speaking of her good will and good hostess-ship to them; 
and one of the brothers of Imogen confide his sorrow to them—rebuked instantly 
by his brother for ‘wench-like words’; but any thought of them in his mighty men 
I do not find; it is not usually in the nature of such men; and if he had loved the 
flowers the east better himself, he would assuredly have been offended at this, and 
given a botanical turn of mind to Cesar or Othello. 

301, 302. And not protract ... due debt] Caper (p. 116): That is, pro- 
tract payment of a debt that is now due. 

301. admiration] Scummpt (Lex.): Wonder mingled with veneration.— 
DowveEN: Perhaps used in modern sense, with something also of the sense of 
wonder. 

303. where shall’s lay him] Asporr (§ 215): ‘Shall,’ originally meaning 
necessity or obligation, and therefore not denoting an action on the part of the 
subject, was used in the south of England as an impersonal verb. (Compare Latin 


ACT IV, SC. it. | CYMBELINE 321 


Gut. By good Euriphile, our Mother. 
Aru. Bee’t fo: 305 
And let vs ( Polidore) though now our voyces 
Haue got the mannifh cracke, fing him to’th’ground 
As once to our Mother : vfe like note, and words, 
Saue that Zuriphile, mutt be Fidele, 
Gut. Cadwall, 310 
I cannot fing : Ile weepe, and word it with thee ; 
For Notes of forrow, out of tune, are worfe 
Then Priefts, and Phanes that lye. 
Arui, Wee’l fpeake it then. 
Bel, Great greefes I fee med’cine the leffe: For Cloten 315 


307. to’th’] to the Cap. et seq. 313. Phanes] Vanes Fi, Rowe. fanes 
308. to our] our Pope et seq. Pope et seq. 

311. thee;] thee, Ff, Rowe. 315. med’cine] medicine Cap. et seq. 
312, 313. Mnemonic Warb. leffe:|lefs, F2F;. lefs. F,, Rowe,+. 


and Greek.) So Chaucer, ‘us oughte,’ and we also find ‘as us wol,’ 7. ¢., ‘as it is 
pleasing to us.’ See also, ‘Shall’s have a play of this?’—V, v, 265.—WuiTre (ed. ii.): 
It is recklessly used instead of shall we, for rhythm’s sake.—Wyatr: I think it more 
likely to be an irregular extension of the familiar usage after transitive verbs, as in 
SWetcuiOtaeWermse, 

304. By good Euriphile, our Mother] Is this a passing hint that we must 
take as a revelation of the outlandish manners of the two youths that they speak 
of their mother by her first name, and patronisingly call her ‘good’?—Eb. 

308. As once to our Mother] DowpEn: This may be right, ‘as once we sang 
to our mother.’ 

309. Euriphile, must be Fidele] Hupson: Yet neither name occurs in the 
dirge. A discrepancy for which it is not easy to account. 

312, 313. For Notes of sorrow . .. Phanes that lye] BOWDEN (p. 369): 
A few lines before Guiderius refused to sing because his voice was choked [qu. 
cracked?]; he would only say the dirge, it would be profanation to sing it out of 
tune. It is impossible to suppose that Shakespeare really held that the singing 
of a Miserere a trifle too sharp was worse than a hypocritical priesthood and a false 
religion. Read ironically the text means, ‘You talk of lying priests and their lying 
temples; I hold your vile psalm singing to be ten times worse.’ [Be it remembered 
that Bowden’s book, mainly the composition of the lamented Simpson, is devoted 
to proving that Shakespeare was not in sympathy with the Protestant movement 
of the day. In the present instance I am thoroughly in accord with Bowden as 
far as concerns the impossibility of Shakespeare’s ever having expressed in any 
circumstances so false and puerile a sentiment as that a broken heart must lament 
with strict attention to solmisation or else be hypocritical; but I go further, and 
believe it utterly impossible that Shakespeare could ever have put such a senti- 
ment into the mouth of an innocent stripling, who was yet in his salad days and 
had never left his mountain side. It is the irreconcilable falseness to character 
which, of itself alone, is sufficient to condemn these lines as spurious.—Ep.] 

315. Great greefes I see med’cine the lesse] MALONE: Thus also, ‘a touch 


21 


322 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Is quite forgot. 


[ACT Iv, SC. ii. 


He was a Queenes Sonne, Boyes, 316 


And though he came our Enemy, remember 

He was paid for that: though meane, and mighty rotting 
Together haue one duft, yet Reuerence 

(That Angell of the world) doth make diftinétion 320 


Of place ’tweene high, and low. 


Our Foe was Princely, 


And though you tooke his life, as being our Foe, 


Yet bury him, as a Prince. 


Gui. Pray you fetch him hither, 


Therfites body is as good as Azax, 


When neyther are aliue. 
Arut. Tf you’l go fetch him, 


316. Boyes,] boys; Cap. et seq. 

317. came] ’came Ingl. 

318. He was] Was Pope, Theob. He 
has Han. Warb. Cap. He’s Walker, 
Huds. 

though| thou F;F, The Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. tho’ Johns. 

319. du/t,) Ff, Rowe, Johns. Coll. 
Glo. Cam. dust; Pope et cet. 

320. That] The Rowe ii, Pope, Han. 


more rare subdues all pangs, all fears.’—I, ii, 82. 


327 


321. *tweene] twixt Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. 

Varr. Ran. 
Princely,| Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. 

princely; Cap. et cet. 

322. you] thee Ff, Rowe, Om. Pope,+. 

325. Therfites...Aiax] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
Thersites’... Ajax’ Han. Dyce, Ktly, 
Glo:-Coll. iii, Cam. Thersites’... Ajax 
‘Theob.eticet. 
* 326. are] are are F,. 7s Coll. MS. 


Again in Lear, ‘But where the 


greater malady is fix’d The lesser is scarce felt.’—III, iv, 8. 

316. He was a Queenes Sonne] CHARLES Worpsworts (p. 83): When 
Jezebel,—whose character has been compared not inaptly to that of Lady Macbeth, 
—had been thrown out of the window, and so killed, by the command of Jehu, he 
first trod her under foot, but afterwards, ‘when he came in, and had eat and drunk,’ 
he said: ‘Go see now this cursed woman, and bury her: for she is a king’s daughter .’— 
2 Kings, ix, 34. This command not improbably suggested to Shakespeare this 
speech, which he has put into the mouth of Belarius. 

318. He was paid for that] Scumrpr (Lex., s. v. 4. Trans. c.): To requite, to 
reward or punish.—Jounson: Hanmer reads has, rather plausibly than rightly. 

319, 320. Reuerence (That Angell of the world), etc.] JoHNson: ‘Rever- 
ence,’ or due regard to subordination, is the power that keeps peace and order 
in the world.—DercuTon: Yet the spirit of respect for one’s betters, that divinely 
sent messenger from God to men, makes distinction between those of high and 
low birth—Dowpen: Is this merely the praise of reverence as divinely sent? 
Or does Shakespeare think of the angels severing hereafter those who are to go 
above from those who must go below, and does he mean that in the present world 
reverence acts as a dividing angel? Ulysses, in Tro. & Cress., in a remarkable 
passage (I, iii, 83) justifies distinctions of rank, and dwells on their importance in 
society. 

324. Pray you] WALKER (Cyrit., i, 77) would read ‘Pray.’ 
above. 

326, neyther are] For ‘neither’ as a plural pronoun, see ABBOTT, § x2. 


See" LV, "ii,-10; 


ACT IV; SC. ii.] CYMBELINE 323 


Wee’l fay our Song the whil’{t : Brother begin. 328 
Gut. Nay Cadwall, we mutt lay his head to th’Eatt, 
My Father hath a reafon for’t. 330 


Aru, ’Tis true. 
Gut. Come on then, and remoue him. 
Aru. So, begin. 
SONG: 
Guid. Feare no more the heate o'th’ Sun, 265 
Nor the furious Winters rages, 


328. whil’ft:] Ff. whilst: Rowe,+. Begin. Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. (subs.). 


whilst. Johns. et seq. So,—Begin Cap. et cet. 
[Exit Bel. Han. 335-350. Mnemonic Pope. 
320. th Eaft,) Fi, Rowe.  th’east; 335. o’th’] of the Cap. o’the Var. ’73 
Pope,+. the east; Cap. et seq. et seq. 
333- So, begin.] Ff, Rowe. So.— 330. rages,] rages; Pope et seq. 


329. lay his head to th’East] Wyatt: The Christian custom of burial is to 
lay the head to the west, and the feet to the east; ‘so at the second coming of the 
Son of Man the dead might rise and face him in the general resurrection’ (Lee’s 
Glossary of Liturgical and Ecclesiastical Terms, p. 62). In reversing this position, 
Shakespeare may have no other intention than to suit the pre-Christian period of 
his play. But it is at least possible that he was aware of the Classical (and Celtic) 
myth which located the ‘Earthly Paradise’ in the Fortunate Islands (Avalon), 
across the western ocean, and which gave rise to the custom of burying the dead 
with their faces set thitherwards. (See Tylor’s Primitive Culture, ii, 48, 442, and 
Baring Gould’s Curious Myths of the Middle Ages.)—¥. C. CONYBEARE (Enc. Brit., 
rth ed., s. v. Funeral Rites, p. 331): The legend is that Christ was buried with his 
head to the West; and the Church follows the custom, more ancient than itself, 
of laying the dead looking to the East, because that is the attitude of prayer, and 
because at the last trump they will hurry eastward. So in Eusebius (His. Eccl., 
420, I9) a martyr explains to his pagan judge that the heavenly Jerusalem, the 
fatherland of the pious, lay exactly in the East, at the rising place of the sun. 

334. Song] Wuuite (Sh. Scholar, 466): Can any one familiar with the cast of 
Shakespeare’s thought, the turn of his expression, and the rhythm of his verse, 
believe that this Song is his? It could not be at once tamer, more pretentious, or 
more unsuited to the characters than it is. What did Guiderius or Arviragus, bred 
from infancy in the forest, know about ‘chimney sweepers’? How foreign to their 
characters to philosophize on ‘the sceptre, learning, physick’! Will anybody believe 
that Shakespeare, after he was out of Stratford Grammar School, or before, wrote 
such a couplet, as ‘All lovers young, all lovers must Consign to thee and come to 
dust’? Has he throughout his works given us reason to suspect him, on any evi- 
dence short of his own hand and seal, of making these two lads, burying their 
adopted stripling brother by the mouth of their cave in the primeval forest, close 
their dirge with such a wish as, ‘Quiet consummation have, And renowned be thy 
grave’? . . . The lines are the production of some clumsy prentice of the muse. 
[These remarks White repeated in his edition.|}—HattiweELL: This truly beautiful 
dirge may safely be left to its own influences, yet it may be worthy of note how ex- 
quisitely the fears dissipated by the hand of Death are made to harmonize with the 


324 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC. il. 


Thou thy worldly task haji don, 337 

Home art gon ,and tane thy wages. 

Golden Lads ,and Girles all mujfe, 

As Chimney-Sweepers come to auf. 340 
Arui. Feare no more the frowne ot’ Great, 


338. tane] take FF, Rowe. 340. Chimney-Sweepers] Chimney 
wages.] wages; Cap. et seq. Sweepers Rowe ii, Theob. Warb. 
339. Golden] Both golden Johns. Var. Johns. 
’73,’78. Both. Golden Var. ’85. Ran. 341. o’th’] F.F,, Rowe,+. oth F;. 
Girles all] lasses Coll. MS. o’the Cap. et seq. 


character of the wild district in which the speakers were then living. [In Shake- 
speariana, vol. v, p. 196, will be found a translation of this Song, into Latin, by 
Gotpwin Suite. In 1759 Witt1am Hawkins, Late Fellow of Pembroke College, 
and Professor of Poetry in the University of Oxford, ‘new-constructed this Tragedy,’ 
as we learn from his Preface, by ‘enlarging and improving some of the original parts.’ 
(The Italics are Hawkins’s.) Under this improvement we have the following version 
of this song: ‘Fear no more the heat o’th’sun, Nor the furious winter’s blast,’ 
Thou thy worldly task hast done, And the dream of life is past. Golden lads and 
girls all must Follow thee, and come to dust. Fear no more the frown o’th’great, 
Death doth mock the tyrant foe; Happiest is the early fate, Misery with time doth 
grow. Monarchs, sages, peasants must Follow thee, and come to dust.’ Of these two 
stanzas, the first only was adopted in their versions by Garrick and Kemble.—Eb.] 

339. Golden Lads, etc.] In some thoughtless moment, I fear it cannot be other- 
wise designated, Dr JoHNson prefixed to this line the word ‘Both,’ reading, 
‘Both golden lads,’ etc. The Cam. Edd. noted it as ‘a misprint,’ and, of course, 
they are right. Any other intimation thereof I can, however, nowhere find in any 
list of Errata, Corrigenda, or Addenda in subsequent volumes. And it is a ‘mis- 
print’ that is continued in the two following Variorums. Furthermore, Dr Johnson 
reiterated it in line 345, reading, ‘Both the sceptre,’ etc. Here the Var. ’73 and ’78 
deserted him and followed the Folio; but the Var. ’85 reads, ‘Both, The sceptre,’ 
etc., Dr Johnson printed, I am quite sure, from Theobald’s Second Edition; it is 
unfortunate that, in this instance, he could not be trusted to go alone.—Ep. 

339, 340. Golden Lads . . . come to dust] Staunton: There is something 
so strikingly inferior both in the thoughts and expression of the concluding couplet 
to each stanza of this Song, that we may fairly set them down as additions from 
the same hand which furnished the contemptible masque or vision that deforms the 
last Act.—Rotre: I am inclined to agree with Staunton. The poor pun in chimney 
sweepers and dust could hardly have been tolerated by Shakespeare in his later 
years; and the couplet has no natural cohesion with the preceding lines. The same 
is true of those which end the second and third stanzas. The final couplet is not so 
much out of place, but ‘renowned’ is a word out of place. [Staunton judiciously 
draws a distinction between the stanzas and the couplets, which White does not, 
although the lines which White specifically condemns are only in the couplets. 
These it is which are by a hand other than Shakespeare’s, and are probably a con- 
tinuation of the same trail which began with the offensive references to ‘rich left 
heirs’ and ‘lying priests.’ The stanzas themselves are Shakespeare’s very own, and 


in their melody and sad sweetness worthy of every exclamation of admiration 
which can be lavished on them.—Ep.] 


ACT Iv, SC; il, | CYMBELINE 325 


Thou art paft the Tirants firoake, 342 
Care no more to cloath and eate, 
To thee the Reede ts as the Oake: 
Lhe Scepter, Learning , Phyficke mu/f2, 345 
All follow this and come to auf. 
Guid. Feare no more the Lightning flafh. 
Aru. Wor tl’all-dreaded Thunderfione. 
Gui. Feare not Slander , Cenfure rafh. 
Aru. Thou haft finish’d Toy and mone. 350 
Both. AW Louers young ,all Louers muft , 
Configne to thee and come to duf. 
Guid. Wo Exorcifor harme thee, 
Aru. (or no witch-craft charme thee. 354 


342. ftroake,] stroke; Pope et seq. 
343. eate,] eat; Pope et seq. 


345. The] Both the Johns. Both. 
The Var. ’85. Ran. 

346. this] Ff. thee, Han. Ran. 
Herzberg. this, Rowe et cet. 

347. Lightning flafh.] Ff, Rowe. 
lightning-flash. Pope,+.  lightning- 


-flash, Cap. et cet. (subs.) 
348. all-dreaded] all dreaded Rowe ii, 
Pope, Han. 
Thunderftone.] Thunder-ftone. 
F;F,, Rowe,+. thunder-stone; Cap. et 
seq 


Han. Warb. Cap. 
349. Slander, Cenfure] slander’s cen- 
sure Johns. conj. 
Cenfure] censure, Rowe i. 
rath.] rash; Cap. et seq. 
350. mone.] moan: Cap. et seq. 
352. thee] F,. thee, F;F,, Rowe et 
seq. this Johns. conj. 
353. Exorcifor] Exorcifer Ff et seq. 
353,.354. harme...charme] charm... 
harm Warb. (MS., N. & Q., VIII, iii, 
263). 
353) 354) 355) 356. thee.] thee! Pope 
et seq. 


349. not] no Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob, 354. Nor] And Pope, Han. 


345. The Scepter, Learning, etc.] Jomnson: The Poet’s sentiment seems to 
have been this: All human excellence is equally subject to the stroke of death; 
neither the power of kings, nor the science of scholars, nor the art of those whose 
immediate study is the prolongation of life, can protect them from the final destiny 
of man. 

348. Thunderstone] So Othello asks: ‘Are there no stones in heaven But 
what serve for thunder?’—V, ii, 234——DowpENn: In Conrad Gesner’s De Rerum 
Fossilium . . . figuris, Zurich, 1565, pp. 62-64, thunderstones are depicted, which 
are obviously prehistoric stone-axes and stone-hammers. 

352. Consigne to thee] STEEVENS: That is, ‘to seal the same contract with 
thee,’ 7. e., add their names to thine upon the register of death. Murray (NV. E. D., 
s. v. 5. b.) quotes the foregoing definition by Steevens, and also one from John- 
son: ‘submit to the same terms with another,’ but where Johnson gives it I do 
not know; it is not in his edition, and if in any Variorum it has escaped me; in his 
Dictionary the definition of ‘consign’ is ‘to yield; to submit; to resign,’ with the 
present passage as its sole illustration. It is also Murray’s sole illustration. Under 
s. a, the definition of ‘consign’ is given by Murray: ‘to set one’s seal, subscribe, 
agree to anything’ and 2 Hen. IV: V, ii, 143; and Hen. V: V, ii, 326, are quoted. 

353. Exorcisor] Cotgrave: ‘Exorcisme: m. An exorcisme, or exorcising, a 


326 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act Iv, SC. il. 


Guid. Ghoft vnlaid forbeare thee. 355 

Arui. Nothing wl come neere thee. 

Both. Quiet confumation haue, 

And renowned be thy graue. 
Enter Belarius with the body of Cloten. 

Gui. We haue done our obfequies : 360 
Come lay him downe. 

Bel. Heere’s a few Flowres, but bout midnight more : 
The hearbes that haue on them cold dew o’th’night 


Are ftrewings fit’ft for Graues : vpon their Faces. 364 
357. haue,] have; Cap. et seq. about Ff et cet. 
358. And renowned] Unremoved 362. midnight] midnight, Cap. et seq. 
Han. (subs.) 
graue.] grave! Pope. 363. o’th’] oth F3F,. o’the Cap. et 
ScENE vi. Johns. seq. 
360, 361. One line, Pope et seq. 364. Graues:] graves—— Pope et seq. 
360. We haue] We’ve Pope,+, Dyce their Faces.| Ff, Coll. Dyce, Sta. 
li, iil. Glo. Cam. their faces— Rowe,+. 
361. [They place him beside Imogen. the face— Han. their ashes Sprengel. the 
Coll. MS. surface W. W. Lloyd (N. & Q., VI, xii, 
362. a few] few F;F,. 263). sein Gesicht, i. e., his face Hertz- 


*bout] Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. berg. their faces:— Cap. et cet. 


conjuring, an adjuring.’ Again, ‘Grimoire. A booke of coniuring, or exorcising, 
much in vse among Popish Priests. Mots de la Grimoire. Conjurations, exor- 
cismes, coniuring, or exorcising tearmes.—Monckx Mason (p. 335): Shakespeare 
invariably uses the word ‘exorcisor’ to express a person who can raise spirits, not 
one who lays them. So Ligarius in Jul. C@s. says, ‘Thou like an exorcist, hast 
conjured up my mortified spirit..—II, i, 323. And in 2 Hen. VI, where Boling- 
broke is about to raise a spirit, he asks Eleanor: ‘Will your ladyship behold and 
hear our exorcisms?’—I, iv, 5. 

357. consumation] Hupson: Probably the best comment on this is fur- 
nished by the closing prayer in the Church Burial Service: ‘That we, with all 
those who are departed in the true faith of Thy Holy Name, may have our perfect 
consummation and bliss, both in body and soul, in thy eternal and everlasting 
glory.’ 

360. We haue done our obsequies] JoHnson: For the obsequies of Fidele 
a song was written by my unhappy friend, Mr William Collins of Chichester, a man 
of uncommon learning and abilities. I shall give it a place at the end in honour 
of his memory. [See A ppendix.] 

364. vpon their Faces] CapeLt (p. 116): But here was but one face to do it 
on, for that of Cloten was gone; a small impropriety (designed or undesigned, is 
uncertain).—Heatu (p. 485): We must understand Euriphile as well as Fidele to 
have been buried in a cave, not under the earth, otherwise the raddock could not 
have brought them flowers and moss, nor could Imogen or the carcase of Cloten 
have been seen by passengers. The flowers were, therefore, strewed on Euriphile 
as well as Imogen, and both of them are addressed in the line ‘which we upon you 
strew.’—STAUNTON (Athen@um, 14 June, 1873): I attribute the fault in these 


ACT IV, SC..1i.] CYMBELINE 327 


[364. vpon their Faces] 


lines to the compositors rather than to Shakespeare, and believe those inveterate 
offenders have here spoiled a very beautiful apostrophe to the supposed dead 
Fidele and the deceased Cloten: ‘Upon the earth’s face You were as flowers; now 
wither’d; even so These,’ etc. [Hereupon follow justifications of ‘earth’s face’ 
from Rich. IIT: V, iii; 3 Hen. VI: I, iii, and from Dr Donne’s Funeral Elegy on Mrs 
Boulstred, where the poet, addressing Death, says: ‘Th’earth’s face is but thy table; 
there are sett Plants, cattell, men, dishes for Death to eat.’ Hudson adopted 
this emendation, reading, however, ‘Earth’s face,’ not ‘the earth’s face.’|—Br. 
NicHoson (NV. & Q., VI, xii, 425, 1885) doubts that ‘Cloten’s body has laid in the 
grave side by side with Imogen.’ I think Dr Nicholson must have forgotten 
Imogen’s awakening and her exclamation, ‘no Bedfellow!’ Again, when he goes 
on to say that he is ‘sure’ that ‘Come lay him down’ refers to Imogen, he seems 
to have overlooked the reply of Arviragus, ‘Bee’t so,’ when Guiderius says that 
Imogen is to be laid ‘by good Eriphile.’? ‘I had once thought,’ continues Nicholson, 
‘of the change, ‘Upon her [the earth’s] face,” but now I see that the text is far better 
and only requires the substitution of a comma for a full stop after “faces.” “Upon 
their faces” is “Upon the faces of these flowers that I have gathered.” ‘The 
speaker would say: ‘You, Fidele, once moved upon the faces of these herbelets, 
but now you are withered; even so these new fresh herbelets which we strew upon 
you shall within a few hours wither, so soon do beauty and fragrance and youth 
pass away”’; the frequent Biblical simile (Ps. ciii, 15, 16) occurring to him (as it does 
immediately afterwards to Imogen) and in some degree being his solace. —INGLEBY 
(reading ‘Upon their faces You were as flowers,’ etc.): This means, ‘Upon the 
faces of the herbs you were as flowers now withered. Just so, these herblets, 
which we strew upon you, shall serve for flowers.’ Throughout the passage 
‘you’ and ‘your’ consistently refer to the corses, and ‘their’ and ‘these’ to the 
herbs. The commentators impute to Shakespeare an oversight of their own crea- 
tion. ‘Shall’ is an extraordinary ellipsis: and possibly a line is lost. [Dr Ingleby’s 
interpretation would carry more weight if he could have given us only a single 
reference where an author had spoken of the face of an herb. The ‘extraordinary 
ellipsis’ after ‘shall’ is due to the removal of the full stop after ‘Faces.’ In the 
Revised Edition by Dr Ingleby’s son, Holcombe, the full stop is restored and the 
ellipsis is easily filled. His good paraphrase is as follows: ‘You (addressing the 
bodies) were once as flowers, but now are withered; even so shall these herblets 
wither, which we strew on you.’ —Ep.]—Dericuton: By ‘upon their faces’ nothing 
more is probably meant than on the front of their bodies, they being naturally laid 
on their backs, or, as we say, ‘face upward.’—THISELTON (p. 40): ‘Upon their 
faces’ explains why such ‘strewings are fit’st for Graues,’ namely, because the 
“cold dew o’th’night’ on the herbes resembles tears on the faces of the mourners.— 
VAUGHAN (reading ‘You, were as flowers, now wither’): That is, ‘You, who were 
once as flowers, now wither. Even so shall wither these herblets.’ {It seems to me 
that the punctuation of the Folio should be retained and ‘Upon their Faces’ is to 
be regarded as a direction by Belarius to the two youths, as to the strewing of the 
flowers. Deighton’s interpretation is, to me, the true one, and that ‘faces’ means 
merely the front of the body. It is common enough to say that a child is ‘sleeping 
on his face.’ Belarius says, ‘Here’s a few flowers, but bout midnight more’; 
although the obsequies were over, the bodies were not, therefore, interred; he 
afterwards says that the ‘ground has them,’ in the sense, I suppose, that they 


328 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT Iv, SC. il. 
You were as Flowres, now wither’d : euen fo 365 


Thefe Herbelets fhall, which we vpon you ftrew. 
Come on, away, apart vpon our knees : 
The ground that gaue them firft, ha’s them againe : 


Their pleafures here are paft, fo are their paine. 
Imogen awakes. 


Exeunt. 


370 


Yes Sir, to Milford-Hauen, which is the way ? 

I thanke you : by yond bufh? pray how farre thether ? 

’Ods pittikins : can it be fixe mile yet? 

I haue gone all night : ’Faith, Ile lye downe, and fleepe. 

But foft ; no Bedfellow ? Oh Gods, and Goddeffes / 375 
Thefe Flowres are like the pleafures of the World ; 


This bloody man the care on’t. 


366. Herbelets] Ff, Rowe,+. 
lets or herblets Cap. et cet. 
Strew] Ff, Rowe, Coll. Sta. Glo. 
strow Pope et cet. 


herb’- 


367. away,| away. Johns. away; 
Cap. et seq. 
knees:] Ff. knees— Rowe,+. 


knees. Cap. et cet. 
Line of asterisks here follows, 
Ktly. 
369. pleafures here are] pleasure here 
is Pope,+, Varr. Ran. 
are their paine| Fi (pain F3F,), 
is their pain Pope et seq. 
SCENE vi. Pope, Han. 
371-386. Mnemonic Pope, Han. 
371. Hauen,] Haven; Cap. et seq. 
372. you:] you Rowe,+. you, 
Cap. et seq. 
yond] yond’ Cap. Coll. Ktly. 
yon’ Var. ’73. yon Var. 78, ’85, Mal. 


Rowe. 


I hope I dreame : 377 


Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt. 
372. bufh?] bush— Pope, Han. 
thether?| Fy. 
373. pittikins:] pittikins— Rowe,+. 
pittikins! Cap. et seq. 
mile] miles Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. 
Ran. Steey. Varr. Knt, Coll. i, ii. 
; night:| night— Rowe,+. 
375. foft;] Ff, Cap. soft! Rowe et 
cet. 
Bedfellow?] Ff. bedfellow! Rowe, 
Pope, Ktly, Glo. Cam. bedfellow. 
Theob. Coll. bedfellow— Warb. bedfel- 
low, Johns. bedfellow: Han. et cet. 
[Seeing the Body. Rowe. 
376. Thefe] The Rowe ii, Pope, Han. 
377. care] cares Han. 
I hope| Sure Pope. TI hope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Varr. Mal. 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Ktly. Hope Vaun. 


repose on the Earth, where they will gradually moulder. Heath, who is too thought- 
ful a critic to have his opinions disregarded, seems to suppose, from line 304, that 
Euriphile’s body was still exposed and that Imogen was placed by her side; this is 
hard to reconcile with Imogen’s awakening by the side of Cloten’s trunk. This 
scene presents many a difficulty to the Stage Manager.—Ep.] | 

366. strew] Dyce (Remarks, p. 259): Read, with other modern editors, ‘strow’; 
for a rhyme was certainly intended here as at the conclusion of the speech. That 
transcribers were in the habit of writing ‘strew’ and ‘strow’ indifferently is beyond 
a doubt. 

373. ’Ods pittikins] Murray (N. E. D.): OD. A minced form of God, 
which came into vogue about 1600, when, to avoid the overt profanation of sacred 
names, many minced and disguised equivalents became prevalent. 2. The pos- 
sessive ’ods occurs like God’s, Gad’s in many asseverative or exclamatory formule. 
Pittikins, diminutive of ‘pity,’ like bodikins. 


AGE IV; SC. ii.) CYMBELINE 


329 
For fo I thought I was a Caue-keeper, 378 
And Cooke to honeft Creatures. But ’tis not fo: 
Twas but a bolt of nothing, fhot at nothing, 380 


Which the Braine makes of Fumes. Our very eves, 

Are fometimes like our Iudgements, blinde. Good faith 

I tremble ftill with feare: but if there be 

Yet left in Heauen, as {mall a drop of pittie 

As a Wrens eye ; fear’d Gods, a part of it. 385 
The Dreame’s heere {till : euen when I wake it is 


378. fo] sure Pope, Theob. Han. 385. eve,] eye, Pope et seq. 
Warb. Cap. so, Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. fear’d| oh Pope, Theob. Han. 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt. Jo/ Sing. Warb. 
Coll. ii, iti. (MS.) Gods,] gods! Rowe ii,+. 

379. But] Om. Pope, Han. @ part] Fy. apart F.F3. 

381. Fumes.] Ff, Rowe, Johns. Coll. of it.] of it! Rowe ii. et seq. 


fumes: Pope et cet. 


378. For so] CoLirer’s MS. changes ‘so’ to Jo. ‘Rightly perhaps,’ says DycE 
(ed. ii.) —VAUGHAN (p. 493): ‘So,’ however, has a good meaning, which sure and 
lo spoil. Imogen justifies her expectation that what she sees is a dream by ob- 
serving that ‘so’, 7. ¢., ‘in the same way,’ she had taken herself for a cave-keeper, 
and that turned out a delusion. Surely we should punctuate better thus [line 
378, as in the text]: ‘And cook to honest creatures, but ’tis not so.’ [It seems to me 
that Vaughan is emphatically right in condemning Collier’s Jo. ‘So’ refers to her 
hope that she had been dreaming,—then various pictures float dimly before her: 
that she was in a cave, that she cooked for honest creatures, but it was all shadowy, 
and she concludes ‘it is mof so,’ it cannot have happened, it was merely like an 
aimless arrow which the brain sometimes crystallises in a flash out of mists,—it 
was alla dream. Thus, step by step, we mount to the agony of her heart-rending 
cry, ‘the dream’s here still!’—Eb.] 

378, 379. a Caue-keeper, And Cooke to honest Creatures] CRaic: 
There should probably be no stop after ‘cave-keeper.’ Imogen means ‘up to 
this I fancied that the people I attended on, whose cave I cared for and for whom 
I cooked, were honorable.’ [Apparently, this interpretation that the cave-keeper 
was not honest is derived from the words that follow: ‘But ’tis not so.’ But does 
not this refer to ‘dreaming,’ and not to the honesty of the cave-dwellers? She had 
just hoped that it was ‘so,’ that is, adream. She now says ‘it was not so.’—Eb.] 

383. I tremble still with feare] Ecctrs: She seems, at pronouncing these 
words, to have risen from the ground, and stood somewhat apart from the body. 

384, 385. as small a drop of pittie As a Wren’s eye] It is “sacred pity’ 
that ‘engenders’ drops in eyes (As You Like It, I, vii, 12 3), and Imogen pleads 
but for a drop in the smallest of eyes.—ED. 

386. The Dreame’s heere still: euen when I wake it is] STAUNTON 
(Atheneum, 14 June, 1873): Another of the countless instances where Shake- 
speare’s meaning has been enfeebled or destroyed by an erroneous punctuation 
point: ‘The dream’s here still, even when I wake! It is,’ etc. [I cannot see any 
improvement. On the contrary, it seems to me to enfeeble the force of ‘here.’— 
Ep.] 


J 


Without me, as within me: not imagin’d, felt. 


330 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT IV, SC. ii. 


387 


A headleffe man? The Garments of Posthumus ? 

I know the fhape of’s Legge: this is his Hand: 

His Foote Mercuriall : his martiall Thigh 390 
The brawnes of Hercules : but his Iouiall face 

Murther in heauen ? How? ’tis gone. Pi/anzo, 

All curfes madded Hecuba gaue the Greekes, 

And mine to boot, be darted on thee : thou 

Confpir’d with that Irregulous diuell C/oten, 395 


387. within me:..felt.] within; felt, not 
imagin’d, Cap. conj. 
me] Om. Vaun. 
imagin’d] imag’d Dyce ii, conj. 
388. man?] man! Rowe et seq. 
Posthumus?] Posthumus! Cap. 
et seq. 
389. of’s] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Dyce, 
Sta. Glo. Cam. of his Cap. et cet. 
Legge:| leg, Rowe,+. 
Hand:| hand, Rowe,+. 
300. Mercuriall:| Mercurial, Rowe, 


+: 


Thigh] F.F;. thigh, F,, Rowe,+-. 
thigh: Cap. et seq. 
391. brawnes] arms Pope, Han. 
but his] but’s Walker (Crit., iii, 


327)- 

391. face——] face?— Coll. iii. 

302. Murther] Fi, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Knt, Wh. 
Murder Johns. et cet. 

heauen?| heav’n! Rowe, Pope, 
Han. heaven! Coll. Sta. Ktly. 
How?| How!— Rowe,+, Dyce, 
Glo. Cam. 
gone.]| gone— Rowe, Pope i. 
gone! Pope ii,+. 
- Pifanio,] Pisanio/— Rowe,+. 

304. thee:] thee! Rowe et seq. 

305. Confpir'd...diuell]| ’Twas thou 
conspiring with that devil, Pope,+. 

Trregulous| irreligious Johns. 
conj. 


390, etc. His Foote Mercuriall, etc.] H. CoLeRmGE (ii, 192): Shakespeare 
seldom, very seldom, repeats himself; but certainly this mythological dissection is 
very like Hamlet’s description of his father. In Hamlet, however, not only is the 
7éxo¢ better made out, but the application is much more natural and forcible. 
Here, considering that the mercurial foot, herculean brawns, etc., belong in reality 
to Cloten, Shakespeare’s intention probably was to show how much the eyes are 
fools of the mind, and how completely passion makes the beauty or deformity it 
loves or loathes. 

391. brawnes] Murray (N. E. D. 1.): Fleshy parts, muscle; especially the 
rounded muscle of the arm or leg. 

391. Iouiall] STEEvENS: This signifies here such a face as belongs to Jove. 
It is frequently used in the same sense by other old dramatic writers. Thus, in 
Heywood’s Rape of Lucrece: ‘Brutus. Thou Joviall hand held up thy Scepter 
high, And let not,’ etc., 1630, [sig. k, verso]. 

_ 395: Irregulous] CAPELL (p. 117): A word that cost the Poet some thought, 
is of the same derivation as irregular, and, in truth, of the same sense; but usage 
having weakened the latter, this was coined for the place; and the sense we should 
put in it is: under no Rule or Governance.—Mourray (N. E. D.) thus analyses its 
formation: Ir + Lat. regula rule + -ous; and gives the present as the only instance 


known. As a verb and participle, irregulate and irregulated are not without ex- 
amples. ; 


ACT IV, SC. ti. ] 


CYMBELINE 331 


Hath heere cut off my Lord. To write, and read, 396 
Be henceforth treacherous. Damn’d Pi/anio, 

Hath with his forged Letters (damn’d Pianio) 

From this moft braueft veffell of the world 

Strooke the maine top! Oh Po/humus, alas, 400 
Where is thy head? where’s that? Aye me ! where’s that ? 
Piano might haue kill’d thee at the heart, 


And left this head on. 


396. Hath] Have Rowe. 
et seq. 
397. Pifanio,].Pisanio Rowe et seq. 
398. forged] forg’d F;F,, Rowe i. 
400. Strooke] F2. Strook F;. Cap. 
Struck F 4. 
maine top] 
Warb. et seq. 
Ok Pofthumus, alas,] Posthu- 
mus!—O, alas, Cap. (errata), Ran. 
401. Aye me! where's] F.. Aye 
me | where’s F;. Aye me, I, where’s 


Hast Pope 


main-top Theob. 


How fhould this be, Pé/anio? 403 


F,. Ay, me, ay, where’s Rowe i. Ay 
me, where's Rowe ii, Theob. i, Pope. 
ah me, where’s Theob. ii, Han. Warb. 
Johns. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. 
Ktly. (subs.) 

403. this head] his head F,F,, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. thy head Han. Warb. 
Cap. Ran. Dyce ii, iii, Coll. iii. the 
head Ktly. 

be, Pifanio?] Fi, Theob. Warb. 
be, Pisanio! Rowe, Pope. be? Pisa- 
nio!— Han. be? Pisanio? Cap. et cet. 


396. Hath] This, immediately preceded by ‘Cloten,’ is a singular by attraction, 
like ‘The voice of all the gods Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.’—Love’s 
Lab. Lost, IV, iii, 364 (of this ed.). A plural by attraction has already occurred 
in the present play—I, v, 22. Such sentences present to us a melancholy alter- 
native; we must sacrifice either our ears or our grammar. Shakespeare preferred 
grammar as the victim. I cannot believe that it would be a symptom of de- 
generacy if we followed his example and here retained ‘hath.’—Ep. 

400. maine top] Murray (NV. £. D.): This is the Top of the mainmast, a 
platform just above the head of the lower mainmast. Often used loosely for the 
main-topgallant-masthead. [Alas, poor Imogen, in her distress, has used the term 
‘loosely’! Why, did not Zachary Jackson, or Andrew Becket, or Lord Chedworth 
assert that Imogen must have used the full nautical term?—Eb.] 

400. Oh Posthumus, alas] Capertt (p. 117) changed the order of these words 
not only to ‘heighten the pathos,’ but also to avoid giving an accent to ‘Posthumus’ 
that does not occur elsewhere in the play. But, just as inter arma silent leges, so in 
exclamations, at moments of extreme passion all ordinary rules of scansion should be 
silent, and, I think, that here the usual pronunciation of Posthumus should be 
retained.— ED. 

4o1. Aye me! where’s] Note in the Text. Notes the genesis of an error. In F; 
the exclamation mark after ‘me’ is a badly battered type, and resembles an up- 
right bar, which the compositor of F, mistook for the first personal pronoun, and 
accordingly set it up as ‘I,’ added a comma, and thus it was all ready to be con- 
verted by Rowe into ‘ay.’—Eb. 

403. And left this head on] VaucHaN (p. 495): I would read, ‘And left this 
on.’ ‘This’ is ‘thy head,’ just made mention of, and therefore ‘this.’ But the 
introduction of ‘head’ converts a proper expression into.an absurdity, for ‘this 
head’ must mean the head here present. 


332 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT IV, SC. ii. 


’Tis he, and Cloten : Malice, and Lucre in them 


Haue laid this Woe heere. 


Oh ’tis pregnant, pregnant! 405 


The Drugge he gaue me, which hee faid was precious 
And Cordiall to me, haue I not found it 
Murd’rous to’th’Senfes ? That confirmes it home : 


This is Pi/anio’s deede, and Cloten: Oh! 


404. he, and] he and F3;F,, Rowe,+, 
Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. 

Cloten:] Cloten. Ff, Rowe,-+. 

408. Murd’rous|] Murdr’ous Fy. Mur- 

th’vous Theob. ii, Warb. Murderous 

Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. murtherous 


409 


Wh. i. 

408. to’th’] to th’ F;F,, Rowe,+. to 
the Cap. et seq. 

409. Cloten:] F.F,, Rowe, Coll. i. 
Clotten: F;. Cloten. Vaun. Cloten’s 
Pope et cet. 


405. pregnant] Nares (Gloss.): That is, ready or apt to produce. The 
metaphorical senses of this word, by which it was applied to the productiveness of 
mind, genius, argument, etc., are now in general obsolete. 1. Stored with informa- 
tion: ‘Our cities, institutions, and the terms For common justice, you are as 
pregnant in, As art or practice hath enriched any That we remember.’—Meas. for 
Meas., I, i, 12. Hence the contrary, um-pregnant. 2. Ingenious, full of art or in- 
telligence: ‘Disguise, I see, thou art a wickedness Wherein the pregnant enemy 
[i. e., the devil] does much.’—Twel. Night, I, ii, 29; ‘How pregnant sometimes his 
replies are!’—Ham., Il, ii, 212. 3. Apprehensive, ready to understand, rich in 
perceptive powers: ‘My master hath no voice, lady, but to your own most pregnant 
and vouchsafed ear.—Twel. Night, III, i, 100. It is marked, however, in this 
sense as somewhat affected, for the foolish Sir Andrew immediately takes it up, as a 
superfine word, fit to be remembered: ‘Odours, pregnant, and vouchsafed! Tl get 
them all three ready.’ 4. Applied to an argument; full of force or conviction, or 
full of proof in itself: ‘Now, sir, this granted, as it is a most pregnant and unforc’d 
position.’—Othello, II, i, 239. [Also the present line.] The word was, however, 
used with great laxity, and sometimes abus’d, as fashionable terms are; but gener- 
ally may be referred to the ruling sense as being full, or productive of something. 
Thus in Ham., ‘And crook he pregnant hinges of the knee, Where thrift may follow 
fawning.’—III, ii, 66. Where I should not so much interpret it quick, ready, as 
Johnson and others do; but artful, designing, full of deceit —Scummpt (Lex., s. 2. 3.): 
‘Probable in the highest degree, clear, evident.’ As illustrations of these meanings 
the following quotations are given: ‘’tis very pregnant,’ Meas. for Meas., II, i, 23; 
the present passage; ‘most true, if ever truth were pregnant by circumstance,’ 
Wint. Tale, V, ii, 34; ‘it is a most pregnant and unforced position,’ Othello, II, i, 2 393 
“were’t not that we stand up against them all, ’twere pregnant they should square 
between themselves,’ Ant. & Cleop., II, i, 45. [In all of them there seems to me to 
be a trace of meaning on which Nares lays stress and Schmidt overlooks, namely, 
an intimation of fulness, of aggregation, of complexity. Imogen’s exclamation, 
“Oh ’tis pregnant, pregnant!’ indicates, I think, that light is just dawning on her. 
The mere mention of Pisanio and Cloten, of whom she has just spoken, gives the 
clew, and she suddenly realizes that these two names enfold the whole mystery,— 
that they are big with the plot against her life. Shakespeare’s use of ‘pregnant’ 


always presents a problem, with a distinctive, subtle meaning—it is itself ‘preg- 
nant.’—Ep.] 


ACT IY, SC. ii.] CYMBELINE 333 


Giue colour to my pale cheeke with thy blood, 410 

That we the horrider may feeme to thofe 

Which chance to finde vs. Oh, my Lord! my Lord! 412 
412. chance] chace Ff, Rowe i. 412. [Falls on the body. Glo. Falling 


and embracing the body. Coll. iii. 


412. Oh, my Lord! my Lord!] Anon. (qu. Campbell?) Blackwood, Feb., 
1833, Pp. 152): We remember that we used to think of old that Imogen’s passion on 
finding what she believed was the dead body of Posthumus was not enough intense. 
Boy-critics then were we on Shakespeare—now we are an old man. What is the 
truth? Imogen has awoke from a poisoned swoon—and has been bestrewed with 
flowers like one of the dead. As the swoon has gone, on comes sleep. ‘Faith I'll 
lie down and sleep!’ Something human-like is beside her on the ground; and on the 
uncertain vision she says to herself, ‘but soft! no bedfellow!’ Then, seeing that 
it is indeed a body, she utters that beautiful exclamation: ‘O gods and goddesses! 
Those flowers are like the pleasures of the world; This bloody man the care on’t. 
I hope I dream!’ For a while longer she knows not whether she be or be not in the 
power of a dream; all she knows is, that her whole being is possessed by fear and 
trembling. She says: ‘But if there be Yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity 
As a wren’s eye, fear’d gods, a part of it!’ Her fancy—her imagination—as she 
lies there half entranced—are bewildered by and bewilder her passion—and all the 
language then given utterance to in her strange agony is pitched wild and high, a 
wonderful wailing of poetry. 

‘The dream’s here still! It is even when I wake, Without me as within me; not 
imagined, felt. A headless man!’ At that moment her emotion must be—horror. 
Tn it all her senses are bound up; but it relaxes its hold, and she now has the whole 
miserable use of her eyes. ‘The garment of Posthumus!’ The human heart can 
suffer but a measure—in hers, it has been an overflowing one—of any one passion. 
Her actions, her words, are now calmer—they shew almost composure—she in- 
spects the body of her husband with a fearful accuracy of love. ‘I know the shape 
of his leg; this is his hand; his foot Mercurial; his Martial thigh; The brawns of 
Hercules; but his Jovial face—Murder in heaven! How? ’Tis gone!’ Had she 
seen him lying unmutilated in the majestic beauty of death, she would have poured 
out her heart, in tenderest grief, and there would have been more of what is com- 
monly called pathos in her lamentations, but the bloody neck—the sight, the 
touch of that extorts but one wild cry. ‘Murder in heaven!’ ‘How? ’tis gone!’ 
Who but a Siddons could have uttered these words in shrieks and moans! With 
suitable accompaniment of stony eyeballs, clay-white face, and the convulsive 
wringing of agonized hands! Out of the ecstacy of horror, and grief, and pity, and 
love, and distraction, and despair arise—indignation and wrath towards his mur- 
derers. Pisanio! be all curses darted on thee! and that ‘irregulous devil Cloten!’ 
All is at once brought to light. The circumstantial evidence of their guilt is 
‘strong as proof of Holy Writ,’ or rather she sees the murderers revealed, as in a 
lurid flash of lightning. Forgery! poisoning! assassination! ‘Damned Pisanio!’ 
‘Pisanio!’ ‘Pisanio!’ ‘Damned Pisanio!’ ‘This is Pisanio’s deed!’ ‘’Tis he and 
Cloten!’ ‘Pisanio’s deed and Cloten’s!’ ‘O, ’tis pregnant, pregnant!’ Thus she 
clenches the proof of their guilt by the iteration of their accursed names, the very 
sound of every syllable composing them being to her ears full of cruelty and wick- 


334 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act Iv, Sc. ti. 


Enter Lucius, Captaines ,and a Sooth{ayer. 413 
Cap. To them,the Legions garrifon’d in Gallia 
Scene vit. Pope,+. Scene continued. Cap. 
Theob. 414. To them,] Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. 
413. Enter...] Enter, as in March, Varr. Mal. Steev. Knt, Sta. To them 
Lucius, a Captain and other Officers... (a stage direction) Anon. ap. Cam. 


edness. ‘Where is thy head? where’s that? Ah mel where’s that? Pisanio might 
have killed thee at the heart, and left this head on!’ 

But, had his heart been stabbed, and his breast all blood-bedabbled, would her 
woe have been less wild? Then had she thought, ‘he might have spared the 
heart!’ Distracted though she be, and utterly prostrate, what a majestic image 
crosses her brain, as she gazes on the majestic corpse! ‘From this most bravest 
vessel of the world Struck the main-top!’ ‘O!—Give colour to my pale cheek with 
thy blood, That we the horrider may seem to those Which chance to find us: O, 
my lord! my lord!’ 

Does she smear her face with his blood? A desperate fancy! In her horror she 
madly desires to look horrid; and all this world being terribly changed to her, she 
must be terribly changed too, and strike with affright ‘those which chance to find 
her.’ She has forgot the cave and its dwellers, that, as she was recovering from her 
swoon, kept glimmering before her eyes. She thinks no more that she ‘was a cave- 
keeper, and cooked to honest creatures’-—to her Guiderius and Arviragus have 
ceased to be—their beautiful images are razed out from her brain. She cares not 
on what part of the wide wild world she may be laying now; and her last words, ere 
once more they stop the beating of her heart, are, ‘O, my lord! my lord!’ 

414. To them] The ingenious and plausible suggestion that these words formed 
part of the stage direction is recorded as an Anonymous Conjecture in the Cam. 
Ep. of 1866. Not knowing that he had been anticipated, it was re-conjectured by 
R. M. Spence in WV. & Q., in January, 1880. It was sur-re-conjectured by the 
same, in the same, in March, 1897, and, after expressing regret that it had never 
been adopted, after the many years since he proposed it, Spence doubted that any 
one would have ‘the fortitude to defend the present text.’ His doubt was removed 
by ‘B. C.’ in Notes & Queries for 1 May, 1897, who upheld the retention of ‘To 
them’ in the text, for the following reasons: ‘In III, vii, we have a conference 
between Senators and Tribunes as to the legions to be appointed for service in 
Britain. Three bodies of troops then mentioned: (1) The force remaining in 
Gallia. (2) Another force, the subject of supposed preceding conference. (3) A 
further supplementary levy to be made under a commission to the Tribunes. 
Taking the speech in question to be a continuation of a conversation commenced 
before the actual presence of the actors on the stage, a reference may be made to a 
junction of the first two bodies and their being in readiness at Milford Haven, the 
third body being the “confiners and gentlemen of Italy under conduct of bold 
Iachimo” shortly expected.’ On the 29th of January, 1808, through the same 
channel, Spence replied to ‘B. C.’ that it was quite true that there were three bodies 
of troops, but of these only two were available for use in Britain. Lucius, who com- 
manded the legions in Gallia, had preceded them to Britain and was now informed 
of their arrival there. The Roman levy has not yet arrived, and there were no 


other troops to which ‘the words “to them” can refer.’,—DowpbEN interprets these 
words as ‘in addition to them.’ 


ACTIV. SC ila] CYMBELINE 335 
After your will, haue croft the Sea, attending 415 


You heere at Milford-Hauen, with your Shippes : 
They are heere in readineffe. 
Luc. But what from Rome? 
Cap, The Senate hath ftirr’d vp the Confiners, 
And Gentlemen of Italy, moft willing Spirits, 420 
That promife Noble Seruice : and they come 
Vnder the Condué& of bold Jachimo, 
Syenna’s Brother. 
Luc. When expect you them ? 
Cap. With the next benefit o’th’winde. 425 
Luc. This forwardneffe 
Makes our hopes faire. Command our prefent numbers 
Be mufter’d : bid the Captaines looke too’t. Now Sir, 
What haue you dream’d of late of this warres purpofe. 429 


415. Sea,] sea; Cap. et seq. 425. oth’) F., Rowe,+. oth F;F,. 


416. with your) with you F2. with 
you or with their Elze. 

417. are heere] are Ff, Rowe,+, Cap. 
Varr. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. 

420. Italy,| Fi, Rowe,+, Coll. iii. 


of the Cap. o’the Var. ’73 et cet. 
428. mufter’d:| muftered, Fi, Rowe ii. 
muster’d, Rowe i, Pope, Han. 
[To the Soothsayer. Han. 
4290. What haue] What, have F3F,. 


Italy; Cap. et cet. 
moft] Om. Cap. seq. 


purpofe.| purpose? Rowe et 


417. They are heere] Dyce: The transcriber or compositor repeated ‘heere’ 
by mistake [from the line immediately above it]. 

419. Confiners] Murray (NV. E. D., s. v. 2.): That is, one living within the 
confines, an inhabitant. [Other than the present passage, the only quotation is— 
1595, Daniel, Civil Warres, i, xviii: ‘Happie confiners you of other landes.’]}—Dycr, 
following Capell, Steevens, and Malone, places an accent on the first syllable, 
‘cénfiners.’ ‘Daniel accents confi-ners, says Murray. [I am not quite sure that the 
quotation from Daniel bears out the definition of ‘an inhabitant.’ Daniel repre- 
sents the populace, who accompany ‘Bullingbrooke’ to the sea-shore to begin his 
six years of exile, as lamenting that the ocean hems them ‘within the waterie 
prison of its waves,’ and none escape ‘the eyes of wrath.’ ‘Happie confiners,’ they 
say, ‘you of other landes, That shift your soyle, and oft scape tyrants hands.’ 
Does not ‘confiners’ here point to ‘borderers,’ which is Murray’s first definition, 
rather than to mere ‘inhabitants’? To escape a tyrant cannot those who live 
on the confines, on the borders, pass from one country to another more swiftly and 
readily than those who are ‘stopt by the fearefull ocean’ or are inhabitants of in- 
land cities?p—Eb.] 

423. Syenna’s Brother] STEEVENS: That is (as I suppose Shakespeare to have 
meant), brother to the Prince of Sienna; but, unluckily, Sienna was a republic. See 
W. Thomas’s Hist. of Italye, 1561, p. 7, b—DowpEN: But not in drama. In 
Beaumont & Fletcher’s Woman Pleased we find a Duke of Sienna. 


336 THE TRAGEDIEVOF 


Sooth. 


Laft night, the very Gods fhew’d me a vifion 


[acT Iv, SC. il. 


430 


(I faft,and pray’d for their Intelligence ) thus : 

I faw Ioues Bird, the Roman Eagle wing’d 

From the fpungy South, to this part of the Weft, 

There vanifh’d in the Sun-beames, which portends 

(Vnleffe my finnes abufe my Diuination ) 435 


Succeffe to th’? Roman hoaft. 
Luc. Dreame often fo, 
And neuer fal fe. 


Soft hoa, what truncke is heere ? 


Without his top? The ruine fpeakes, that fometime 


It was’a worthy building. How? a Page? 


Or dead, or fleeping on him ? But dead rather: 
For Nature doth abhorre to make his bed 442 


430. Laft...Gods] Last very night the 

Gods Han. 
very] warey Warb. Conj. 

431. I faft, and pray’d] I feaft, and 
pray’d Ff, Rowe i. I fasting pray’d 
Han. I fasted, pray’d Eccles. conj., Ktly 
conj. In fast I pray’d or I fast and pray 


438. falfe.] false! Theob. Warb. 
Johns. 
hoa,| ho, Fy. 
Var. ’73 et seq. 
heere?| Ff (subs.), Rowe. here 
Pope,+, Knt, Dyce, Sta. Glo. Coll. iii, 


Cam. here, Cap. et cet. 


ho; Cap. hot 


Anon. ap. Cam. 
thus:| Om. Pope,+. 
432. Bird, the] bird. The Craig conj. 
wing’d] wing Han. Cap. 
433. From the] From th’ Han. 


440. How? a Page?| How! a Page! 
Rowe et seq. 
440, 441. Page? Or dead, or fleeping 
on] page, Or dead or sleeping, on Vaun. 
441. dead rather] Fi, Rowe, Pope, 
434. vanifh'd] vanish Han. Han. Coll. Glo. Cam. dead, rather 
Sun-beames,]| sun-beams; Pope et Theob. et cet. 
seq. 442. bed] couch Pope,+. 


430. the very Gods] JoHNson: It was no common dream, but sent from the 
very gods, or the gods themselves.—WALKER (Crit., ii, 328): That is, not even the 
gods, but the gods beyond a doubt; or perhaps the gods in person, as in Virgil, Ain., iii, 172. 

430. a vision] Hrrrorp: This episode was probably suggested by Holinshed’s 
description of Aulus Plautius’s invasion under Claudius, when ‘the mariners and 
men of war’ were encouraged by seeing ‘a fierie leme [light] to shoot out of the east 
towards the west, which way their course lay.’—Stone’s Holinshed, p. 15. 

431. I fast] Apporr (§ 342) gives a long list of verbs ending in ¢ which do not 
add -ed in the participle. 

431. Intelligence] Scumipt (Lex.): That is, mental intercourse. 

431, 432. thus: I saw Ioues Bird] VAUGHAN (p. 497): ‘Jove’s bird’ is the 
nominative case and should commence the sentence. We should read: ‘Thus I 
saw; Jove’s bird the Roman eagle,’ etc. 

433, 434. South, . . . West, There vanish’d in the Sun-beames] MappEn 
(p. 215, foot-note): The soothsayer notes that the Eagle ‘vanish’d in the sun- 
beams.’ This annoyance must have occurred constantly on a bright morning with 
a strong north-northwesterly wind. 


442. bed] See Text. Notes for what appears to be eighteenth century squeamish- 
ness.—Ep. 


ACT Iv, SC. ii. ] CYMBELINE 337 


With the defunct, or fleepe vpon the dead. 443 
Let’s fee the Boyes face. 
Cap. Hee’s aliue my Lord. 445 


Luc, Hee’l then inftruét vs of this body : Young one, 
Informe vs of thy Fortunes, for it feemes 
They craue to be demanded : who is this 
Thou mak’ft thy bloody Pillow ? Or who was he 
That (otherwife then noble Nature did) 450 
Hath alter’d that good Picture? What’s thy intereft 
In this fad wracke? How came’t? Who is’t ? 
What art thou? 

Imo. Jam nothing; or if not, 
Nothing to be were better : This was my Matter, 455 
A very valiant Britaine, and a good, 


443. or] to Cap. 452. came’t?] came to’t? Ingl. 
dead.| dead, Rowe i. came't? Who is’t?] F,, Rowe. 
445. Hee’s| He is Varr. Mal. Ran. cam't? Who is’t? F.F;. came it, and 
Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. who is it? Pope,+. came it? and who 
446. this] his Fi, Rowe. is it? Cap. cameit? Who is it? Var.’73 
body:] body. F3F, et sea. et seq. 
447. thy] the F,, Rowe, Pope. 455. to be] to be, Pope,+. 
449. Or who| who Pope,+. better:] better. Cap. et seq. 
450. did)| did it, Han. Cap. Eccles. 456. Britaine] Ff (subs.), Rowe, 
limn’d Anon. ap. Cam. Pope, Theob. i, Cap. Briton Theob. ii. 
452. wracke] Fi (subs.), Rowe. wreck et cet. 
Pope. 


450, 451. (otherwise then noble Nature did) Hath alter’d] THrosatp 
(ed. i.): By the construction, this means, ‘who hath alter’d this good picture, other- 
wise than Nature alter’d it?’ But this is not the meaning. The Poet designed to 
say, ‘who hath alter’d this good picture from what Nature at first made it?’ [Theo- 
bald, therefore, modestly suggested bid for ‘did.’ That is, ‘the laws of Nature 
being against murder..—WarsBurton heaped ridicule on this note, for which 
Epwarns (p. 181) called him roundly to account. ‘Shakespeare certainly meant,’ 
adds Edwards, ‘as Mr Theobald explains him. And if Mr W. won’t allow us Mr 
Theobald’s conjecture of bid for “did,” we must suppose “did” not to be the sign 
of the past tense, but to be itself a verb, “did” or made; perhaps used in the tech- 
nical sense—did the picture, 7. e., painted it.’ In this technical sense of ‘did,’ 
i. e., drew, or painted, HeaTH acquiesced, and CapeLy pronounced it ‘certainly 
right,’ adding that ‘this sense will be obvious if we allow of the inserted word it 
[see Text. Notes]; which might very easily be dropped at the press, or omitted by 
the Poet himself.’ There has been no dissenting view from this interpretation of 
the passage.—STEEVENS quotes Olivia’s words in Twel. Nighi, where, ‘speaking of 
her own beauty as of a picture, Olivia asks Viola if it “is not well done?”’—DowpDEN 
queries: ‘But is not the meaning, Noble Nature only took away the life—Who 
mutilated the body?’—Eb.| 


22 


338 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[AcT IV, SC. il. 


That heere by Mountaineers lyes flaine : Alas, 457 
There is no more fuch Mafters : I may wander 
From Eaft to Occident, cry out for Seruice, 


Try many, all good: ferue truly : neuer 


Finde fuch another Matter. 
Luc. ’Lacke, good youth : 


460 


Thou mou’ft no leffe with thy complaining, then 
Thy Maifter in bleeding : fay his name, good Friend. 

Imo. Richard du Champ: Vf I do lye, and do 465 
No harme by it, though the Gods heare, I hope 


They’! pardon it. 
Luc. Thy name? 
Imo. Fidele Sir. 


Luc. Thou doo’ft approue thy felfe the very fame : 


Say you Sir ? 


470 


Thy Name well fits thy Faith ; thy Faith,thy Name: 


457. Mountaineers] Mountainers Ff, 
Rowe. 
Alas,| Ff (Alafs, F3;). Alas! 
Rowe. 
458. There is] Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo. 
Cam. There are Ff et cet. 
more fuch] more of such Coll. ii. 
conj. 
460. many,| many, and Johns. Cap. 
many more Kinnear. 
good: ferue truly:] Ff. good, 
serve them truly, Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. good, serve them true and Hertz- 
berg. conj. good, serve all truly, Vaun. 
good, serve truly, Rowe et cet. 
neuer] never more Ktly. 
462. youth:] youth! Cap. et seq. 


464. Thy] The F,. 
Maifier] Master Ff. 
in] Om. Pope, Han. Cap. in his 
Sta: conj. (Athenzum, 14 June, 1873). 

465. Champ] F,. Camp F;F,, Rowe, 

Pope, Han. 
” [Aside. Rowe et seq. 
and do] F,. and doe F;F,. 

467-469. As one line, omitting Sir. 
Steev. Var. ’03, 713. As one line, Var. 
21 et seq. (except Cam.). 

467. pardon it] pardon’t Han. 

469. Sir.] Om. Han. 

471. Faith; ...Name:] F2. Faith, ... 
Name: F;F;. faith,...name. Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. faith;... 
name. Theob. et cet. 


458. There is] For other examples of the ‘inflection in -s preceding a plural 


subject,’ see ABBOTT, § 335. 


459. cry out for Seruice] WALKER (Crit., iii, 327): Does this mean make 
public proclamation of my wish to enter into service? as outcry for auction. 
460. Try many, all good: serue truly: neuer] STEEVENS: We may be 


certain that this line was originally complete. 


metre, read: ‘—and all good,’ etc. 
Johnson and Capell! 
punctuate Imogen’s sobs. 


I would, therefore, for the sake of 


[This ‘and’ already stood in the texts of 
Steevens must have known it.—Ep.]—Wvyattr: The commas 
[After this palmarian note by Wyatt, anyone who 


could meddle with the scansion of this line or attempt, after counting off the syl- 
lables on his fingers, to amend it, would have held the pail while Malone white- 


washed Shakespeare’s bust.—Ep.] 


471. Thy Name well fits thy Faith] Thus, in Henry V, where Pistol, as he 


AGCTRIV§SCo i. CYMBELINE 


339 


Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not fay 472 


Thou fhalt be fo well mafter’d, but be fure 

No leffe below’d. The Romane Emperors Letters 

Sent by a Confull to me, fhould not fooner 

Then thine owne worth preferre thee : Go with me. 
Imo. Ile follow Sir. But firft,and’t pleafe the Gods, 

Ile hide my Mafter from the Flies,as deepe 

As thefe poore Pickaxes can digge : and when 

With wild wood-leaues & weeds, I ha’ ftrew’d his graue 

And on it faid a Century of prayers 

(Such as I can) twice o’re, Ile weepe,and fighe, 

And leauing fo his feruice, follow you, 

So pleafe you entertaine mee. 
Luc. I good youth, 

And rather Father thee, then Mafter thee : My Friends, 


475 


480 


485 


472. chance] change F,, Rowe. 482. fighe,] Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
473. mafter’d,| Fi, +, Coll. Glo. Cam. sigh; Theob. et cet. 
Cam. master’d; Cap. et cet. 485. I] Ay, Rowe. 


75. not] no Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 


4 youth,| youth; Cap. et seq. 
Han. Warb. Cap. 


486. Father thee,| father Walker 


476. preferre thee:| prefer thee. Johns. 
477. and’t] an’t Ff et seq. 
479. poore] door Theob. ii. (misprint), 
Warb. 
480. wild  wood-leaues] 
leaves Cam. conj. 
I ha’ Ff,+, Dyce, Glo. Cam. 


wild-wood 


Crityyiins27)s 
thee.| thee. Rowe et seq. 
My Friends,| Closing the line, 
Ff, Rowe, Mal. Coll. Sta. Sing. Ktly. 
Separate line, Pope et cet. 
486, 487. My Friends...duties| One 
line, Elze. 


I’ve Sing. I have Cap. et cet. 


goes out, says, ‘My name is Pistol call’d,’ King Henry, after he is gone, says, 
‘It sorts well with your fierceness.’—IV, i, 62. 

476. preferre thee] That is, recommend, advance. 
400, below. 

479. Pickaxes] JOHNSON: Meaning her fingers. 

480. wild wood-leaues & weeds] The CamBripcE Eprrors have conjectured 
that the true reading here is ‘wild-wood flowers.’ Every conjecture from this 
source is worthy of all respect. At first blush this one seems unquestionable. 
To test it, Imogen’s probable purpose in selecting ‘wood-leaves’ must be analysed. 
That these leaves are coupled with ‘weeds’ gives usa clue. Flowers are tokens of 
grief andsorrow. Yet these are not the emotions that predominate here,—but rather 
one overwhelming horror, where flowers would be inappropriate. Leaves, not petals, 
must be strewed on the bloody abhorrent corpse—and they must be stiff, harsh leaves 
from forest trees to match the weeds, the nettles, and darnels, whereon are no gay 
blooms. Can ‘wild-wood leaves’ suit this mood? It is conceivable that leaves 
from the ‘wild-wood’ might be those of gay wild-flowers, pale primroses or violets, 
or azured harebells. Hence, I venture modestly to think that the Folio is right.— Eb. 

484. entertaine mee] Matone: That is, hire me; receive me into your service. 


See II, iii, 49, and line 


340 


The Boy hath taught vs manly duties : Let vs 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT Iv, SC. il. 


Finde out the prettieft Dazied-Plot we can, 
And make him with our Pikes and Partizans 


A Graue : Come, Arme him: Boy hee’s preferr’d 


By thee, to vs, and he fhall be interr’d 


As Souldiers can. 


Some Falles are meanes the happier to arife. 


487, 488. Let vs Finde out the...can] 
One line, reading: Let’s find the...can. 
Elze. 

488. Dazied-Plot] Ff,+. daizy’d plot 
Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. dazied plot 
Steev. Varr. daisied plot Knt et cet. 

490. Graue:] grave. Johns. Ktly. 

him:] him. Johns. et seq. 


Be cheerefull ; wipe thine eyes, 


487 
490 
Exeunt 493 

490. Boy] Boy, F, et seq. 

hee’s] he is Ff et seq. 

491. to vs,] to us; Cap. 

492. cheerefull;| cheerful F2.  cheer- 
full, F;.  chearful F,,4.  chearful; 


Cap. Var. 778, ’85, Ran. 
eyes,] eyes. Pope, Theob. i, Han. 
eyes; Theob. ii. et seq. 


490. Come, Arme him] Hanmer: That is, take him up in your arms. 

493. Exeunt] Anon. (Blackwood, Feb., 1833, p. 153): The scene is perfect. 
The flow and ebb of passion is felt by us to be obeying, like the sea, the mysterious 
law of nature. The huge waves of woe have subsided almost into a calm. The 
strength of love is now the support of Imogen’s life—and the sense of duty. She 
has no wish either to die or to live; but her despair is no longer distraction; and 
having grieved till she could grieve no more, and reached the utmost limits of sorrow, 
there she is willing submissively to endure her lot. ‘Leaving so his service!’ not 
till with her own fingers she had helped to dig her master’s grave! That done, 
and he buried, ‘I follow you, so please you entertain me.’ The warrior bids her 
‘be cheerful and wipe her eyes’; and we can believe that Imogen obeys one-half 
of the injunction—that she does ‘wipe her eyes’; but as to being ‘cheerful,’ never 
more may a smile visit for a moment that beautiful countenance—though Lucius, 
looking on it, may believe that his page is happy. To him she is but Fidele; to us— 
Imogen. 

It is wonderful how our pity is never impaired by our knowledge, all the while, 
that the corpse is not that of Posthumus but Cloten’s. Perhaps we forget that it is 
so; surely there is no interruption given to our sympathy; we partake in the same 
delusion, which is only dispelled at last, to our great relief, by the last words of 
Lucius, ‘Some falls are means the happier to arise.’ It was just the same with 
our feelings for Imogen herself in the forest-cave. The young princes believed her 
dead—and we, though we knew she was but in a swoon, believed so too—almost 
sufficiently for any amount of sorrow. The thought that Fidele was not dead but 
sleeping, was so dim, that it marred not the emotions with which we beheld her 
funeral rites, and heard the dirge chanted, to the scattering over her fair body of 
leaves and flowers. Poor Cloten! He must have been a fine animal, to be mis- 
taken, a headless trunk, for Posthumus. 


ACT IV, SC. iii. ] CYMBELINE 341 


Scena Tertia. 


Enter Cymbeline , Lords ,and Pifanio. 2 
Cym. Againe: and hring me word how ’tis with her 
A Feauour with the abfence of her Sonne ; 


r) 


A madneffe, of which her life’s in danger : Heauens, 5 

How deeply you at once do touch me. Jmogen, 

The great part of my comfort, gone : My Queene 7 
1. Scene 0. Rowe. Transposed to 3. [To an attendant; who goes out. 

the end of Act III, there numbered Sc. Cap. 

vil. Pope, Han. 5. A] Om. Pope,+, Cap. Walker. 
The Palace. Rowe. danger:| danger. Coll. Ktly, Glo. 
2. Pifanio] Pisanio, Lords and other Cam. danger, Dyce. 

Attendants. Cap. Heauens,| Heav’ns! Rowe,+. 

3. hring] Fx. 6. me.]| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
me] we F3F,. Warb. Johns. me/ Han. et cet. 
her,| Ff. her; Rowe, Pope, Theob. 7. great] great’st Cap. conj. 
Han. her! Warb. Johns. her. Cap. et cet. gone:] gone! Rowe,+. 


1. Scena Tertia] Ecctes: We cannot pretend to fix with any degree of exactness 
the period of time to which this Scene belongs; Cymbeline here receives intelligence 
of the troops from Gallia and the ‘supply of Roman gentlemen,’ who in the preced- 
ing Scene were only expected ‘With the next benefit of the wind,’ in the very neigh- 
borhood of the harbour where they were about to land. Time, therefore, must be 
allowed for the arrival of the latter, and also conveyance of the news to the king. 
The interval necessary for these purposes need not be supposed to exceed the 
limits of a few days.—DANIEL (New Sh. Soc. Trans., 1877-79, p. 247): [At the close 
of the ninth day] Lucius finds Imogen lying on the body of Cloten, and engages 
her in his service and orders the burial of the body. An interval—a few days 
perhaps. Day 1o. Act IV, Scene iii. In Cymbeline’s Palace. The news is 
that the Legions from Gallia are landed ‘—with a supply Of Roman gentlemen, 
by the Senate sent.’ Cymbeline’s forces are in readiness, and he prepares to meet 
the time, but he is distracted with domestic afflictions: his Queen is on a desperate 
bed; her son gone, Imogen gone, no one knows whither. Pisanio does, but he also 
is in perplexity at not hearing from them. He thinks it strange too that he has 
not heard from his master since he wrote him Imogen was slain. Decidedly, Rome 
must be behind the scenes somewhere. 

4. A Feauour] BuckNitt (p. 225): The wicked queen, who bore down all 
with her brain, is struck with disease of the brain, when her schemes fail. She 
lies ‘upon a desperate bed.’ Towards the end of the play we learn the fatal result 
‘with horror, madly dying,’ though, like the death of Constance and of Lady 
Macbeth, it is hidden from view. Shakespeare sometimes places before his audi- 
ence scenes of death, whose terror can hardly be exceeded, as that of King John 
and Cardinal Beaufort; but the innate delicacy, which is not inconsistent with 
much verbal grossness, prevents him from so exhibiting a woman. 

6, touch me] That is, as frequently in Shakespeare, wound. Thus in V, iii, 14. 


342 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT Iv, Sc. lll. 


Vpon a defperate bed, and in a time 38 


When fearefull Warres point at me : 


Her Sonne gone, 


So needfull for this prefent ? It ftrikes me, paft fe) 
The hope of comfort. But for thee, Fellow, 

Who needs muft know of her departure, and 

Doft feeme fo ignorant, wee’l enforce it from thee 


By a fharpe Torture. 
Pif. Sir, my life is yours, 


15 


I humbly fet it at your will : But for my Miftris, 


I nothing know where fhe remaines : 


why gone, 


Nor when fhe purpofes returne. Befeech your Highnes, 


Hold me your loyall Seruant. 
Lord. Good my Liege, 


20 


The day that fhe was miffing, he was heere ; 

I dare be bound hee’s true, and fhall performe 
All parts of his fubiection loyally. For Cloten, 
There wants no diligence in feeking him, 


And will no doubt be found. 


25 


Cym. The time is troublefome : ° 
Wee’l flip you for a feafon, but our iealoufie 27 


8. bed,] Ff,+, Knt, Coll. Dyce, Glo. 
Cam. bed; Cap. et cet. 
9. me:] me! Rowe,+. 
10. this] his Ff. 
prefent?| Ff. present! Rowe,+. 
present. Johns. present; Cap. et seq. 
me,| me, me, Ff. 
11. hope] holpe or help Theob. conj. 
(withdrawn?) 
thee,| thee, thee, Cap. Walker 
(Crit., ii, 146). 
13. enforce] inforce F3F,, 
force Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
16-19. Lines end: for...remaines.... 
returne...Seruant. Elze, Vaun. 


Rowe. 


16. humbly] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. 

18. your Highnes,| you, Han. 

20. Lord.] 1. L. Cap. et seq. (subs.) 

21. he was] fhe was F;F, et seq. 

23. For Cloten] Separate line, Cap. 
Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Knt, Sing. 

25. And will] He will Han. And 
he'll Cap. And he will Ktly. A’ will 
Anon. ap. Cam. 

26. time is] time’s Steev. Var. 03, 
33 

27. feafon,] season; Cap. et seq. 

[To Pisanio. Johns. 
our] with Ff, Rowe. 


23. subiection] Scumipt (Lex.): 


Service as a subject. 


24. There wants no diligence] Apsott (§ 297): ‘Wants’ is probably here 
not impersonal, but intransitive—‘is wanting.’ 


25. And will no doubt] For other, examples of the ‘omission of the nomina- 


tive,’ see Apporr, § 4oo. 


27. slip you for a season] Scumupt (Lex.): That is, make or let loose. 
of greyhounds allowed to start for game. 


Used 


27, 28. our iealousie Do’s yet depend] JoHNson: My suspicion is yet un- 
determined; if I do not condemn you, I likewise have not acquitted you. We now 


ACT IV, SC. iti. ] CYMBELINE 343 


Do’s yet depend. 28 
Lord. So pleafe your Maiefty, 
The Romaine Legions, all from Gallia drawne, 30 


Are landed on your Coaft, with a fupply 
Of Romaine Gentlemen, by the Senate fent. 
Cym. Now for the Counfaile of my Son and Queen, 
I am amaz’d with matter. 
Lord. Good my Liege, 35 
Your preparation can affront no leffe (ready : 
Then what you heare of. Come more, for more you’re 
The want is, but to put thofe Powres in motion, 
That long to moue. 
Cym. Ithanke you: let’s withdraw 40 
And meete the Time, as it feekes vs. We feare not 
What can from Italy annoy vs, but 


We greeue at chances heere. Away. Lixeunt 43 
29. Lord] 2, L. Cap. First Lord. 37. Then...heare of.] Separate line, 
Mal. et seq. F,, Rowe. 
30, 32. Romaine] Romane F,. Roman of.] of; Cap. et seq. 
FF,. 38. thofe] thefe Ff, Rowe,+, Varr. 
31. Coa/ft,| coast; Cap. et seq. Ran. 
a fupply| fupply Fi. large 40. you:] you. Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
supply Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. 41. vs.] us: Coll. 
Warb. 42. vs,]) Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Cam. 
32. Gentlemen] Gentleman Rowe i. us; Cap. et cet. 
33. Queene,| F2. Queen. F;F,, Rowe. 43. Away.] Come, let’s away. Han. 
queen: Pope, Han. queen! Theob. et Away, my lords. Elze. 
Gets Exeunt] Exeunt all except Pisa- 


Bc) Lord: tl Cap, ev seq. subs.) nio. Dyce. 


say the cause is depending —CouuteR (ed. ii.): The MS. puts it ‘but with jealousy 
you yet depend,’ which in no point of view seems an improvement. 

27. iealousie] Scumipt (Lewx., s. v. 2.): Suspicion in any way. 

34. I am amaz’d with matter] STEEVENS: That is, confounded by a variety 
of business. 2 

36. Your preparation can affront] Jonnson: Your forces are able to face 
such an army as we hear the enemy will bring against us. 

4i. meete the Time, as it seekes vs] CAPELL (p. 117): The intention of the 
speaker is—meet it with spirit, with the same spirit with which it meets us; the 
sentiment is weakly express’d on purpose to show his inward dejection. 

43. We greeue at chances heere. Away] WALKER (Vers., 273): Single 
lines of four or five or six or seven syllables, interspersed amidst the ordinary blank 
verse of ten, are not to be considered as irregularities; they belong to Shakespeare’s 
system of metre. On the other hand, lines of eight or nine syllables, as they 
are at variance with the general rhythm of his poetry (at least, if my ears do not 
deceive me, this is the case), so they scarcely ever occur in his plays,—it were 
hardly too much to say, not at all. I would arrange [by making ‘Away’ a separate 


344 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Ty, SC. iv. 


Pifa. heard no Letter from my Matter , fince 
I wrote him Jmogen was flaine. ’Tis ftrange : 45 
Nor heare I from my Miftris, who did promife 
To yeeld me often tydings. Neither know I 
What is betide to C/oten, but remaine 
Perplext in all. The Heauens ftill must worke : 
Wherein I am falfe, I am honeft : not true, to be true. 50 
Thefe prefent warres fhall finde I loue my Country, 
Euen to the note o’th’King, or Ie fall in them: 
All other doubts, by time let them be cleer’d, 
Fortune brings in fome Boats, that are not fteer’d. zit. 54 


Scena Quarta. 


Enter Belarius, Guiderius ,& Aruyvagus. 2 
Gui. The noyfe 1s round about vs. 
Bel. Let vs from it. 4 
44. I heard] I’ve had Han. Dyce ii, 50. not...be true.| not true, true. Han. 
iii, Ingl. I have had Cap. Ktly. I had Cap. 
Mason, Coll. ii, Warb. MS. 52. oth’) Fi,+. of the Cap. o’the 
Letter| later Musgrave. Var. 773 et cet. 
45. flaine.| Ff,+, Coll. slain; Cap. 53. cleer’d,| clear’d: Pope et seq. 
et cet. tT. Scene’ mz. Rowe: Scene’ vim 
47. tydings.] tidings; Cap. et seq. Pope, Han. Scene rx. Warb. 
48. betide| betid Han. Johns. et The Street. Rowe i. The Forest. 
seq. Rowe ii. Scene changes to the Forest. 
Cloten,] Cloten; Theob. et seq. Theob. Before the Cave. Cap. 
50. J am... am] I’m...I’m Pope,+, Wales: before the cave of Belarius. 
Dyce ii, iii. Dyce. 


line]. [Can repugnance to the recognition, in rhythm, of empty spaces (more 
vacue) further go! Or can there be a more flagrant instance of the removal of 
metre from the ear to the eye! Or is it that Walker, in his zeal, forgets that we are 
not dealing with epic or lyric poetry, but with dramatic, where the nice divisions 
of lines are dominated and determined by the emotions.—Ep.] 

44. I heard no Letter from my Master] Matone: Perhaps ‘letter’ here 
means, not an epistle, but the elemental part of a syllable. This might have been a 
phrase in Shakespeare’s time. We yet say, I have not heard a syllable from him. 

52. to the note o’th’King] Jonson: I will so distinguish myself the king 
shall remark my valour. 

1. Scena Quarta] Eccres here begins the Fifth Act, and thus upholds the 
change: If this scene be supposed to belong to that period when Lucius and his 
train first arrive in the neighborhood of Milford, it ought to precede that which 
was last noticed. [The excellent Eccles so overflows with words that it is not easy 


NCTM SSC. 91V7.\| CYMBELINE 345 


Arui. What pleafure Sir,we finde in life, to locke it 5 
From Aétion, and Aduenture. 
Guz. Nay, what hope 
Haue we in hiding vs? This way the Romaines 
Muft, or for Britaines flay vs or receiue vs 
For barbarous and vnnaturall Reuolts 10 
During their vfe, and flay vs after. 
Bel. Sonnes, 
Wee’! higher to the Mountaines, there fecure v.. 
To the Kings party there’s no going : newneffe 
Of Clotens death (we being not knowne, not mufter’d 15 
Among the Bands) may driue vs to a render 


\ 


5, 6. Sir, we finde...Aduenture.] Sir, Cap. et cet. 


jinde we...Adventure? Ff et seq. do we to. Reuolts| revolters Pope, Han. 
jind...adventure Anon. ap. Cam. 11. their] our Eccles. 
8. Romaines] Romans F;F,. 13. Mountaines,| mountains; Cap. et 
9. Britaines] Ff. (subs.). Britons seq. 
Theob. ii. et seq. v..] Fr. ws. Ff et seq. 
flay vs] F,, Cam. flay us, F3F,,+, 15. not mufler’d| nor muster’d Rowe ii, 


Coll. Dyce, Sing. Ktly, Glo. slay us; +, Cap. Varr. Ran. 


fully to apprehend him. By ‘that which was last noticed’ does he mean the pre- 
ceding scene? Unless he means that, I know not what he means.—Ep.] But 
I rather incline to think it should be ascribed to a period just before that of the 
scene with which the Fifth Act has hitherto commenced; upon this supposition I 
have caused it to begin the Fifth Act. This has been done in Cymbeline as pre- 
pared by Mr Garrick for the stage. Between the former scene, in which Cym- 
beline receives an account of the invasion of his country by the Roman army, 
and the commencement of Act the Fifth it seems requisite that such an interval of 
time should be conceived to pass as may be supposed consistent with the prepara- 
tions necessary to be made for an engagement such as that which is about to ensue, 
and for Cymbeline himself to advance to meet and give his enemies battle— 
DanteEL (Sh. Soc. Trans., 1874-75, p. 248): Day 11. Act IV, Scene iv, Wales. 
The noise of the war is round about them, and Guiderius and Arviragus determine 
to fight for their country; Belarius at last consents to accompany them. Its 
position as a separate day seems to me to satisfy all the requirements of 
the plot. 

10. Reuolts] STEEVENS: That is, revolters. Soin King John: ‘Lead me to the 
revolts in England here.’—V, iv, 7. [See Apporr (§ 433) for other examples of 
‘Participial Nouns.’] 

11. During their vse] RANN: So long as they shall retain us in their service.— 
Hupson: This may mean ‘as long as they have any use for us’; or, perhaps, during 
their present armed occupancy. 

16. a render] Jonnson: An account of our place of abode. This dialogue is 
a just representation of the superfluous caution of an old man.—STEEVENS: Thus, 
in Timon: ‘And send for thus, to make their sorrow’d render.’—V, i, 152. 


340 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT IV, SC, iv. 


Where we haue liu’d; and fo extort from’s that 17 
Which we haue done, whofe anfwer would be death 
Drawne on with Torture. ‘ 

Gut. This is (Sir )a doubt 20 
In fuch a time, nothing becomming you, 
Not fatisfying vs. 

Arui. It is not likely, 
That when they heare their Roman horfes neigh, 
Behold their quarter’d Fires ; haue both their eyes 25 
Aud eares fo cloyd importantly as now, 
That they will wafte their time vpon our note, 
To know from whence we are. 

Bel, Oh,I am knowne 
Of many in the Army: Many yeeres 30 
(Though Cloten then but young) you fee, not wore him 


17, 18. from’s...we haue] from us... 19. with] his Ff. 
we've Pope,+, Steev. Varr. Sing. Ktly. 24. their] the Rowe et seq. 
from us...we have Cap. Varr. Mal. Ran. 25. Fires;| Ff. files Ran. fires, 
Knt. Rowe et cet. 
that...death] One line, Pope,+, 26. fo cloyd] so ’ploy’d Warb. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Ktly. _ 27, note,| note Pope,+. 


18. whose answer] JOHNSON: The retaliation of the death of Cloten would be 
death, etc. [See V, iii, 87.] 

24. their] MALONE deems this ‘their,’ instead of the, as due to the ear of the 
transcriber. [Is it not possible that ‘their’ is correct? No objection to it is found 
in the very next line, where, I think, it bears exactly the same reference.—ED.| 

25. their quarter’d Fires] Jonson: Their fires regularly disposed.— 
STEEVENS: This means no more, I believe, than fires in the respective quarters of 
the Roman army.—RANN ingeniously reads files, and explains it as ‘their well dis- 
posed lines.’ 

26. so cloyd importantly] Warsurton: What it is to be ‘importantly 
cloy’d’ I have not the least conception of. Shakespeare, without doubt, wrote 
“so ’ploy’d importantly,’ 7. e., imployed or taken up with things of such importance. 
—Epwarps (p. 242): This is Mr Warburton’s word (’ploy’d for imploy’d; he should 
have said employ’d) instead of cloyed. But Shakespeare never thought of circum- 
cising his words at this rate, as our critic does to fit them for any place which 
he wants them to fill, By the same rule we may say ’pry and ’prrE are English 
words, signifying empty and empire —Heatu (p. 487): Mr Warburton’s emenda- 
tion seems to be right, but why [does he not] write it at full length, employed, or at 
least with a note of elision, so ’mploy’d?—Ecctes: I think it is not improbable that 
employed was the word. With the omission of ‘so’ the measure will be perfect. 
[Thus in Eccles’s text.|—Murray (NV. E. D.): That is clogged, cumbered, burdened. 
[Present passage quoted.] 


27. waste their time vpon our note] That is, waste their time in taking note 
of us. 


ACI LV py SConLV.cl| CYMBELINE 347 


From my remembrance. And befides, the King 32 
Hath not deferu’d my Seruice, nor your Loues, 
Who finde in my Exile, the want of Breeding ; 
The certainty of this heard life, aye hopeleffe 35 
To haue the courtefie your Cradle promis’d, 
But to be {till hot Summers Tanlings, and 
The fhrinking Slaues of Winter. 
Gut. Then be fo, 


Better to ceafe to be. Pray Sir, to’th’Army : 40 
I, and my Brother are not knowne ; your felfe 
So out of thought, and thereto fo ore-growne, 42 
33. Loues,] F2, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 36. promis’d,] promis’d; Theob. Warb. 
Warb. Johns. Coll. Joves F;F,. loves; Johns. 
Han. et cet. 39. Then] Than Rowe. 
34. Breeding;] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 40. Better] Betrer F.. Beteer F2 ap. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. breeding, Han. et Cam. 
cet. to be. to be; Rowe. 
35. heard] hard F;F, et seq. to'th’| toth F,. to th’ F3F,,+, 
life,| life; Cap. et seq. Dyce ii, iii. to the Cap. et cet. 


35. The certainty of this heard life] MAtone: That is, the certain con- 
sequence of this hard life—VAUGHAN (p. 506): Malone, I believe, errs. [The 
phrase] means the certain continuance of this life, and with it all those incidents 
which he proceeds to describe. [This interpretation is, I think, so far eminently 
just. When, however, Vaughan goes on to suggest that in the lines following, 
‘aye hopeless To have the courtesy your cradle promis’d,’ should be parenthetical, 
does he not only deprive ‘ But to be still’ of its adversitive force, but of any force 
at all? Thus: ‘Who find in my exile the want of breeding, the certainty of this 
hard life, But to be still hot summer’s tanlings,’ etc. To avoid this awkwardness, 
Vaughan is obliged to give a special meaning to ‘but,’ and explains that ‘Shake- 
speare generally places “but” in this sense of “nothing more than” out of the exact 
position which we should now give it’: which, in the present case, as Vaughan 
would have it, seems to be no position at all; it would have to be discarded, I fear, 
as meaningless.—ED.] 

37,38. Summers Tanlings, and The shrinking Slaues of Winter] DowpEn: 
I retain the capitals in ‘Summer’ and ‘Winter,’ for perhaps personification may ex- 
plain the diminutive ‘tanlings.’ Summer, a mother with her infants tanned by 
the sun; Winter, a king, whose slaves wince under his lash. 

42. thereto so ore-growne] Ecctes: Perhaps this alludes to the squalid, 
savage, and neglected appearance of the old man in this retirement.—STEEVENS: 
Thus, Spenser: ‘oregrown with old decay, And hid in darkness that none could 
behold The hue thereof.—Dvycr (Remarks, p. 259): Neither Mr Collier nor Mr 
Knight explains ‘o’ergrown.’ The only note on the word in the Variorum Shake- 
speare is [that by Steevens, which has just been given.—Ep.]. Now, when Steevens 
cited these lines from Spenser (and he might have cited with equal propriety any 
other passage of any poet where the word ‘o’ergrown’ happens to be found), did 
he understand in what sense Shakespeare here employs ‘o’ergrown’? I think not. 


348 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acr Iv, SC. iv. 


Cannot be queftion’d. 43 
Arui. By this Sunne that fhines 
Ile thither ; What thing is’t, that I neuer 45 


Did fee man dye, fcarfe euer look’d on blood, 
But that of Coward Hares, hot Goats, and Venifon? 
Neuer beftrid a Horfe faue one, that had 
A Rider like my felfe, who ne’re wore Rowell, 
Nor Iron on his heele? I am afham’d 50 
To look vpon the holy Sunne, to haue 
The benefit of his bleft Beames , remaining 
So long a poore vnknowne. 
Gui. By heauens Ile go, 
If you will bleffe me Sir, and giue me leaue, 55 
Ile take the better care : but if you will not, 
The hazard therefore due fall on me, by 
The hands of Romaines. 


Aru. So fay I, Amen. 59 
43. queftion’d] queftiond F>. Cam. 
45. thither] hither F,. 48. beftrid] bestride Rowe ii. 
ts’t] Coll. Ktly. zs a Fi et cet. 49. felfe,] self Pope,+. 
46. dye,] Fi,+. die! Dyce, Glo. 50. heele?] heel! Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
Cam. dye? Cap. et cet. 52. blefi] best Theob. Warb. Johns. 
47. Venifon?] venison! Dyce, Glo. 56. but] but but F2. 


Its meaning is sufficiently explained by what Posthumus afterwards says of Bela- 
rius: ‘who deserv’d So long a breeding as his white beard came to.’—V, iii, 21, 22. 
[Hereupon, in consequence of the censure of Collier implied by his failure to supply 
a note on ‘o’ergrown,’ there followed an outbreak of that unseemly quarrel between 
the two great editors, Dyce and Collier, which even at the time could make the 
judicious only grieve, and now, after the lapse of years, is best forgotten. The 
sole aid to the reader of Shakespeare which is to be derived from it is the fresh 
proof it afforded, if any were needed, that Steevens is not to be trusted unless to his 
quotations he adds the volume and page. In the present instance he garbled the 
quotation from Spenser. Had he given the exact line, its inappropriateness would 
have been patent. Spenser is describing the ‘cave of Mammon,’ and what was 
applicable to a cave can be hardly applicable to Belarius. The complete line is 
‘overgrowne with dust and old decay.’—Ep.] 

45, 46. What thing is’t . . . dye] Dyce: The modern editors (misled 
by the Folio, which sometimes, as here, puts the interrogation point for the excla- 
mation point) very improperly make this passage interrogative. By ‘what thing 
is it,’ etc., Arviragus means ‘what a thing is it,’ etc.; the @ in such exclamations 
being frequently omitted by our early writers. [See ABBOTT, § 86.] 

47. hot Goats] BATMAN vppon Bartholome (Lib., xviii, Cap. 24, P- 353, verso.): 
Archelaus meaneth that the Goats breath at the ears, and not at the nose, and 
be seld [seldom] without feauer [heat]—TopsEtt (p. 231): There is no beast 
that is more prone and given to lust then is a Goate. 


ACT AV, SCo 1.) CYMBELINE 349 


Bel. No reafon I (fince of your liues you fet? 60 
So flight a valewation ) fhould referue 
My crack’d one to more care. Haue with you Boyes: 
If in your Country warres you chance to dye, 
That is my Bed too (Lads )and there Ile lye. 
Lead,lead; the time feems long, their blood thinks fcorn 65 
Till it flye out,and fhew them Princes borne. Lexeunt. 


Actus Quintus. Scena Prima. 


Enter Pofthumus alone. 2 
Poft. Yea bloody cloth, Ile keep thee : for I am wifht 


60. of your] on your Cap. Steev. Varr. Britain. The Roman Camp. Dyce. 
62. you] you, Fy. 2. Enter...] Enter Posthumus with.a 
65. lead;} lead. Johns. et seq. bloody Handkerchief. Rowe. 
long,| long: Pope et seq. 3. I am wifht] Ff, Rowe, Dyce i. for 
[Aside.] the time, etc. Han. I wisht Pope et cet. (subs.) J e’en 
[Aside.] their blood, etc. Vaun. wished Sing. I have wished Coll. conj., 
SCENE 1. Eccles. Ktly. I’ve wished Del. conj. I am- 
A Field between the British and bush’d Vaun. I’d wish’d Nicholson 
Roman Camps. Rowe. ap. Cam. 


60. since of your liues you set, etc.] For examples where ‘“‘of” passes easily 
from ‘‘as regards”’ to “concerning,” ‘‘about,”’ see ABBOTT, § 174. 

1. Both Ecctes and Danret confine the whole of this Fifth Act to one day, 
the Twelfth. The latter says that the ‘last line of the play justifies the placing 
of the whole of the last Act, including the battle, Posthumus’s imprisonment, and 
the final scene, in one day only.’ 

2, Enter Posthumus] Boas (p. 516): It is no longer necessary that, to be 
near her husband, Imogen should be carried to Rome. Cymbeline’s refusal of 
tribute has produced an invasion of Britain by the imperial troops, with Iachimo 
as leader and Posthumus enrolled as a volunteer. The latter (whose complete 
disappearance from the scene during Acts III. and IV. is a serious defect in plot- 
construction) has repented of his outburst of murderous fury against his wife, and 
is now anxious to atone for it as best he may. 

3. Yea bloody cloth, etc.] JoHnson: The bloody token of Imogen’s death 
which Pisanio in the foregoing Act determined to send. This is a soliloquy of 
nature, uttered when the effervescence of a mind agitated and perturbed spon- 
taneously and inadvertently discharges itself in words. The speech throughout 
all its tenor, if the last conceit be excepted, seems to issue warm from the heart. 
He first condemns his own violence; then tries to disburden himself by imputing 
part of the crime to Pisanio; he next soothes his mind to a momentary and artificial 
tranquillity by trying to think he has been only an instrument of the gods for the 
happiness of Imogen. He is now grown reasonable enough to determine that 
having done so much evil he will do no more; that he will not fight against the 


350 THE DTRAGEDIEROL 


Thou fhould’ft be colour’d thus. 


[act v, Sc. 1. 


You married ones, 


If each of you fhould take this courfe, how many 5 
Muft murther Wiues much better then themfelues 

For wrying but a little? Oh Pi/ano, 

Euery good Seruant do’s not all Commands: 


No Bond, but to do iuft ones. 


Gods, if you 


Should haue ’tane vengeance on my faults, I neuer 10 
Had liu’d to put on this: fo had you faued 


5. fhould] would F3F,,+, Varr. Mal. 
Steev. Varr. 

6. murther| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Cap. Knt, Wh. murder Warb. 
et cet. 

7. little?| little! Knt, Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Cam. 

Oh] O Cap. et seq. 
Pisanio! 


8. Seruant] Servants Fy. 
Commands:] commands— Rowe, 
Pope i. 
9. Gods,] Ff, Cap. Gods! Rowe et 
cet. 
to. Should haue ’tane| Had taken 
Ktly conj. 
*tanel tane F2. ta’ne F3Fy. ta’en 
Rowe. 


Pifanio,] Ffi,+, Cap. 
Pope et cet. 


country which he has already injured; but as life is no longer supportable, he will 
die in a just cause, and die with the obscurity of a man who does not think himself 
worthy to be remembered.—Ecctes here expresses much and prolonged wonder 
over the difficulty of accounting for this ‘bloody cloth’; since it must have reached 
the hands of Posthumus after his arrival in Britain. Eccles thinks that Posthumus 
must have privately dispatched a messenger with authority to receive it from 
Pisanio. And if this be so, Shakespeare should unquestionably have communi- 
cated some intelligence of it to the audience. 

3. I am wisht] ABgott (§ 294): A participle formed from an adjective means 
‘made of (the adjective),’ and derived from a noun means ‘endowed with (the 
noun).’ [Thus, ‘your loop’d and window’d raggedness.’—Lear, III, iv, 31, 7. e., 
your raggedness endowed with many loops and windows. Again, ‘A guiled 
shore.’—Mer. of Ven., III, ii, 97. Thus the present ‘I am wisht’ is equivalent to 
‘I have had many a wish.’—THIsELTon, who at first explained the phrase as the 
case of a suppressed relative, ‘I am that wisht,’ later (Notule Critice, p. 27) 
withdrew this explanation on finding in Dekker’s Wonderful Veare, 1603, the fol- 
lowing: ‘I know not how they sped [the ‘‘ Mountibank doctors” during the Plague], 
but some they sped I am sure, for I haue heard them band for the Heauens, because 
they sent those thither, that were wisht to tarry longer vpon earth,’ [p. 117, ed. 
Grosart], ‘where,’ observes Thiselton, ‘““were wisht” clearly means “were pos- 
sessed with the desire.””’—DowbEN conjectures: “‘I am Who wish’d,” and closes 
the line with “am.”’ [See V, iv, 107, ‘The more delay’d, delighted.’-—Ep.] 

5, 6. If each of you . . . themselues] See I, ii, 58; III, iii, 112; IV, ii, 285. 

7. For wrying but a little] SreEEvEeNs: For this uncommon verb, see Stany- 
hurst, Trans. of Virgil: ‘Right so to thee same boord thee maysters al wrye the 
vessels.’ —IIT, [p. 88, ed. Arber]. Again, in Sidney’s Arcadia: ‘to.what a passe are 
our mindes brought, that from the right line of vertue, are wryed to these crooked 
shifts.’—p. 67, ed. 1508. 

Ir. to put on this] JoHNSon: That is, to instigate, to incite. 


GRAV SC. 1.] 


The noble /mogen, to repent, and ftrooke is 


CYMBELINE 351 
ro) 


Me (wretch)more worth your Vengeance. But alacke, 

You {natch fome hence for little faults ; that’s loue 

To haue them fall no more : you fome permit 15 
To fecond illes with illes, each elder worfe, 


12. Imogen,] Imogen Rowe et seq. 
repent,| F{,+, Coll. Glo. Cam. 
repent; Cap. et cet. 
Jirooke| firook F;F4, Rowe, Cap. 
struck Pope. 
13. Me (wretch)| Me wretch, Var. ’03, 
13,21, Dycei. Me, wretch Glo. Cam. 


14. fome hence] from hence Fi, Rowe, 


14. little] Om. Theob. ii. 

16. elder worfe,] Johns. Knt, Dyce, 
Sta. Glo. Cam. Elder worfe, Ff. worse 
than other Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. younger worse, Cap. conj. ill 
the worse, Jackson, White approves. 
later worse, Coll. iii (MS.). alder-worse, 
Sing. alder worst Bulloch. other worse 
Herr. elder worse; Cap. et cet. 


Warb. Line here indicated as lost. Ktly. 


14, 15. that’s loue To haue them fall no more] WorpswortH (p. 116): 
Compare Isaiah, lvii, 1: ‘Merciful meh are taken away, none considering that the 
righteous is taken away from the evil to come.’ 

I5, 16. you some permit To second illes with illes, each elder worse] 
Jounson: The last deed is certainly not the oldest, but Shakespeare calls the 
deed of an elder man an elder deed—ToutET: That is, where corruptions are, they 
grow with years, and the oldest sinner is the greatest. | You, Gods, permit some to 
proceed in iniquity, and the older such are, the more their crime—MALoneE: 
I believe our Author must answer for this inaccuracy, and that he inadvertently 
considered the later evil deed as the elder; having probably some general notion 
in his mind of a quantity of evil, commencing with our first parents, and gradually 
accumulating in process of time by a repetition of crimes.—Dyce: I agree with 
Malone that Shakespeare here regarded the later deed as the elder.—RANN: Each 
deed of an old sinner being worse than the preceding; till at Jength, pierced with a 
review of their accumulated enormities, they became exemplary penitents.— 
Kwicut: What Dr Johnson says is, perhaps, prosaically true; but as the man who 
goes on in the commission of ill is older when he committed the last ill than when 
he committed the first, we do not believe that Shakespeare, as Malone says, ‘ 
advertently considered the later evil deed as the elder.’ The confusion, if there be 
any, in the text, may be reconciled by Bacon’s notion that what we call the old 
world is really the young world; and so a man’s first sin is his youngest sin.— 
Coxxrer (ed. ii.): The MS. changes ‘elder’ to /ater. We can well understand how 
later ills should be worse than those which went before them.—St1ncER: I have no 
doubt this is merely a misprint for ‘each alder-worse.’ Shakespeare has used the 
old superlative prefix in a comparative sense, as if he had written ‘each worse and 
worse.’ The superlative ‘alder-lifest’ is found in 2 Hen. VJ: I, i, 28.—THISELTON 
(p. 42): ‘Worse’ is clearly a verb governing ‘each elder,’ for otherwise we are 
left without a distinct antecedent for ‘it.’ Milton makes ‘worse’ a verb in Paradise 
Lost, vi, 440 (‘to better us and worse our foes’), where it means to ‘place at a 
disadvantage.’ For the subject of ‘worse’ we must either have recourse to the 
suppressed relative, making ‘each elder worse’ equivalent to ‘that place each 
elder ill at disadvantage,’ or we may,—not so well I think,—refer to ‘you.’ The 
passage should present no further difficulty if we bear in mind that ‘illes’ is a 


in- 


352 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[act v, SC. i. 


And make them dread it, to the dooers thrift. 17 


17. them] men Coll. ii. (MS.). 

them dread it] trade in them 
Herr. 

dread it,...thrift.| Fi. (thrift 
F.F;; thrift, F,), Pope ii, Var 78, ’85, 
Mal. Ran. Knt, Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Cam. dread it,...thrift; Rowe, Pope i. 
dreaded,...thrift. Theob. Han. Cap. Wh. 
Ktly. dread it...thrift. Johns. Steev. 
Varr. dreaded to...shrift. Warb. conj. 
(Nichols, Ill., ii, 269), Sing. dread it,... 


trist. Br. Nicholson (N. & Q., III, v, 
234, 1864). bread o’t...thrift Bulloch. 
reap it,...thrift. Sprengel. done but to 
the doer’s thrift. Orson (MS.). dreadful, 
..shrift. Spence (N. & Q., VI, 1, 92, 
1880). dread the evil-doer’s thrift Lloyd 
(N. & Q., VI, xii, 342, 1885). dream it, 
.. thrift. Vaun. 

17. dooers| doers Ff, Han.  doer’s 
Pope, Steev. Varr. Coll. doers’ Theob. 
et cet. 


general term covering ‘ills suffered’ as well as ‘ills done,’ and that ‘thrift’ may 
mean ‘abstinence’ as well as ‘welfare. —DowpEN: ‘Elder,’ meaning ‘later,’ the 
idea of a course of evils developing to maturity being transferred to the evils 
themselves, which proceed from a more developed stage of sin. Compare ‘elder 
days,’ meaning days of more advanced age, in Rich. II: Il, iii, 43: ‘my service. . . 
raw and young, which elder days shall ripen.’ 

17. And make them dread it, to the dooers thrift] THrospatp: The 
Divinity Schools have not furnished juster observations on the conduct of Prov- 
idence than Posthumus gives us here in his private reflections. | You Gods, says 
he, act in a different manner with your different creatures: ‘You snatch some 
hence for little faults; that’s Love; To have them fall no more.’ This seems a 
fine short comment on what St. Paul says to the Hebrews: ‘The Lord chasteneth 
whom he loveth.’ The philosopher Seneca is more ample upon the same subject: 
‘Hoc Deus, quos probat, quos amat, indurat, recognoscit, exercet.’ Others, 
says our Poet, you permit to live on, to multiply and increase in crimes, ‘And make 
them dread it, to the doer’s thrift.’ Here’s a relative without an antecedent sub- 
stantive; and a Genitive Case Singular, when all the other members of the sentence 
run in the plural. Both which are a breach of Grammar. We must certainly read, 
‘And make them dreaded to the doers’ thrift,’ i. e., others you permit to aggravate one 
crime with more; which enormities not only make them revered and dreaded, but 
turn in other kinds to their advantage. Dignity, respect, and profit accrue to 
them from crimes committed with impunity—CuurtTon CoLttrns (Essays, etc., p. 
281): This note [of Theobald] is a model of what such notes should be. [In Nichol’s 
Illustrations (ii, 269) Theobald writes to Warburton, ‘Dreaded I had a great while 
ago corrected.’ Warburton’s text reads: ‘And make them dread, to the doers’ 
thrift—.’ The Cam. Epp. suggest that either Warburton had forgotten Theobald’s 
emendation or that ‘it’ was probably omitted by mistake. ‘In the Globe Edition,’ 
they add, ‘we have put an obelus to this most difficult and probably corrupt 
passage.’|}—JOHNSON: There seems to be no very satisfactory sense yet offered. 
I read, but with hesitation: ‘make them deeded to the,’ etc. The word deeded I 
know not, indeed, where to find, but Shakespeare has, in another sense, undeeded in 
Macbeth: ‘my sword I sheath again undeeded.’ I will try again, and read thus: 
‘make them trade it to the,’ etc. Trade and thrift correspond. Our Author plays 
with trade, as it signifies a lucrative vocation, or a frequent practice. So Isabella 
says, ‘Thy sin’s not accidental, but a trade.,—STEEVENS: However ungrammatical, 
I believe the old reading is the true one. To make them dread it is to make them 
persevere in the commission of dreadful actions. Dr Johnson has observed on a 


INC We, SES wb] CYMBELINE 353 


[17. And make them dread it, to the dooers thrift] 


passage in Hamlet that Pope and Rowe have not refused this mode of speaking: 
“To sinner it or saint it,—and ‘to coy it.—Matone: Mr Steevens’s interpreta- 
tion appears to me inadmissible—Cape.t (117): In ‘make them,’ ‘them’ refers 
to these ‘ills’; ‘make’ is as much an infinitive as ‘second,’ and ‘make them dreaded’ 
is to make the ills enormous and dreadful, to the great profit of those who do 
them.—Monck Mason (p. 336): There is a meaning to be extracted from these 
words as they now stand, and in my opinion not a bad one: ‘Some you snatch 
from hence for little faults; others you suffer to heap ills on ills, and afterwards 
make them dread their having done so, to the eternal welfare of the doers.’ The 
whole speech is in a religious strain. ‘Thrift’ signifies a state of prosperity. It 
is not the commission of the crimes that is supposed to be for the doer’s thrift, but 
his dreading them afterwards, and, of course, repenting, which ensures his salva- 
tion. The same sentiment occurs in The False One, where the Soldier, speaking of 
the condition of Septimius, who murdered Pompey, says, ‘he was happy he was 
a rascal, to come to this,’ [IV, iii.]—Kwnicut: Posthumus is comparing his own 
state with what he supposes is that of Imogen. She is snatched ‘hence, for little 
faults’; he remains ‘to second ills with ills.’ But how is it that such as he ‘dread 
it’? The commentators believe that there is a misprint. The author of the 
pamphlet we have already quoted, ‘Explanations and Emendations,’ etc., thinks 
that ‘it’ refers to ‘vengeance,’ four lines above. We cannot feel confident of this. 
We cannot help believing that some word ought to stand in the place of ‘dread it.’ 
We are inclined to conjecture that ‘dread it’ has been misprinted for do each: 
‘make them do each to the doer’s thrift.—WuITE (ed. i.): That is, ‘make the evil 
deeds of these men awaken a dread of the doers, which enables them to go on with 
impunity in their selfish wickedness. —Co.ttrer (ed. ii.): The MS. has men for 
‘them,’ and the meaning seems to be that men dreaded the commission of great 
crimes, to the thrift of the offender, who is able to take advantage of their fears.— 
STAUNTON: The commentators have contended that the last deed is not the oldest; 
but, whether rightly or wrongly, it is certain Shakespeare so considered it, thus, in 
Pericles: ‘And what first but fear what might be done, Grows elder now,’ etc.—I, ii, 
14. The real pinch in the passage is [line 17], which has been tortured into [five 
substitutions] and still remains as inscrutable as ever—Hupson: Some bold 
knaves are permitted to go on from bad to worse, the crimes causing the doer of 
them to be feared, and so working for his security and profit. In other words, 
boldness in wrong sometimes brings impunity by scaring earthly justice from her 
propriety——Rotre: The passage may be corrupt, but the emendations seem to me 
less intelligible than the original text—Drrcuton: Others you permit to heap 
crime on crime, each succeeding one being more heinous than its predecessor, and 
cause them to dread this accumulation, with the result that they, the doers, being 
driven by this dread to repent, profit thereby, z. e., by repenting. It has been 
objected that ‘elder’ ought logically to mean the preceding, not the succeeding, 
crime; but it seems probable that Shakespeare here uses ‘elder’ in the same way 
that Bacon, Adv. of Learning, I, v, 1, says ancient ought to be used in regard to time: 
“And to speak truly, Antiguitas seculi, juventus mundi. These times are the 
ancient times when the world is ancient, and not those which we account ancient 
ordine retrogrado, by a computation backward from ourselves.’ So, too, Webster 
of Clitheroe, in his Academiarum Examen (quoted by Dyce, Preface to John Web- 
ster’s Dram. Works, p. xxix.), says, ‘In regard of Natural Philosophy, . . . we 


23 


354 THE TRAGEDIE OF facr Vv, $C.1, 


But Jimogen is your owne, do your beft willes, 18 
And make me bleft to obey. I am brought hither 
Among th’Italian Gentry, and to fight 20 
18. Imogen is] Imogen’s Pope,+. 18. bei] bless’d Johns. conj. 
owne,] Ff, Rowe. own. Johns. 19. obey.] obey! Pope et seq. 


own; Pope et cet. 


preposterously reckon former ages, and the men that lived in them, the Ancients; 
which in regard of production and generation of the Individuals of their own 
species are so; but in respect of knowledge and experience this Age is to be accounted 
the most ancient.,—DowpEN: The Folio text seems to me correct. In generalising 
about evil-doers Posthumus is thinking of his own case. He has thoughts of his 
past,—the wager which was a trap for Imogen, and the murder; he now comes to 
his present state-—one in which this course of evil terrifies him with the thought 
of its further progress, a dread which will cause him to bring to an end the growing 
sum of evil,—by the honourable death which he anticipates,—and to his infinite 
advantage. ‘Thrift,’ in the sense of gain, profit, is common in Shakespeare. [In 
dealing with all puzzling or obscure lines such as these, should we not bear in mind 
how much of the obscurity may be due to our having the printed text before our 
eyes, over which we can pore and analyse, and mark any defect in grammar or 
coherence? Ought we not accept the lines as when spoken and when our ears are 
our only interpreters? Surely it was thus that Shakespeare intended them to be 
received. What, then, would be the fleeting impression we should receive from 
the present passage? Would it not be that the gods permit some people to go 
from bad to worse, heaping crime on crime, until at last they make them fairly 
loathe this evil course, which is a good thing for the culprit? It is when we pause 
over every word that we are puzzled by ‘each elder worse,’ and ask what ‘it’ 
refers to, etc. And then the fanaticism of emending siezes us, and we propose 
changes, utterly oblivious of the fact that by all others our emendation will be at 
once discarded or mentioned only to be jeered at.—Ep.] 

18. But Imogen is your owne] W. W. Lioyp (NV. & Q., VI, xii, 342, 1885): 
If this phrase is not nonsense, it at least will bear no interpretation which blends 
happily with Posthumus’s reflection. We cannot be wrong in erasing ‘Imogen’ 
and printing ‘But judgment is your own.’ An alternative suggestion is to read, 
‘But vengeance is your own,’ with support of the observation that the idea of ven- 
geance is so present to the mind of Posthumus, that the word has already occurred 
twice in the speech; and then the familiarity with the text (Rom., xii, 19), ‘Ven- 
geance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord,’ might easily influence the Poet. But, 
on the other hand, the ductus literarum is decidedly in favour of judgement.— 
Inctesy: If the four lines (‘You snatch . . . doers thrift,’ 14-17) of explanation 
be omitted, and also ‘But’ in line 18, these words [‘ Imogen is your own’] are in 
place, and answer to ‘so had you saved,’ etc.; and there would not be the least 
ground for suspecting the purity of the text. With the insertion of those four 
lines an element of doubt arises, which gives a locus standi, for Mr Lloyd’s first 
[‘judgment’] and very clever emendation. [It is ‘clever,’ as Ingleby says, but is it 
needed? Does it not mar a little the gradual inclining toward not merely forgive- 
ness, but even to an exaltation of Imogen, who is now in Heaven, among the very 
own of the Gods? Is there not a pathetic tenderness and a cadence in the words 
which judgment and, still more, vengeance raspP—Ep.] 


ACTRY,1 SCs 15} CYMBELINE 355 


Againft my Ladies Kingdome : ’Tis enough at 
That (Britaine) I haue kill’d thy Miftris : Peace, 

Ile giue no wound to thee : therefore good Heauens, 

Heare patiently my purpofe. Ile difrobe me 

Of thefe Italian weedes, and fuite my felfe 25 
As do’s a Britaine Pezant : fo Ile fight 

Againft the part I come with : fo Ile dye 

For thee (O /mogen) euen for whom my life 

Is euery breath,a death : and thus, vnknowne, 

Pittied, nor hated, to the face of perill - 30 
My felfe Ile dedicate. Let me make men know 


21. Ladies] lady’s Rowe et seq. Pope, Theob. i, Cap. Briton Theob. ii. 
22. Miftris: Peace,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, et cet. 
Han. Cap. mistress. Peace! Johns. 26. Pezant:| Peazant: Fy. peasant? 
Knt. mistress: peace! Theob. et cet. Rowe. peasant; Pope et seq. 
23. thee:] thee. Pope et cet. 28. euen| Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
24. purpofe.| Fi,+, Coll. Ktly. pur- Warb. 
pose:— Dyce, Sta. purpose: Cap. et 29. thus,| thus Ff,+. 
cet. vnknowne] not known Han. 
26. Britaine] F,. Britain F,F,, Rowe, 30. nor] or Han. ot Johns. 


22. thy Mistris : Peace] STAUNTON (Atheneum, 14 June, 1873): So, flatly, 
reads every modern text. Can I be mistaken in believing Shakespeare wrote, 
‘thy mistress-piece!’ The received lection sounds absolutely senseless, while, con- 
sidering the exalted rank and august endowments of Imogen, the expression, of 
which it appears to be a sophistication, is peculiarly appropriate. Compare—a 
notable instance of its use—the following passage from Lord Herbert’s Hist. of 
Henry VIII. (ed. 1649): ‘Among whom, because Mistresse Elizabeth Blunt, 
daughter to Sir John Blunt, Knight, was thought, for her rare Ornaments of Nature 
and education, to be the beauty and Mistress-peece of her time,’ etc —MURRAY 
(N. E. D.), who says it is formed in ‘master-piece,’ adds a second quotation: Fuller 
(Worthies, Herefordshire, II, 41, 1662), ‘Rosamund, being the mistress-piece of 
beauty of that age. —THISELTON: Staunton may be right, the colon representing 
a hyphen which was often in a form resembling the sign of equality; compare 
“Abraham:Cupid’ in Rom. & Jul., II, i, 13, Q.; also a similar use of the colon in 
Scotch legal documents; and also perhaps the sign of ratio. Either reading gives 
good sense, but ‘my Ladies Kingdom,’ line 21, seems to turn the balance in favour 
of the usual text. [Rarely, indeed, is there suggested, I think, a more plausible 
emendation than this of Staunton. And our regret cannot but be correspondingly 
great that the need of it isnot greater. See also, ‘The peece of tender Ayre, thy ver- 
tuous Daughter,’ V, v, 529. See again, ‘Thy mother was a piece of virtue,’ Temp., 
I, ii, 56.—Eb.] 

25. weedes] That is, clothes, as in Shakespeare passim. They are referred to 
again in ‘habits,’ line 32. 

31-35. Let me... more within] The vulgar, discordant note struck in these 
lines, with their braggart tone, from a heart-broken man whose only prayer was a 
death unknown, never came from the hand that wrote what precedes it.-—Ep. 


356 THE TRAGEDIE OF (Acts, SC-4i, 


More valour in me, then my habits fhow. 32 
Gods, put the ftrength o’th’Zeonat in me : 
To fhame the guize o’th’world, I will begin, 


The fafhion leffe without, and more within. eae 35 
Scena Secunda. 
Enter Lucius, Tachimo,and the Romane Army at one doore : 2 


and the Britaine Army at another: Leonatus Pofihumus 
following like a poore Souldier. They march ouer , and goe 

out. Then enter againe in Skirmifh Tachimo and Pofthu- 5 
mus : he vanquifheth and difarmeth Lachimo, aud then 

leaues him. 


Tac. The heauineffe and guilt within my bofome, 
Takes off my manhood : I haue belyed a Lady, 
The Princeffe of this Country ; and the ayre on’t 10 
Reuengingly enfeebles me, or could this Carle, 

32. habits fhow.] Ff (fhow, F,). 
habit’s show; Rowe, Pope. habit’s shew; 
Theob. Warb. Johns. habit shews; ~ 


Han. 
33, 34. o’th’] o’the Cap. et seq. 


- humus following it, like a poor Soldier: 
They march over and go out. Alarums 
as of a Battle begun. Enter, in skir- 
mish, several little Parties; with them, 
Tachimo and Posthumus: [The rest as 


33. me:] me! Theob. et seq. 

34, 35. begin, The fashion] Ff, Rowe. 
begin, The fashion, Pope. begin The 
fashion. Johns. begin The fashion, 
Theob. et cet. 

1. Scene continued. Rowe,+. Scene 
mm. Eccles. 

2. Enter...) Enter, from opposite 
side, Lucius, Iachimo, and the Roman 
Army: then the British army; Post- 


in text.] Cap. et seq. (subs.). Trumpets 
and Drums. Enter...leave him. Ala- 
rums on both sides. Coll. (monovol.). 

8. heauineffe] heaviest Theob. ii. (mis- 
print). 

and] of Warb. Coll. conj. (Warb. 

MS., N. & Q., VIII, iii, 263, 1893), 
Coll. conj. 


11. me,] me: Rowe et seq. 


2. Enter, etc.] Knicur holds that the minuteness of the stage directions in the 
first four Scenes of this Act savours of youth, and is possibly due to the fact that we 
here have the remnants of an early sketch which Shakespeare at a later period 
elaborated. [In Garrick’s Version the stage direction and opening lines are as 
follows: ‘A Fretp or Battie. A grand Fight between the Romans and Britons: 
the Romans are drove off. Enter Posthumus and Iachimo fighting. Iachimo drops 
his Sword. Posthumus. Or yield thee, Roman, or thou dy’st. Iachimo. Peasant, 
behold my breast. Post. No, take thy life and mend it. [Evit Post.] 
The heaviness and sin,’ etc., etc., as in the original —Ep.] 

6,7. aud then leaues him] RuccrEs (p. 38): This mercy has a rich reward. 
Had Posthumus put Iachimo to death, he would have slain the only witness that 
could fully confirm Imogen’s truth. 


11. Carle] Murray (N. £. D.)—|For the elaborate genesis of this word recourse 


Tachimo. 


AeTAY, SC: i1.] 


CYMBELINE 


Jon 


A very drudge of Natures, haue fubdu’de me 12 
In my profeffion ? Knighthoods, and Honors borne 

As I weare mine )are titles but of fcorne. 

If that thy Gentry (Britaine) go before 15 
This Lowt, as he exceeds our Lords, the oddes 


Is, that we fcarfe are men, and you are Goddes. 


Ext. 


Lhe Battaile continues , the Britaines fly, Cymbeline is 
taken: Then enter to lus refeue, Bellarus , Guiderius, 


and Aruiragus. 


20 


Bel.Stand, ftand, we haue th’aduantage of the ground, 
The Lane is guarded : Nothing rowts vs, but 


The villany of our feares. 
Gut. Arut. 


Enter Pofthumus,and feconds the Britaines. 


Stand, ftand, land fight. 


They Refcue 25 


Cymbeline, and Exeunt. 
Then enter Lucius, Lachimo, and Imogen. 


Ie, 


Away boy from the Troopes,and faue thy felfe: 


For friends kil friends ,and the diforder’s fuch 


As warre were hood-wink’d. 
Tac. ’Tis their frefh fupplies. 


12. Natures] Ff. 
nature’s Rowe et cet. 
Jubdwde| fubdwd F3F 5. 
13. and] Om. Pope, Han. 
borne] born F,, Rowe,+, Cap. 


nature Pope,+. 


14. titles] tiles Theob. ii. (mis- 
print?) 

fcorne.| scorn; Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. 
18. Battaile] Battel F;F,, Rowe, 


Pope, Han. 
18, 25. Britaines] Ff (subs.). Britons 
Theob. ii. 


30 


21. fland,| stand; Pope,+. — stand. 
Johns. stand! Cap. et seq. 
th aduantage| Pope,+, Dyce ii, 
iii. the advantage Ff et cet. 
ground,| ground; Pope, Theob. 
Warb. et seq. 
22. The Lane] That lane Rowe ii,+. 
guarded] garded F,. 
24. Stand, ftand,| Stand, stand Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Stand; stand Johns. 
fight.) fight! Cap. et seq. 
29. diforder’s| disorders Han. ii. (mis- 
print?) 


must be had to the inestimable Dictionary itself]: The form karl appears as the 


proper name Carl, Latin Carolus, French and English Charles. 
b. A bondman, a villain. 


common people. 


1. A man of the 
2. Hence, A fellow of low birth or rude 


manners; a base fellow; a churl.—STEEVENS: The thought seems to have been 
imitated in Philaster: ‘The gods take part against me; could this boor Have held 


me thus else.’—{IV, iii.]. 


12. A very drudge of Natures] WALKER (Cyit., ii, 309): In Rich. III: I, iii, 
we have ‘The slave of nature,’ which means neither more nor less than a born 


villain. 


[By quoting the present phrase immediately after his remark on Rich. III. 


the inference is that Walker would interpret it as a natural born drudge.| 


358 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. lil. 


Luc. It is a day turn’d ftrangely : or betimes 32 
Let’s re-inforce, or fly. Exeunt 


Scena Tertia. 


Enter Pofithumus, and a Britaine Lord. 2 
Lor. Cam’ft thou from where they made the ftand ? 
Poft. I did, 
Though you it feemes come from the Fliers ? 5 
La, Acid, 
Poft. No blame be to you Sir, for all was loft, 
But that the Heauens fought : the King himfelfe 8 


. Britaine] Briti/h Pope et seq. 


32. firangely:] strangely. Pope,+. 
33. re-inforce] re.inforce F2. 


1. Scene continued. Rowe. Scene It. Fliers?| Fliers. F;F, et seq. 


No nan 


Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. . did] bid F;. 
Scene tv. Eccl. . be to you] to you F;F,, Rowe. 
ScENE, another Part of the Field of Sir,| Sir; Cap. et seq. 
Battel. Theob. -. 8. fought:| fought. Coll. Ktly. 


33. Let’s re-inforce] Craicre (VN. EL. D., s. v. 4.): To obtain reinforcements. 
(The present passage is the only one, except a quotation dated 1811, where this 
verb is used intransitively.|—Dowpren: Mr Hart thinks that this means not 
obtain reinforcements, but ‘renew the attack,’ and he cites the Play of Stuckley 
(Simpson’s School of Shakepseare, p. 207), where he believes the word bears this 
meaning. [The passage referred to is as follows: ‘Retire thee into Clamgaboy 
Where Alexander and MacGilliam Buske May join their Scots. . . . And reinforce 
the English with fresh power,’ where the word certainly seems to mean, as a foot- 
note says, ‘7. e., renew the attack upon, engage again’; and it is possible that it so 
means here, whether or not it is intransitive—CRaIcIE (op. cit.) quotes a passage 
from Coriolanus as an illustration of the use of ‘Reinforcement,’ as meaning ‘A 
renewal of force, a fresh assault’—‘He “‘aydelesse came off, And with a sudden 
re-inforcement strucke Corioles like a Planet.”—TII, ii, 117.’ Here again, as in 
Stuckley, it is transitive. It must, however, be borne in mind that these two ex- 
amples are exceptions to the large number of instances involving the idea of added 
forces.—Ep.] 

6. I did] Cratc: These two ‘I dids’ are awkward. It is very likely, I think, 
that Shakespeare here wrote Aye. It must be remembered that Aye is always 
printed ‘T’ in the Folios. 

8. the Heauens fought] STEEvENS: So in Judges, v, 20: ‘They fought from 
heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.’ 

8. the King himselfe, etc.] CapELt (p. 118): The description that begins 
at these words, and is concluded in the speech that comes after, is worded with 
such conciseness in some parts, clogged with so much parenthetical matter in 
others, and its images follow so thick one upon the heels of another, that a more 
than ordinary attention is necessary to gain due understanding of it. This sen- 


INCI We, SCS san] CYMBELINE 359 


[8. the King himselfe] 


tence and the three it is followed by are put absolutely; after which the construc- 
tion is regular as far down as the words ‘athwart the lane’ [line 23], where we must 
supply throwing himselfe; for ‘soldiour’ is not connected with anything, but the 
sense is broke off at it. This turning of the tide of battle by Belarius and his two 
sons is derived from an incident narrated by Holinshed (Hist. of Scotland, p. 155), 
which is quoted in part by MALonE and Muscrave. It stands thus in Holinshed: 
“The Danes being backed with the mounteine, were constreined to leaue the same, 
and with all speed to come forward vpon their enimies, that by ioining they might 
auoid the danger of the Scotishmens arrowes and darts: by this means therefore 
they came to handstrokes, in maner before the signe was giuen on either part to 
the battell. The fight was cruell on both sides: and nothing hindered the Scots 
so much, as going about to cut off the heads of the Danes, euer as they might over- 
come them. Which maner being noted of the Danes, and perceiuing that there was 
no hope of life but in victorie, they rushed foorth with such violence vpon their 
aduersaries, that first the right, and then after the left wing of the Scots, was 
constreined to retire and flee backe, the middle-ward stoutly yet keeping their 
ground: but the same stood in such danger, being now left naked on the sides, that 
the victorie must needes haue remained with the Danes, had not a renewel of the 
battell come in time, by the appointment (as is to be thought) of almightie God. 

‘For as it chanced, there was in the next field at the same time an husbandman, 
with two of his sons busie about his worke, named Haie, a man strong and stiffe in 
making and shape of bodie, but indued with a valiant courage. This Haie behold- 
ing the king with the most part of the nobles, fighting with great valiancie in the 
middle ward, now destitute of the wings, and in great danger to be oppressed by the 
great violence of his enimies, caught a plow-beame in his hand, and with the 
same exhorting his sonnes to doo the like, hasted towards the battell, there to die 
rather amongest other in defense of his countrie, than to remaine aliue after the 
discomfiture in miserable thraldome and bondage of the cruell and most vnmercifull 
enimies, There was neere to the place of the battell, a long lane fensed on the 
sides with ditches and walles made of turfe, through the which the Scots which 
fled were beaten downe by the enimies on heapes. 

‘Here Haie with his sonnes, supposing they might best staie the flight, placed 
themselues ouerthwart the lane, beat them backe whome they met fleeing, and 
spared neither friend nor fo; but downe they went with all such as came within 
their reach, wherewith diuerse hardie personages cried vnto their fellowes to 
returne backe vnto the battell, for there was a new power of Scotishmen come to 
their succours, by whose aid the victorie might be easilie cbteined of their most 
cruell aduersaries the Danes: therefore might they choose whether they would 
be slaine of their owne fellowes comming to their aid, or to returne againe to fight 
with the enimies. The Danes being here staied in the lane by the great valiancie 
of the father and the sonnes, thought verely there had beene some great succors 
of Scots come to the aid of their King, and therevpon ceassing from further pursute, 
fled backe in great disorder vnto the other of their fellowes fighting with the middle 
ward of the Scots. . . . But Haie, who in such wise (as is before mentioned) staied 
them that fled, causing them to returne againe to the field, deserued immortall 
fame and commendation: for by his meanes chieflie was the victorie atchiued.’ 

Muscrave: It appears from Peck’s New Memoirs, etc., Article 88, that Milton in- 
tended to have written a play on this subject. [After enumerating Milton’s poems, 


360 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act v, SC. iii. 


Of his wings deftitute, the Army broken, 
And but the backes of Britaines feene ; all flying fe) 
Through a ftrait Lane, the Enemy full-hearted, 
Lolling the Tongue with flaught’ring : hauing worke 
More plentifull, then Tooles to doo’t : ftrooke downe 
Some mortally, fome flightly touch’d, fome falling 
Meerely through feare,that the ftrait paffe was damm/’d 15 
With deadmen, hurt behinde, and Cowards liuing 
To dye with length’ned fhame. 
Lo. Where was this Lane? 
Poft.Clofe by the battell, ditch’d, & wall’d with turph, 


Which gaue aduantage to an ancient Soldiour 20 
(An honeft one I warrant) who deferu’d 
So long a breeding, as his white beard came to, 22 


9-17. Mnemonic Pope, Warb. 


15. firait] straight Rowe, 
10. Britaines] Ff (subs.), 


Theob. Han. Warb. 


Pope, 
Rowe, 


Pope, Cap. Britain Theob. Warb. damm’d| damn’d Pope, Warb. 
Johns. Britons Han. et cet. 16. deadmen] dead-men F;F,. dead 
Jeene;| seen, Cap. et seq. men Rowe et seq. 
11. ftrait] straight F.F;, Rowe, Pope, behinde,| behind; Pope. 
Theob. Han. Warb. 19. battell,| battle; Johns. 
Lane,| lane; Theob. i, Cap. et seq. turph,| turfe, F;. turf, F,4,+. 
12. flaugh’ring:|  slaughtring, or turf; Cap. et seq. 
slaughtering, Rowe et seq. 20. Soldiour| Souldier F;F,. soldier, 
13. doo’t:| do’t, Rowe et seq. Rowe,+, Coll. Glo. Cam.  soldier,— 


firooke| firoke F2. ftrook F3F4, 


Cap. et cet. (subs.) 
Rowe i, Cap. struck Rowe ii. 


21. (An... warrant)| An... warrant; 


14. flightly touch’d,| slightly, touch’d Cap. et seq. 
Vaun. Dowden. 21, 22. (An...came to,] In parentheses, 
15. feare,| fear; Cap. et seq. Pope. 


Peck (p. 88) thus begins his Chap. XII: ‘Besides all these our author intended like- 
wise (as may be remembered) upwards of ninety dramatic pieces. I shall here give 
the Catalogue of them from his MS. Common-place-book, now in Trinity College 
Library.’ No. Ixxxvili. reads: ‘Haie, the plowman, who, with his two sons that 
were at plow, running to the battell that was between the Scots & Danes in the next 
field, staid the flight of his countrymen, renew’d the battell, & caus’d the victorie, 
&c. Scotch Story, p. 155.’ It is, I think, noteworthy that No. xc. on this list is: 
‘Macbeth. Beginning at the arrival of Malcolm at Mackduffe. The matter of 
Duncan may be expres’t by the appearing of his ghost.’-—Ep.] 

12. Lolling the Tongue] This forcible-feeble expression has not, to me, a 
Shakespearian stamp. Nor the use of ‘Tooles’ in the next line. The first line in 


all this description that, to me, gives the true ring is ‘To die with length’ned 
shame.’—Ep. 


16. deadmen] See WALKER (Crit., ii, 136), or II, iii, 77. 
21, 22. deseru’d So long a breeding, as his white beard came to] 
Waite: His service to his country made him worthy of the great age indicated 


BCTAVs SC. itis] CYMBELINE 301 


In doing this for’s Country. Athwart the Lane, 23 
He, with two ftriplings (Lads more like to run 
The Country bafe, then to commit fuch flaughter, 25 


With faces fit for Maskes, or rather fayrer 
Then thofe for preferuation cas’d, or fhame) 
Made good the paffage, cryed to thofe that fled. 


Our Sritaines hearts dye flying, not our men, 29 
23. for’s] Fi,+, Coll. Dyce, Sta. shame Make Han. (reading: For shame 
Glo. Cam. for’s his Var. ’73 (misprint?). ... passage, aS a quotation). 
for his Cap. et cet. 28. paffage,] passage; Johns. et seq. 
Country.| Ff,t+, Ktly, Cam. fled.| fled, Ff et seq. 
country, Knt. country; Han. et cet. 29-33. Mnemonic Pope. As quota- 
Athwart] ’Thwart Pope,+. tion Theob. et seq. 
25. flaughter,| slaughter; Theob. 29. hearts] harts Pope ii. et seq. 
Wartb. et seq. men,| men; Pope et seq. 


27, 28. cas’d,...Made] cas’d) ‘For 


by his beard.—Scumipt (Lex., s. v. Breeding): That is, who deserved to live so long 
as to breed his long white beard—IncLtEeBy: That is, who shewed by his valour 
that he had profited by such long experience (in arms) as his long white beard 
cited.—DeErcHton: Who, in so serving his country, well deserved of it the support 
it had given him during the life which his white beard showed him to have lived.— 
DowbEN: Who deserved the nurture of his country for as many years as his 
white beard indicated. [May it not mean: Who, for this patriotic action, de- 
served as long a nurture in the future as his white beard indicated that he had been 
nurtured in the past? which differs but slightly from Dowden’s paraphrase—Eb.] 

25. Country base] Murray (N. E. D., 5. v. Base. sb?): A popular game among 
boys; it is played by two sides, who occupy contiguous ‘bases’ or ‘homes’; any 
player running out from his ‘base’ is chased by one of the opposite side, and, if 
caught, made a prisoner. [Present line quoted.] 

26. With faces fit for Maskes, etc.]| DEIGHTON: With faces so delicate of 
complexion as to deserve masks to protect them from the sun, or rather, I should 
say, fairer than those by which masks are worn either for that purpose or to 
prevent impertinent curiosity; masks were commonly worn by ladies out of doors 
to preserve their complexions, or for purposes of concealment at theatres, etc. 

29. Our Britaines hearts dye flying] THeosarp: Thus all the editions, 
and thus Mr Pope in his [First] edition, most implicitly obsequious to nonsense. I 
corrected the passage in my Shakespeare Restor’d, as I have now reform’d it in the 
Text, and Mr Pope has follow’d my correction in his [Second] edition of our Author. 
[Theobald reads farts in his Text.|}—INcLEBy (retaining ‘hearts’ of the Folios): 
Compare line 51, where the allusion is to the Romans’ hearts. The meaning is 
that the Britons were losing heart (courage); and flying, lest they should lose their 
lives; and they were thus putting their souls in jeopardy. [Is losing heart a com- 
mendable paraphrase of ‘hearts die’? —Ep.]|—Cuurton CoLins (p. 303): Nothing 
could be happier than [Theobald’s] emendation of Harts in this line. [Wherewith, 
I think, there will be general agreement.—ED.] 

29. not our men] TurrrBy (Letters to Theobald, in Nichols’s [/lustrations, 
vol. ii, p. 229): What if we should read ‘er men’ instead of ‘our men,’ which is just 


362 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[AcT V, SC. ill. 


To darkneffe fleete foules that flye backwards ; ftand, 30 
Or we are Romanes, and will giue you that 

Like beafts, which you fhun beaftly, and may faue 

But to looke backe in frowne : Stand, ftand. Thefe three, 

Three thoufand confident, in a€te as many : 

For three performers are the File, when all 35 
The reft do nothing. With this word ftand, ftand, 

Accomodated by the Place ; more Charming 

With their owne Nobleneffe, which could haue turn’d 

A Diftaffe, to a Lance, guilded pale lookes ; 39 


30. fleete foules] F2. fleet foules F3. 
fleet fouls F,, Rowe, Pope, Han. Glo. 
Cam. fleet souls, Theob. Warb. Johns. 


fleet, souls Cap. Var. 73 et cet. 


backwards;| F.F;, Rowe ii, Han. 
backward; F,, Rowe i. backwards. Glo. 


Cam. backwards! Pope et cet. 
fiand,| stand; Theob. et seq. 


32. beafily,] Fi,+, Coll. Dyce, Glo. 


Cam. beastly; Cap. et cet. 


faue] Ff,+, Cam. ’scape Huds. 


save, Cap. et cet. 


34. many:] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. many— Glo. many, 
Han. et cet. 


35, 36. For...nothing.| In parentheses 
Pope et seq. (subs.) 


36. nothing.| Fi, Rowe.  mnothing;) 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb.  nothing,) 
Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt. mothing,— 


Dyce, Sta. Cam. nothing— Ktly, Glo. 
nothing) Johns. et cet. 

37. Place; place, Pope et seq. 

39. Difiaffe,| diftaff F3F,. 


33. frowne] front Rowe, Pope. 


lookes;] Ff, Rowe,+. looks, Cap. 
ftand.| stand— Pope, Han. 


et cet. looks. Vaun. 


now come into my head? I think I should rather have wrote her, and rather incline 
to think Shakespeare did; but as it is very uncertain, and of no consequence, I would 
not have it mentioned. [Although it is wholly needless, we can, I think, still 
admire its plausibility—Eb.] 

30. To darknesse fleete soules that flye backwards] VAUGHAN (p. 515): 
This is not an imprecation; but, I apprehend, an aphorism, like the line preceding, 
and should be punctuated accordingly. 

31. Or we are Romanes] That is, or else we shall turn Romans. 

33- may saue But to looke backe in frowne: Stand, stand] That is, 
you may save yourself from this death that you shun by only making a stand and 
looking back defiance. 

35. the File] Murray (NV. E. D., s. v. sb®, II, 7. Mil.): The number of men 
constituting the depth from front to rear of a formation in line, etc—Scumipt 
(Lex. 3): The number, multitude. 

37. Charming] Staunton: That is, controlling others of the Britain side, as if 
by enchantment. 

38-44. Noblenesse, which could .. . o’th’Hunters] DrrcHTon: Noble- 
ness, which would have converted a timid woman into a daring man, gave fresh 
colour to those now blanched with fear; and some from shame, some from returning 
courage, became what they were before the panic seized them; so that some who 
merely from following the lead of others, had given way to cowardice,—a sin doabiy 
accursed in those that set the example,—began, like,the old man and the two strip- 


ACT V, SC. iii. ] CYMBELINE 363 


Part fhame, part fpirit renew’d, that fome turn’d coward 40 
But by example (Oh a finne in Warre, 

Damn’d in the firft beginners) gan to looke 

The way that they did, and to grin like Lyons 

Vpon the Pikes o’th’Hunters. Then beganne 

A ftop ’th’Chafer ; a Retyre : Anon 45 
A Rowt, confufion thicke : forthwith they flye 

Chickens, the way which they f{topt Eagles : Slaues 


The ftrides the Viétors made : and now our Cowards 48 
40. Part shame, part] Ff, Rowe, cet. 
Johns. Knt, Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 45, 53. v’th’] a’the Cap. et seq. 
Part shame; part Pope. Part, shame, 45. Chafer;| chaser, Rowe et seq. 
part, Theob. et cet. 46. confufion thicke| confusion-thick 
Spirit renew’d] spirit—renew’d Han. Warb. Cap. Walker, Dyce ii, iii. 
Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. thicke:) thick. Rowe,+. 
renewd,| renew’d; Johns. et seq. 47. fiopt| Ff. stoopi or stoop’d Rowe 
fome] some, Theob. Warb. et seq. et seq. 
42. beginners)| beginners!) Theob. Slaues| Fi. slaves, Pope et seq. 
Watb. et seq. (subs.) 48. the Victors] they victors Theob. et 


gan] F2, Dyce, Glo. ’gan F;F, et seq. 


lings, to face the foe with looks as fierce and grim as those of lions at bay against the 
spears of the hunters. 

45. A stop i’th’Chaser] MADDEN (p. 298): The essential characteristic of 
the career, wherein it differed from the ordinary gallop, was its abrupt ending, 
technically known as ‘the stop,’ by which the horse was suddenly and firmly thrown 
upon his haunches. Wherever Shakespeare uses the word this stop is present to 
his mind. 

47. the way which they stopt Eagles] It is an assertion somewhat teme- 
rarious to predicate of the meaning of any word that Shakespeare always had that 
meaning in mind when he uses the word. Wherefore, if Madden’s assertion in the 
foregoing note be correct, some doubt must be cast on Rowe’s emendation, stoopt 
for ‘stopt,’ in the present line. Does not Rowe’s stoopt weaken the simile? Of 
course, we all know that it is a technical word in Falconry, and equivalent to 
swoop, which gives it, as here used, much force. Is there not, however, more ac- 
tion in describing the pas de charge de victoire of the Romans as so headlong in the 
onward rush of its career that nothing less than the mighty and sail-broad vans of an 
eagle could have stopt midway? The Romans could fly like timorous chickens, but 
only as Eagles could they stop. I am emboldened thus to run counter to every 
editor since Rowe, by Thiselton’s remark that ‘there may be room for doubt’ 
that Rowe’s change ‘is unassailable.’—Ep. 

47, 48. Slaues The strides the Victors made] Dricuron: As slaves they 
retrace the steps which but now they had so proudly made as victors. [Theobald’s 
change of ‘the Victors’ into ‘they victors’ is certainly good and aids the quicker com- 
prehension of the passage, but is it absolutely necessary? The whole description 
is so elliptical, jerky, ill-constructed, and devoid of dramatic fire that I am loath to. 
believe that it was written by the same hand that described the Battle of Bosworth 
Field or the Battle of Agincourt.—ED.] 


364 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act v, Sc. iii. 


Like Fragments in hard Voyages became F 

The life o’th’need : hauing found the backe doore open, 50 
Of the vnguarded hearts : heauens, how they wound, 

Some flaine before fome dying ; fome their Friends 

Ore-borne i’th’former waue, ten chac’d by one, 

Are now each one the flaughter-man of twenty: 


Thofe that would dye, or ere refift, are growne 55 
50. backe doore] back-door Cap. et seq. 52. before] before, Ff, Rowe,+, Cam. 
51. hearts:} Ff, Knt, Sta. haris before; Cap. et cet. 

Sing. hearts, Rowe et cet. dying;| dying, Cam. 

wound,| wound Johns. wound! ome their] Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

Cap. et seq. Johns. Knt, Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
52. Some flaine| Some, slain Cap. some, their Theob. et cet. 

Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr. 53. waue,| wave; Theob. et seq. 


55- or ere] or-ere Pope, Theob. i. 


49, 50. Like Fragments... became The life o’th’need] DrrcHTon: 
Like the fragments of food in a prolonged voyage (which at another time would 
have been despised), became the very life and soul of the emergency. [Several 
editors have here referred to a passage, which is hardly parallel, in As You Like It, 
where Jacques described Touchstone’s brain as dry as ‘the remainder biscuit After 
a voyage.’—Eb.] ; 

49. became] CAPELL (p. 118), regarding this as a participle, ‘and govern’d of 
“‘fragments,”’’ changed it into become, and pronounced it ‘a most certain correction’; 
this conviction is not shared, I believe, by any subsequent editor. 

50. hauing] WALKER (Vers., 242) regards ‘hauing’ in this present sentence as a 
monosyllable, to be pronounced ha’ing. So also does Apport, § 466. And they 
may be right. It is, however, somewhat strange that compositors, as far as I 
know, have never thus printed it, and yet these same compositors will at times 
scrupulously print ‘ha’s’ for haves.—Ep. 

51, 52. how they wound, Some slaine before some dying, etc.] W. W. 
Lioyp commented (NV. & Q., VII, ii, 23, 1886) on the exclamation mark intro- 
duced after ‘wound’ by Capell, and since adopted by all editors, and asks, ‘Is it 
possible that editors understood ‘“‘some”’ to indicate the pursuers?’ Thereupon he 
proposes to put no punctuation at all after ‘wound,’ but to make ‘some’ the accu- 
sative after it—Br. NICHOLSON replied (09. cit., p. 163) that Lloyd’s criticism was 
correct, but needless; that the comma after ‘some’ (in the Var.’21) shows that the 
exclamation mark has not separated the verb from its subject, and that ‘some’ 
refers to ‘the Cowards’ in line 47. But Lloyd was not satisfied (0. cit., p. 305), 
and was still of opinion that any punctuation after ‘wound’ would make the 
‘some’ refer to the ‘pursuers,’ [meaning, I think, that it would make the pursuers 
those who were ‘slain before. —Ep.]—DowpEN: We may understand the word 
‘some’ in each of the three instances to refer to those wounded, not to those 
who wound; but the third ‘some’ may possibly be nominative to ‘wound’ 
understood. It seems, however, quite possible that each ‘some’ may refer to 
those who wound—some who feigned death, some really dying, some trampled 


down in the former rush,—friends of those dying—ten who had been chased by 
one, etc. 


ACT PY, SC. ii. ] CYMBELINE 305 

The mortall bugs o’th’ Field. 56 
Lord. This was ftrange chance : 

A narrow Lane,an old man,and two Boyes. 
Poft. Nay,do not wonder at it you are made 

Rather to wonder at the things you heare, 60 

Then to worke any. Will you Rime vpon’t, 

And vent it for a Mock’rie? Heere is one: 

“Two Boyes,an Oldman (twice a Boy)a Lane, 

“Preferwd the Britaines, was the Romanes bane. 
Lord. Nay,be not angry Sir. 65 
Poft. Lacke,to what end? 

Who dares not ftand his Foe, Ile be his Friend : 

For if hee’l do, as he is made to doo, 

I knowhee’l quickly flye my friendfhip too. 


You haue put me into Rime. 70 
Lord. Farewell, you’re angry, Exit. 
Fof. Still going? This is a Lord : Oh Noble mifery 72 


56. bugs] hugs Warb. (corrected in 64. Britaines] Britons Theob. 


MS. ap. Cam.). 

57. was] was a F3F,, Rowe. 

58. Lane,...Boyes.] Fi, Rowe, Coll. 
(boys!) Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Janel... 
boys! Pope et cet. 

59. Nay, do not] Nay, do but Theob. 
Pope ii. Ay, do but Sta. conj. Nay, do 
you Ingl. 

you] tho’ you Han. But you Cap. 
conj. [Aside] you Anon. ap. Cam. 

61-70. In margin, Pope, Han. 

61,70. Rime] Ff, Cap. rhyme Rowe. 

62. Mock’rie] Fi, Rowe. mockery 
Pope. 

63. Oldman] F>. 
man F, et seq. 


Old-man F;. Old 


66. Lacke,| Ff (subs.), Rowe. Lack! 
Theob. Warb. ’Lack, Han. Cap. Dyce, 
Sta. Glo. Cam. ’ZLack/ Johns. et cet. 

70. Rime] rhymes. Pope,+. 

71. you're] Fi, Rowe, Cap. Dyce, Glo. 
Cam. you are Pope et cet. 

72. Still going?] Ff. (going: F,). 
Om. Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Sepa- 

This is a Lord:| This a lord! 
Ritson. This’ lord Elze. 

Lord:| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
lord— Theob. Warb. lord. Coll. lord! 
Johns. et cet. 

mifery| Ff. misery,— Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. misery! Cap. et cet. 


56. bugs] JoHNson: Terrors.—MAtoneE: See 3 Hen. VI: ‘Warwick was a Bugge 
that fear’d us all.’—V, ui, 2. 

59. Nay, do not wonder at it] Jonnson: Posthumus first bids him not 
wonder, then tells him in another mode of reproach that wonder was all that he 
was made for.—VAUGHAN (p. 517): Perhaps there are not two modes of reproach, 
but a command and a reproachful expostulation of its necessity. If ‘you are 
made,’ etc., were right, I would read: ‘They do not wonder,’ etc. But I very much 
prefer to amend the end of the line than the beginning, thus: ‘You are mad,’ etc. 

72. Still going] WALKER (Crit., iii, 327): That is, you run away from me 
as you did from the enemy. [Walker would put these words in a separate line, 
I can hardly see wherefore. Possibly, in order to make of the remaining words 
a regular iambic pentameter. His own remark after making the division is simply: 


306 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT v, SC. iil. 
To be i’th’Field,and aske what newes of me : a3 
To day, how many would haue giuen their Honours 

To haue fau’d their Carkaffes? Tooke heele to doo’t, a5 


And yet dyed too. I,in mine owne woe charm’d 

Could not finde death, where I did heare him groane, 

Nor feele him where he ftrooke. Being an vgly Montfter, 

’Tis ftrange he hides him in frefh Cups, foft Beds, 

Sweet words; or hath moe minifters then we 80 


That draw his kniues 1’th’ War. 


Well I will finde him : 


For being now a Fauourer to the Britaine, 82 


73. vth’] ithe Cap. et seq. 
aske what newes] Ff (news F,), 
Rowe, Pope, Knt, Coll. iii. ask what 
news, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. ask 
‘what news?’ Glo. Cam. ask, what 
news, Cap. et cet. 
me:| Ff, Rowe. me? Pope. me. 
Coll. me! Theob. et cet. 
74. To day] To-day Pope. 
75. To haue] To’ve Pope,+. 
Carkaffes?] carcasses! Dyce, Glo. 
Cam. 
76-81. Mnemonic Warb. 
76. too.] Ff. to. Rowe. too/ Han. 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. too? Theob. et cet. 
charm’d\ charm’d, Ff. 
77. groane,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Coll. Dyce, Glo. Cam. groan; Theob. 


et cet. 
78. ftrooke.] Ff (subs.), Rowe. struck. 
Pope,+. strook; or struck; Cap. et cet. 
Being an] This Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Being Vaun. 
80. or hath] and hath Han. 
moe] F., Cam. more FF, et cet. 

81. i’th’] in Pope, Han. 7’the Cap. et 

seq. 
War.] 
Johns. 
-- him:| him Pope i, Han. him. 
Pope ii. 

82. Britaine] F.. Britain F;F,, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. i, Cap. Briton Theob. ii, 
Warb. Ran. Knt, Coll. i, iii, Dyce, Sta. 
Sing. Glo. Cam. Roman Han. Johns. 
Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr. Coll. ii. 


Theob. Warb. 


war— 


‘Rhyme, Posthumus had been rhyming before.’ If a rhyme be intended, which I 
doubt, it is already there in the Folio text and is not created by Walker’s division — 
Ep.] 

72. Oh Noble misery] O miserable nobility. 

76. in mine owne woe charm’d] Warsurton: Alluding to the common 
superstition of Charms being powerful enough to keep men unhurt in battle. 

80. Sweet words] VAUGHAN: This phrase is probably a corruption; ‘sweet 
words’ do not match in their noxious efficacy with ‘soft beds’ and ‘fresh cups.’ I 
would read ‘Sweet viands.’ [This change is ‘needless,’ Dowden says; but when 
Vaughan further tells us to pronounce ‘viands’ as a monosyllable, and does not 
charitably inform us whether it is to be pronounced vi’nds or v’ands, we see how 
subtle is his suggestion; for is there anything which could make Death hide himself 
with more alacrity than to hear English thus pronounced?—Ep.]|—THIsELTON: 
‘Sweet words’ are certainly one of the deadliest instruments of tragedy. 

80. moe] The comparative of many.—EcciEs: The wonder is, not only that, 
being of such a description, he should lie concealed in such unlikely places, but 
that he should be so lodged, and, at the same time, have more ministers than we, 
etc: 

82. being now a Fauourer to the Britaine] THEOBALD believes that Post- 
humus is referring to himself as the ‘favourer,’ and explains: ‘for tho’ he’s 


ACT) V, SC. iil, | CYMBELINE 367 


No more a Britaine, I haue refum’d againe 83 
The part I came in. Fight I will no more, 
But yeeld me to the verieft Hinde, that fhall 85 


Once touch my fhoulder. Great the flaughter is 
83. I haue] Pve Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. 84. in.] in: Cap. Mal. Ran. Steev. 
84. part] port Theob. conj. (with- Varr. Glo. Cam. 

drawn. Nichols, ii, 615). 


now a favourer to the Britons in heart, he’ll not confess himself of that country, 
but yield himself to the meanest of the victor-party, and so fall a sacrifice to their 
resentment.’—HANMER agreed with him so far as actually to change ‘Briton’ into 
Roman, wherein he has a respectable following down even to Collier —CapeLt, 
however, has the clearer vision and says that ‘death’ is the favourer, and that 
Posthumus ‘despairing to find him among the Britons, has resumed the part 
he came in, the Roman, and will meet him there.-—Dvyce (ed. ii.) quotes this note 
of Capell with approval—ArrowsmitH (NV. & Q., I, vii, 567, 1853) (whom it is always 
delightful to cope in his sullen fits; his lurid language then shines brilliantly in the 
drab-coloured world of Shakespearian comment) thus propounds a query in con- 
nection with the failure of the critics to perceive that ‘death’ is the favourer. 
‘My query is this, What amount of obtuseness will disqualify a criticaster who 
itches to be tinkering and cobbling the noblest passages of thought that ever 
issued from mortal brain, while at the same time he stumbles and bungles on 
sentences of that simplicity and grammatical clearness as not to tax the powers 
of a third-form schoolboy to explain? If editors, commentators, critics, and all the 
countless throng who are ambitious to daub with their un-tempered mortar, or 
scribble their names upon the most majestic edifice of genius that the world ever 
saw, lack the little discernment necessary to interpret aright the above extract 
from Cymbeline, for the last hundred years racked and tortured in vain, let them at 
length learn henceforth to distrust their judgement altogether. Staunton thus 
paraphrases: I will find death; and as he is now a sparer of the Briton, I will play 
that part no longer, but seek him as a Roman.—INcLEBy adopts in his text an 
emendation suggested to him by A. E. Brae: ‘Fortune being now a favourer to the 
Briton,’ etc. ‘It would be a mere platitude,’ he says, ‘for Posthumus to say of 
himself, ‘For being now (= just now) a favourer to the Briton,” etc., as if that 
were a reason for his changing sides. A reason is required; aad as Death could not 
(pace Capell and Arrowsmith), with any propriety of speech, be said to favour the 
side he was sparing, one is driven to look for some other agent that could; and 
clearly it is “Fortune”; and then we find half the wanted word already at the begin- 
ning of the line.’ [Ingleby’s assertion that ‘Death could not, with any propriety of 
speech, be said to favour the side he was sparing’ I am not constituted by nature to 
understand. If a mother implores Death to spare her child and her prayer is 
granted, may she not consider it a favour? Where is the impropriety of speech? 
Death did not favour the fleeing Romans; he allowed the Britons to slaughter 
them; he did favour the Britons in not allowing the Romans to slaughter them.— 
Ep.|—Tuisetton: I adopt without hesitation the interpretation that [Death is the 
‘favourer’], and submit that any other is singularly vapid. 

86. touch my shoulder] As a sign of arrest. 

86-88. Great the slaughter is . . . Britaines must take] Craic: Few 
will believe that Shakespeare in his last period wrote these lines as they stand. I 


368 THE TRAGEDIE OF ACIy Vi, SGy lite 


Heere made by’th’Romane ; great the Anfwer be 87 
Britaines muft take. For me, my Ranfome’s death, 
On eyther fide I come to fpend my breath ; 
Which neyther heere Ile keepe, nor beare agen, go 
But end it by fome meanes for /imogen. 
Enter two Captaines, and Soldiers. 

1 Great Iupiter be prais’d, Lucius is taken, 
’Tis thought the old man, and his fonnes, were Angels. 

2 There was a fourth man, in a filly habit, 95 
That gaue th’Affront with them. 

1 So ’tis reported : 
But none of’em can be found. Stand, who’s there ? 

Poft, A Roman, 
Who had not now beene drooping heere,if Seconds 100 
Had anfwer’d him. 

2 Lay hands on him:a Dogge, 
A legge of Rome fhall not returne to tell 103 


87. by’th’] by the Cap. et seq. 

88. take.] take: Cap. Varr. 
Steev. Varr. Coll. Glo. Cam. 

death,| death; Theob. Warb. et 


Mal. 


seq. 
go. nor] not F,. 
agen] Fi, Rowe, Dyce ii, iii, Sta. 
again Pope. 
g2. Enter two...] Enter two British... 
Theob. 
93, 97- r] 1 Cap. Rowe. 
93. prais’d,] prais’d! Cap. et seq. 
taken,| Ff, Rowe i. taken. Rowe 
ii, Pope, Han. Johns. Coll. Glo. taken! 
Theob. Warb. taken: Cap. et cet. 


95, 102. 2] 2 Cap. Rowe. 

98. ’em] F;F,, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Dyce, Sing. Sta. Glo. Cam. them 
‘Theob. et cet. 

Stand,|] Om. Cap. Steev. conj. 
Stand! Var. ’73 et seq. 

who's] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Dyce i, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
who is Han. et cet. 

99. Roman,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Coll. Glo. Roman— Theob. ii, Warb. 
Johns. Roman;— Theob. i. et cet. 

100. heere,] here; Pope. here Cam. 

102. Dogge,| dog! Theob. et seq. 


think they ought to be printed: ‘Great the slaughter’s here Made by the Romans; 


great the answer we Britons must take.’ 


It is, I think, probable that ‘be’ is a mis- 


print for we, but even if ‘be’ is retained, I think Shakespeare arranged as I have 


indicated. 


87. Answer] JoHNSON: ‘Answer,’ as once in this play before, is retaliation, 


[IV, iv, x8]. 


95. Silly] StEEvENS: That is, simple or rustick. 


96. th’Affront] Murray (N. E. D., 3.): Hostile encounter, attack, assault. 

103. A legge] Dantez (p. 89): In Timon (III, vi, 79) we find ‘the common 
legge of people,’ and in this instance Rowe,—followed, I believe, by all editors,— 
changes the word ‘legge’ to Jag. It seems to me that in both cases the meaning of 
the word ‘legge’ is identical, and that any change in the one case must also be 


adopted in the other. [This plausible conjecture is adopted by Hudson in his 
text.] 


ACT V, SC. iv.] CYMBELINE 369 


What Crows haue peckt them here : he brags his feruice 

As if he were of note : bring him to’th’King. 105 

Enter Cymbeline, Belarius, Guiderius, Aruiragus, Pifanio, and 
Romane Captiues. The Captaines prefent Pofihumus to 
Cymbeline,who deliuers him ouer to a Gaoler, 108 


Scena Quarta. 


Linter Pofthumus,and Gaoler. 2 
Gao. You fhall not now be ftolne, 
You haue lockes vpon you: 


So graze, as you finde Pafture. 5 
2.Gao. I, or a ftomacke. 
Poft. Mott welcome bondage ; for thou art a way VA 


3. Gao.] 1. Gaol. Rowe. 
3, 4. One line, Rowe et seq. 
4. You haue] Yowve Pope,+, Dyce 


104. here:] here. Coll. Glo. Cam. 
105. to’th’] to the Cap. et seq. 
106-108. Om. Han. 


108. Gaoler.] Gaoler. After which, 
all go out. Theob. Gaoler. The scene 


ii, iii. 
5. So graze,] Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. 


closes. Sta. Gaoler: then exeunt So, graze Coll. Dyce, Sta. So graze 

omnes. Glo. Glo. Cam. So, graze, Theob. et cet. 
1. Scene m1. Rowe. Scene mt. Pope, 6. I,] Ay, Rowe. 

Han. Johns. Scene v. Eccles. A or a] or Pope,+, Dyce conj. 


{Exeunt Gaolers. Rowe. 


Prison. Pope. 
7. bondage;| bondage! Pope et seq. 


2. and Gaoler.] and two Gaolers. 
Rowe. 


106-108. Enter . . . Gaoler] Ritson: This is the only instance in these 
plays of the business of the scene being entirely performed in dumb show. The 
direction must have proceeded from the players, as it is perfectly unnecessary, and 
our Author has elsewhere [in Hamlet] expressed his contempt of such mummery.— 
Cottier (ed. ii.): It was not unusual in our early stage to begin a scene with a 
dumb show, as Scene ii. of this Act; but it was by no means common so to terminate 
a Scene. Ritson was evidently mistaken when he said that ‘the business of this 
scene was entirely performed in dumb show,’ unless he considered this dumb show 
a scene by itself. Dumb shows were commonly resorted to for the purpose of 
briefly dismissing a portion of the story that would have occupied an inconvenient 
amount of time if represented in dialogue——Wuire: I doubt whether the latter 
part of this Scene,—from the end of Posthumus’s description of the battle,— 
is by Shakespeare. 

3. stolne] JoHNSON: The wit of the Gaoler alludes to the custom of putting a 
lock on a horse’s leg when he is turned to pasture. 

5. So graze] The Text. Notes show that a majority of editors follow Theobald 
in putting a comma after ‘So.’ Walker (Crit., i, 89) thinks, wrongly, and I agree 
with him. 

24 


370 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. iv. 
(I thinke) to liberty: yet am I better 8 
Then one that’s ficke o’th’Gowt, fince he had rather 

Groane fo in perpetuity, then be cur’d 10 


By’th’fure Phyfitian, Death ; who is the key 
T’vnbarre thefe Lockes.My Confcience, thou art fetter’d 
More then my fhanks,& wrifts:you good Gods giue me 
The penitent Inftrument to picke that Bolt, 


Then free for euer. 


9. Gowt,] gout, F3Fy. 
seq. 
11. Byth’] By th F;F,+. By the 
Caps et seq: 
Death;] death, Knt, Coll. Sta. Glo. 
Cam. 
12. T’vnbarre] Ff (subs.),+, Coll. 


gout; Cap. et 


Is’t enough I am forry? 15 


Dyce, Glo. Cam. me...instrument, Cap. 
et cet. 

14. Bolt,] bolt; Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. 

15. Then...ewer.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. i. Then,...ever. Theob. ii,+. 
Then,...ever! Cap. et seq. 


os see 


Dyce ii, iii. To unbar Cap. et cet. 
Confcience,) Ff, Rowe, Coll. 
Dyce ii, iii, Glo. Cam. Ktly. con- 
science! Pope et cet. 
13, 14. me...I nfirument] Ff,+, Coll. 


enough] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. Ktly. enough, Theob. 
CLCeL. 


g. sicke o’th’Gowt] BuCKNILL (p. 225)>-The gout is not a good form of dis- 
ease for this illustration, since there are few of those who suffer from it who ‘groan 
in perpetuity.’ [Did not Bucknill write hastily? It is the severity of the pain 
which is referred to, not the persistence of the disease.—Ep.] 

12-14. T’vnbarre . .. to picke] DricHron: Shakespeare here speaks of 
‘unbarring’ a lock, and ‘picking’ a bolt. 

32-15. My Conscience .. . for euer] WorDSworTH (p. 160): This diffi- 
cult passage must look, I imagine, for its true interpretation to the views which 
our Poet has elsewhere expressed upon the subject of this great duty [of Repentance]. 
Posthumus wishes for death, as the only way to everlasting freedom, provided he 
might die with a quiet conscience. [See lines 15-17, ‘Must I repent.’] As in- 
volved in the notion of repentance, must I take my punishment as Juliet did hers 
‘with joy’—[‘ Juliet. I do repent me, as it is an evil, And take the shame with joy. — 
Meas. for Meas., II, iii, 34]; and, moreover, must I make satisfaction? . . . The 
speech concludes with a recurrence to the view of a man being able to make satis- 
faction for himself, in a sense (as I believe) purposely unchristian, Posthumus being 
a heathen: ‘And so, great Powers, If you will take this audit, take this life, And 
cancel these cold bonds.’ This is the very notion, on the part of the heathen, 
which the Scriptures of the Old Testament so frequently protest against. See Job, 
ix, 32; Micah, vi, 7. 

14. penitent Instrument] Rotre: The penitential means of freeing my con- 
science of its guilt. 

15. Is’t enough I am sorry ?] The punctuation of the Folio is not improved, 
IT think, by Theobald’s comma after ‘enough.’ It is misleading, inasmuch as it 
suggests the meaning: ‘Is it enough for me tosay Iam sorry.’ It misled Lettsom, 
who, in a foot-note on page 238 of Walker’s Crit., iii, asks, ‘Does not the sense 
require “Is’t not enough”?’ Without the comma the sense is ‘can it be that I am 


ACT V, SC. iv.] 


CYMBELINE 371 


So Children temporall Fathers do appeafe ; 16 
Gods are more full of mercy. Muft I repent, 

I cannot do it better then in Gyues, 

Defir’d, more then conftrain’d, to fatisfie 

If of my Freedome ’tis the maine part, take 20 


16. temporall] temp’ral Pope,+. 
17. repent,) Ff, Rowe, Dowden. 
repent? Pope et seq. 
19. confirain’d,| constrain’d. Upton, 
Ingl. constrain’d; Rowe et seq. 
fatisfie] satisfy, Theob. et seq. 


Ing). 
20. If of | I d’off Warb. Theob. Cap. 
I doff Han. Johns. Var. 773. 
If...part,| In parentheses, Upton. 
Freedome] freedom; Theob.+. 
freedom, Cap. 


satisfy you Kinnear. satisfy? Brae, part,| part; Theob.+, Cap. 


sorry enough?’ Posthumus continues with the comforting thought that human 
fathers are thus appeased and the Gods are even more merciful. THISELTON, 
alone of critics, has noticed this excellence of the Folio punctuation. Again, in the 
next sentence, Pope’s interrogation after ‘repent’ is injudicious. There is no 
question needed. Dowprn paraphrases the sentence correctly, I think, ‘If I 
must repent, I cannot do it better than with the penance of voluntary gyves.’—Ep. 

1g. to satisfie] For other examples of this ‘indefinite’ use of the infinitive, see 
AsBsort, § 357. 

19, 20, to satisfie If of my Freedome, etc.}] It would be hardly worth the 
time and paper to give Warburton’s explanation of his uncouth emendation J d’off, 
were it not that Theobald, Hanmer, Johnson, and Capell adopted it. Warburton’s 
note is as follows: What we can discover from the nonsense of these lines is that the 
speaker, in a fit of penitency, compares his circumstances with a debtor’s, who is 
willing to surrender up all to appease his creditor. This being the sense in general, 
I may venture to say, the true reading must have been this, ‘to satisfie, I d’off my 
freedom,’ etc. The verb d’off is here employ’d with peculiar elegance, 7.e., To 
give all the satisfaction I am able to your offended Godheads, I voluntarily divest 
myself of my freedom; ’tis the only thing I have to atone with—HEartH (p. 488): 
Mr Warburton seems to have been so wrapped up in the admiration of his own 
correction that he did not give himself the leisure to observe the glaring incon- 
sistency of it. Posthumus is made to say in the same breath that his freedom is 
his all, and yet not his all, but only the main part of his all. The common reading, 
as much nonsense as Mr Warburton is pleased to call it, gives us at least this con- 
sistent sense: If I had continued in possession of my freedom, the main use and 
duty of it must have been to make satisfaction for my crime; my constant and con- 
tinued endeavors for this purpose would have been all the satisfaction in my power 
to make. By surrendering my freedom I have, together with it, surrendered this 
my all; and have reason to hope you will not require of me a stricter compensation.— 
CapPELt (p. 119): Loss of freedom, imprisonment, is the subject of this period and 
of the one before it; in the first, it is considered as a state meet to repent in; in the 
latter, @ satisfaction for crimes; and being so ‘main a part’ of man’s essence,— 
his ‘all,’ indeed, for love of life was to follow,—the speaker hopes ’twill be accepted 
by heaven, and ‘no stricter render’ required of him.—STEEVENS: Posthumus 
questions whether contrition be sufficient atonement for guilt. Then to satisfy 
the offended gods, he desires them to take no more than his present all, that is, his 
life, if it is the main part, the chief point, or principal condition of his freedom, i. e., 


372 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. iv. 


No ftricter render of me, then my All. 21 


of his freedom from future punishment.—Ranw: To satisfy the offended gods per- 
haps more than this contrition may be requisite; if so, then I desire them to accept 
my present all, my life, which I am ready to surrender as a condition of my pardon, 
or freedom from future punishment, and hope they will not exact a stricter com- 
pensation.—MA tone: ‘Since for my crimes I have been deprived of my freedom, 
and since life itself is more valuable than freedom, let the gods take my life, and by 
this let heaven be appeased, how small soever the atonement may be.’ I suspect, 
however, that a line has been lost after the word ‘satisfy.’ If the text be right, 
‘to satisfy’ means by way of satisfaction.—SincER: ‘If giving satisfaction is the 
chief requirement to entitle me to the freedom I solicit,—the release from bondage 
of conscience as well as limbs,—then take my all, but account that as an entire ac- 
quittance.’ It is possible that we should read, ‘If for my freedom ’tis the main 
point, take,’ etc-—Knicut and Dyce are silent.—Wuite: ‘If to satisfy, 7. e., if ex- 
piation is the main part, the most important requisite, to my freedom of con- 
science, take no stricter render of me than my all, z. e., my life.’ I believe the pas- 
sage stands as it was originally written—Staunton: This passage is, we fear, 
hopelessly incurable-—Cottier (ed. ii.): ‘If my freedom be the main part of what 
I possess, take no stricter render of me, in order to satisfy you, than my all,’ 7. e., 
my life, since his freedom, the main part, was gone. The passage is obscure and 
probably corrupt—The Cowprn-Criarkes:: ‘To satisfy your just wrath, if my 
life be the main part of my freedom, take no less surrender from me than my life, 
which is my all.’—Inctesy: In this speech Posthumus is made to employ the 
language of the early divines, in distinguishing the three parts (primary, secondary, 
and ‘main’) of Repentance, as the condition of Remission of Sins. 1. Attrition, 
or sorrow for sin: ‘Is’t not, enough I am sorry?’ 2. Penance; which was held 
to convert attrition into contrition, or godly sorrow: ‘Must I repent?’ 3. Satis- 
faction: ‘Must I satisfy?’ And he contends that as he has fulfilled the former 
requirements, he is willing to fulfil the last—to pay his debt for having taken 
Imogen’s life,—by giving hisown. [In The Still Lion, p. 102, Ingleby acknowledges 
his indebtedness for this exposition to ‘Mr Hugh Carleton, of Auckland, N. Z., and 
to the late Rev. W. W. Barry, Prebendary of St. Paul’s.’}—DowpeEn: ‘With a view 
to satisfaction for my wrong, if satisfaction is the chief matter in attaining freedom 
from the fetters of conscience, take no more restricted offering from me than my all.’ 
—Vaucuan: ‘If my all amounts to nearly all which in strict justice sets me free’ 
(is ‘the main part of my freedom’), ‘then take in satisfaction no more than that my 
all, although not all the full enfranchisement.’ [White’s paraphrase is most terse, 
and I think ’twill serve.—Ep.] 

21. No stricter] The CowpeNn-Crarkes: To these words the sense of ‘no 
more severe,’ ‘no more rigorous or rigid’ has been assigned; but we believe that 
here they include the contrary effect of ‘no more restricted,’ ‘no more limited,’ 
‘no less.’—Crossy (Am. Bibliopolist, Dec., 1876, p. 122) gives the same sense to 
‘stricter, and remarks: Posthumus wants no ‘abatement.’ He asks the Gods to 
take nothing Jess than his whole,—no more restricted (‘stricter ”) a forfeiture than all 
he has,—his life. The received rendering of ‘stricter’ gives, as I think, a foolish 
or rather a semi-satirical tone in his speech; as if he had said, ‘I beg that you will 
not take from me more than I have got, viz., my life.’ ‘Stricter’ is exactly thus 
used by Hooker, Shakespeare’s contemporary, in his Ecclesiastical Polity: ‘As 


ACTIV) SC 1Ve)| CYMBELINE 373 


I know you are more clement then vilde men, 22 
Who of their broken Debtors take a third, 

A fixt, a tenth, letting them thriue againe 

On their abatement ; that’s not my defire. 25 
For /mogens deere life, take mine, and though 

’Tis not fo deere, yet ’tis a life ; you coyn’d it, 

’Tweene man,and man, they waigh not euery {tampe : 

Though light, take Peeces for the figures fake, 


(You rather) mine being yours: and fo great Powres, 30 

If you will take this Audit, take this life, 

And cancell thefe cold Bonds. Oh Limogen, 32 
22. vilde] vild F.F;. vile Fy. mine Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. Sta. 
20. mine,| mine; Theob. Warb. et you rather, mine, Johns. you rather 

seq. mine, Han. et cet. 
270i ie te Warb.) Jonnsa | ts 30. fo] so, Rowe ii. et seq. 

Rowe et cet. 31. take this Audit, take this| make 
28. fiampe:] stamp Theob. ii, Warb. this audit, take my Daniel, Huds. 

stamp. Han. Johns. 32. thefe] thofe Ff,+. 

29. Though| Thou F., Var. 85. cold) old Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
jigures| figure’s F3F 4. Han. Warb. close Vaun. 
Sake,| sake; Theob. et seq. Imogen,| Zmogen/ Rowe et seq. 


30. (You rather) mine] Ff. you rather, 


they took the compass of their commission stricter or larger, so their dealings were 
more or less moderate.’ 

25. abatement] That is, in their diminished amount. 

28. stampe] That is, a minted or stamped coin. Thus in Macbeth Malcolm 
describes the touching for the king’s evil: ‘Hanging a golden stamp about their 
necks.’—IV, iii, 153. 

30. (You rather) mine being yours] I am not sure that this parenthesis 
should be discarded, or at least its place supplied by commas, as by Rowe. Does 
it not give emphasis to the idea that the gods, far sooner than ordinary men, should 
be willing to take a light piece, since they coined it?-—Eb. 

31. take this Audit] WALKER (Cyrit., i, 293) regards this ‘take’ as suspicious; 
but Dyce (ed. ii.) observes that Walker does not notice the remarkable accumula- 
tion of takes in this speech—see lines 20, 23, 26, and 29. [See Text. Notes, Daniel’s 
emendation.|}—THISELTON: That is, ‘pass this Account,’ but in thus paraphrasing 
we transfer to the verb a portion of the idea contained in the substantive. It may 
be observed that Posthumus has no thought of self-destruction. When he would 
court death in the battle, it was to be with ‘the strength o’th’Leonati’ (V, i, 33). 
His object not so being attained, it is time that after the battle is over he is 
ready to yield to the veriest Hind (V, iii, 85), but this is a very different thing 
from laying violent hands on himself. The present speech is an agonising plea not 
merely for death, but for a death that will be accepted by Heaven as a wiping off 
of all scores, so that his conscience may be free for ever. 

32. cancell these cold Bonds] Tuiserton: It seems to me necessary to 
take the epithet ‘cold’ as implying that the Bonds are without force or have lost 
their force. So far as the allusion is to documentary Bonds, it might, in this view, 


374 THE TRAGEDIE OF EAC?’ Vv, Sc. ivs 


Ile fpeake to thee in filence. 33 
Solemne Muficke. Enter (as in an Apparation) Siculius Leo- 


33. [He sleeps. Rowe. 34. Apparation] F;. 


have reference either to Bonds with conditions impossible of performance, or to 
Bonds the conditions of which have been satisfied, but which have not yet been 
formally released; hence we might take ‘cold’ to be equivalent to dead. We may, 
perhaps, to some extent compare the legal term nudum pactum, nothing remaining 
to support the enforcement of the Bonds. ‘Cold’ is not infrequently used in some 
such sense as ‘lacking force’; thus, Galateo (p. 68, Reid Reprint): ‘If they doe 
laughe, they laughe not at the jest, but at the jester himself, that brings it forth so 
colde.’—Dr Jonnson: This equivocal use of ‘bonds’ is another instance of our 
Author’s infelicity in pathetic speeches.—STEEVENS: An allusion to the same legal 
instrument has more than once debased the imagery of Shakespeare. Soin Macbeth: 
‘Cancel and tear in pieces that great bond That keeps me pale.’—III, ii, 49. WHITE 
(Shakespeare Scholar, p. 469): I have heard that there are bigoted admirers of Dr 
Johnson; though never having met one, I am loath to believe in the existence of such 
a phenomenon; but from the resentment which such may feel at the manner in 
which I have spoken of their ponderous idol, I shelter myself behind the bulwark of 
wrath which such a note as [the foregoing] will excite in the bosom of every man who 
has Anglo-Saxon blood in his veins and can read and understand the English 
language. Shakespeare’s ‘infelicity in pathetic speeches’ is good, excellent good. 

32, 33. Oh Imogen, Ile speake to.thee in silence] GILDEMEISTER: The 
Gods are addressed by Posthumus aloud; when he lifts his thoughts to Imogen the 
deeper devotion of his inmost soul can be expressed only by silence. A lovelier 
method of heralding the hush, which the following monologue demands, cannot 
be imagined. 

34. Solemne Musicke, etc.] Pope: Here follows a Vision, a Masque, and a 
Prophecy, which interrupt the Fable without the least necessity, and immeasurably 
lengthen this act. I think it plainly foisted in afterwards for mere show, and ap- 
parently not of Shakespeare. [Pope, therefore, places the rest of the scene in the 
margin, wherein he is followed by Hanmer.]|—Care t (p. 118) thinks that ‘an editor 
may well wish them out of the text, but has no right to go any farther.,—STEEVENS 
(z778): Every reader must be [of Pope’s] opinion. The subsequent narratives of 
Posthumus, which render this masque, etc., unnecessary (or perhaps the scenical 
directions supplied by the Poet himself) seem to have excited some manager of a 
theatre to disgrace the play by the present metrical interpolation. Shakespeare, 
who has conducted his Fifth Act with such matchless skill, could never have devised 
the vision to be twice described by Posthumus, had this contemptible nonsense been 
previously delivered on, the stage. [Staunton quotes this sentence with approval.] 
The following passage from Dr Farmer’s Essay, [p. 85, foot-note], will show that it 
was no unusual thing for players to indulge themselves in making additions equally 
unjustifiable. ‘We have a sufficient instance of the liberties taken by the actors 
in a pamphlet by Nash, called Lenten Stuff, 1599, where he assures us that in a play 
of his, called The Isle of Dogs, foure acts, without his consent, or the least guess of 
his drift or scope, were supplied by the players,’ [p. 200, foot-note, ed. Grosart. 
Nash is there speaking in a strain so wild, extravagant, and humorous that I think it 
doubtful, at the least, that he ever meant it to be taken seriously. Few things I 


ACTA VAESG HIV; CYMBELINE 375 


[34. Solmene Musicke, etc.] 


imagine could have given him more heart-easing mirth than to know that long years 
afterward he should befool so grave a Doctor of Letters as Farmer into the belief 
that a play could be called his of which he had written only the Induction and First 
Act, and all the remaining four Acts, containing the whole plot or ‘drift,’ were 
supplied by the players.—Ep.]—Ritson: One would think that Shakespeare’s 
style being too refined for his audiences, the managers had employed some play- 
wright of the old school to regale them with a touch of ‘King Cambyses’s vein.’ 
The margin would be too honourable a place for so impertinent an interpolation.— 
H. CoLermce (ii, 193): It would certainly be rash to mark these verses with an 
obelus, but they are as little like Shakespeare as anything that goes under his name. 
It is not improbable that they may have been remodelled from some old ballad; for 
Shakespeare was little scrupulous of using anything that would serve—WHITE 
(Shakespeare Scholar, p. 469): This rhyming dialogue in the Apparition scene is 
evidently the production of some one about the theatre who had been in the habit 
of writing such doggerel for the comedies in fashion just before Shakespeare took 
possession of the stage; and Shakespeare probably consented to its introduction 
for peace’s sake, to please the author or a brother manager,—knowing, too, that there 
were those in his audience to whom it would be acceptable. It is ineffably flat, and 
altogether superfluous; but it must not be removed from the place in which it ap- 
pears in the authentic copy.—Batuurst (p. 135): It is curious that the vision 
(which he could not have been the author of) is in the same fourth style, [7. e., the 
style of Ant. & Cleop. and Wint. Tale-——Enp.]. It is a little like Pericles. ‘Pallas 
[sic/] crystalline’ is like ‘Goddess Argentine.’ We cannot leave it out. The speech 
of Posthumus about it is genuine-——W. W. Lioyp (Singer’s ed., p. 509): The 
vision and the oracular tablet are so utterly unnecessary to the dis-knotting of the 
main intrigue of the play, that they must have been recommended by some special 
purpose and propriety, if we are only wise enough to see it. It will be found that 
they only contribute to the arrangement of the terms of peace at last, and thus 
Jupiter with his thunderbolts from the machine is rendered available for what the 
Poet thought a worthy service,—the same for which Holinshed was fain to fall back 
on the anniversary of the Nativity and the fated peace,—an apology for a submission 
that made Britain tributary. [This allusion to Holinsbed refers to the heading of 
the 18th Chapter of Book iii, which reads: ‘Of Kymbeline within the time of 
whose government Christ Jesus our Saviour was born, all nations content to obey 
the Roman Emperors, and consequently Britain. —Ep.]|—Staunton: By whom, 
or under what circumstances. this pitiful mummery was foisted into the play, will 
probably never be known. That Shakespeare had no hand in it is certain. [Here 
follows Steevens’s remark.|—KENNy (p. 212): We feel utterly perplexed in attempt- 
ing to reconcile the employment of this extravagant stage trick with our knowledge 
of the wonderful imagination and the fine sense of the Poet. Some critics have 
taken it for granted that the scene was not written by himself, but that it was 
foisted into the work by the players. There does not, however, seem to be the 
slightest ground for attributing it to such a source, and, indeed, the episode appears 
to form an essential link in the conclusion of the drama. Our surprise at its intro- 
duction would be considerably diminished if we could find that it was only an 
imitation by Shakespeare of a passage in some work which he was generally copying 
in his play—for such a circumstance would be in complete accordance with a prac- 
tice which he very frequently adopted; and we think it not at all improbable that it 


376 THE TRAGEDIE OF [act v, sc. iv. 


[34. Solemne Musicke, etc. ] 


was in this way that a large portion of Cymbeline was written. The only other mode 
in which we can attempt to account for the selection of so grotesque a show is by sup- 
posing that the dramatist was here yielding, in one of his careless rhyming moods, to 
what he knew to be the taste of his audiences. But, on either of these suppositions, 
we should still find a singular want of harmony between the weakness and extrava- 
gance of this episode and the clearness and strength which more or less characterise 
the rest of his composition. We are specially struck by this contrast by reading 
immediately afterwards, in the same scene, the singular comic dialogue between 
Posthumus and his gaolers—a dialogue so strangely natural, so wild and reckless, so 
replete with the careless, impersonal power of the Poet. In it, as in many other 
portions of his dramas, he seems to allow the characters to speak absolutely for 
themselves; he has no interest in them; he knows nothing of them; he does not even 
appear disposed to indulge, through the medium which they afford, in any bitter 
and concealed irony; he is wholly passive and indifferent, and Nature follows, 
through the unforced play of his fancy, her own capricious, unaccountable will.— 
Hupson (p. 14): The play has one very serious and decided blemish. I refer to 
that piece of dull impertinence in the Fifth Act, including the vision of Posthumus 
while asleep in the prison, the absurd ‘label’ found on his bosom when he awakes, 
and the soothsayer’s still more absurd interpretation of the label at the close. For 
nothing can well be plainer than that the whole thing is strictly irrelevant: it does 
not throw the least particle of light on the character or motive of any person; has, 
indeed, no business whatever with the action of the drama, except to hinder and 
embarrass it. This matter apart, the dénouement is perfect, and the preparation for 
it made with consummate judgment and skill. And it is a noteworthy fact that if 
the apparition, the dialogue that follows with the Jailer, the tablet, and all that 
relates to it, be omitted, there will appear no rent, no loose stitch, nor anything 
wanting to the completeness of the work. It is difficult to believe that Shake- 
speare wrote the passages in question at any time; impossible, that he did so at or 
near the time when the rest of the play was written. For I think every discerning 
student will perceive at once that the style of this matter is totally different from 
that of all the other parts. How, then, came it there? Some consider it a relic of 
an older drama, perhaps one written by Shakespeare in his youth. But the more 
common opinion is that it was foisted in by the players, the Poet himself having 
nothing to do with it. There is no doubt that such things were sometimes done. 
Still I am inclined to think that it was supplied by some other hand at the time, and 
that the Poet himself worked it in with his own noble matter, perhaps to gratify 
a friend; for he was a kind-hearted, obliging fellow, and probably did not see the 
difference between his own workmanship and other men’s as we do. At all events, 
I am sure it must have got into the play from motives that could have had no place 
with him as an artist. And how well the matter was adapted to catch the vulgar 
wonder and applause of that day may be judged well enough from the thrift that 
Waits upon divers absurdities of the stage in our time. Doubtless, in his day, as 
in ours, there were many who, for the sake of this blemishing stuff, would tolerate 
the glories of the play.—Frxray (Life, etc., p. 247): The verse of the vision is 
palpably by an inferior hand, and was probably inserted for some Court perform- 
ance after Shakespeare left the stage. Of course, the stage directions for the dumb 
show are genuine. This would not have been worth mentioning but for the silly 
arguments of some who defend the Shakespearian authorship of these lines, and 


ACTAV, SGo1Vel| CYMBELINE B77, 


[34. Solemne Musicke, etc. ] 


maintain that the play would be maimed without them.—IncLEBy: The dream 
interlude is too poor a composition to be imputed to Shakespeare at any period of 
his career, or on any dramatic ground; and this play was certainly drafted after 
Macbeth. It is at least open to argument whether Posthumus’s speech on awaken- 
ing bears signs of Shakespeare’s hand. Certainly from line 129 to line 143 it is a 
very poor production. The remaining half-dozen lines are not unlike Shakespeare. 
—DeErcHTon: Modern editors are almost unanimous in looking upon this vision as 
foisted in by some later playwright; and argument seems scarcely necessary in 
support of their opinion.—Boas (p. 516): This vision, introducing a deus ex machina 
of the most frigid type, and bequeathing the material legacy of an oracular scroll, isa 
strange excrescence, unworthy to precede the marvellously dexterous final scene in 
which all the tangled knots are untied —DowneEN (p. xxxvii.): Spectacular effects 
of a striking kind, dance and song, occur in the last plays of Shakespeare; in The 
Tempest there is a masque; in The Winter’s Tale, a statue is discovered to be a 
woman; in King Henry VIII. there is a heavenly vision and there is a coronation 
procession. I think it likely that Shakespeare fell in with the taste of the moment, 
and chose to indulge the spectators with the show of spirits described in the stage 
direction. If I were to make a conjecture, for which little evidence that is con- 
vincing can be produced, I should say that the dumb show was followed, as the play 
left Shakespeare’s hands, by the descent of Jupiter in thunder and lightning; that 
the speech of Jupiter (except the four opening lines) and the entirely Shakespearian 
speeches of Sicilius which follow are parts of his original play. But, I imagine, as 
first put upon the stage, the spirits ‘went hence as soon as they were born’ (line 
132), and the spectators found that the spectacle was over and gone too soon. Was 
the appearance of the voiceless ghosts encored by an open-mouthed crowd? 
At all events, ds I may idly guess, it was felt that the scenic effect must be pro- 
longed. The actors knew that any words would pass with an audience agape for 
spectacle, and one of them scribbled the doggerel 41-94 before the next performance. 
In the theatrical copy of the play from which the Cymbeline of the Folio was printed 
these lines naturally were found, and before 1623 they had become an accepted 
portion of the whole. I find it hard to understand how any reader who possesses 
a feeling for Shakespeare’s thought, imagination, diction, or versification can 
ascribe to him these verses, which are made of wood that has no resonance. The 
first four lines of Jupiter’s speech may have been conceded by Shakespeare to 
unite what follows with the addition; but I conjecture that the speech as originally 
written began with ‘Poor shadows of Elysium hence.’ What follows from Jupiter’s 
lips is not in the Poet’s highest manner, but it seems to me Shakespearian. The 
‘din’ of line 116 may have been that of the warrior’s shields. In the music of the 
lines of Sicilius, ‘the holy eagle Stoop’d as to foot us: his ascension is More sweet 
than our blest fields; his royal bird Prunes the immortal wing and cloys his beak, 
As when his god is pleased.’ I seem to hear the authentic voice of the master. 
Idle conjectures, such as these, if they are not insisted on, may be indulged as 
harmless.—HERFORD (p. 122): Posthumus’s vision, the oracle, and a soothsayer’s 
exposition of it are, as literature, mean, frigid, and prosaic. As dramatic business, 
they affect only the outermost fringe of the plot, the political relations of Britain 
and Rome. It is possible to defend the bald style of the ghosts as imitated from the 
archaisms of the time when Posthumus’s parents lived; but the grotesque descent of 
Jupiter is as un-Shakespearean in conception as it is incompetent in execution. 


378 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. iv. 


[34. Solemne Musicke, etc. ] 


Richard III. had dreamed to better purpose before Bosworth. Perhaps, with Mr 
Fleay, we may find the solution in attributing to Shakespeare only the dumb show, 
which some foolhardy person rushed in to versify. The oracle which Posthumus 
finds on his breast is employed with a singular disregard of dramatic effect. It 
serves no purpose but to provide the British king with a not very logical reason 
for offering, ‘though the victor,’ to submit to Cesar, and thus completing by a 
volteface amazing even in this impulsive and capricious Celtic king, this feebler Lear 
—the universal reconciliation. This gratuitious close has the air of having been 
inwoven in the fabric of Shakespeare’s work,—perhaps with concealed political 
intention. 

Thus far those who denounce the Vision. We now hear those who approve of it. 

SCHLEGEL (ii, 250): Posthumus finds on waking a tablet on his left breast, with 
a prophecy on which the dénouement of the piece depends. _Is it to be imagined that 
Shakespeare would require of his spectators the belief in a wonder without a visible 
cause? Is Posthumus to dream this tablet with the prophecy? But these gentle- 
men do not descend to this objection. The verses which the apparitions deliver 
do not appear to them to be good enough to be Shakespeare’s. I imagine I can 
discover why the Poet has not given them more of the splendour of diction. They 
are the aged parents and brothers of Posthumus, who, from concern for his fate, 
return from the world below; they ought consequently to speak the language of a 
more simple olden time, and their voices ought also to appear as a feeble sound of 
wailing, when contrasted with the thundering-oracular language of Jupiter. For 
this reason Shakespeare chose a syllabic measure which was very common before 
his time, but which was then getting out of fashion, though it still continued to be 
frequently used, especially in translations of classical poets. In some such manner 
might the shades express themselves in the then existing translations of Homer and 
Virgil. The speech of Jupiter is, on the other hand, majestic, and in form and style 
bears a complete resemblance to the sonnets of Shakespeare. Nothing but the 
incapacity of appreciating the views of the Poet, and the perspective observed by 
him, could lead them to stumble at this passage.—Knicut (Introd., p. 182): The 
‘Apparition’ either not belongs to Shakespeare at all, or belongs to the period when 
he had not clearly seen his way to shake off the trammels of the old stage. But 
would an audience familiar with that scene have parted with it? We believe not. 
—FLETCHER (p. 66): There may, indeed, be valid theatrical reasons for suppressing 
the vision of Posthumus during the slumber which is supposed to terminate his 
soliloquy; but the suppression deprives us of the solemnly pathetic effect of that 
simple chorus, which is plainly introduced in order, by recalling the whole tenour of 
the story, to remind the auditor that the hero is much more unfortunate than 
criminal, and to relieve our feelings by announcing an approaching deliverance 
from adversity,—at the same time that curiosity is kept alive by the mysterious 
terms in which the prediction is made. The attendant music adds to the soothing 
solemnity of the scene. How beautiful, too, is the plaintive simplicity of the 
ballad verses reciting his fortune, chanted by the apparitions of his deceased rela- 
tives, not one of whom has he seen in life. . . . In fact, both the sufferings and the 
deserts of the hero have now reached their climax; nor could they be more affect- 
ingly recalled to us than by thus evoking the spirits of his kindred, whose deaths 
had left him, at his very birth, a brotherless orphan. How fine a change, again, 
from the brief measure of this artless complaint, to the solemn flow of the lines 


ACT V, SC. iv.] CYMBELINE 379 


natus, Lather to Pofthumus ,an old man, attyred like a war- 35 
viour leading in his hand an ancient Matron (his wife, & 
Mother to Posthumus ) with Muficke before them. Then. 
after other Muficke , followes the two young Leonati ( Bro- 
thers to Posthumus) with wounds as they died in the warrs. 
They circle Pofthumus round as he lies fleeping. 40 


Sicil. No more thou Thunder-Mafter 

thew thy fpight,on Mortall Flies : 

With Mars fall out with Juno chide, that thy Adulteries 
Rates,and Reuenges. 

Hath my poore Boy done ought but well, 45 
whofe face I neuer faw : 

I dy’de whil’ft in the Wombe he ftaide, 
attending Natures Law. 

Whofe Father then (as men report, 
thou Orphanes Father art) 50 

Thou fhould’ft haue bin, and fheelded him, 


38. followes] follows F;F,, Rowe i. 43. that thy Adulteries| Separate line, 
follow Rowe ii. Theob. 
41. Sicil.] Fath. Cap. throughout. 45. ought] aught Theob. ii. 
41, 42. No...fhew] One line Theob. et 46. faw:] faw? F,. 
seq. 50. Orphanes] Orphans FF 3. orphans’ 
43. out] out, Ff. Theob. orphan’s Var. ’78. 


51. bin] been F;. 


supposed to be spoken by the descended Jupiter. . . . And then, with what ex- 
quisite versatility does this miraculous artist change his hand once more, to give us 
that gloriously classical description of the deity’s appearance, breathing all the 
sweet sublimity of a Milton, or even of a Sophocles!—Warb (i, 435): This episode 
in rhymed verse was, doubtless, like the Mask introduced into The Tempest, in 
accordance with the taste of the period; there is no reason, on account of its style, 
which reminds one of the prefatory lines to the Cantos of the Faerie Queene, to 
impugn Shakespeare’s authorship to it. [‘Exactly,’ says Wyatt, ‘but did Shake- 
speare ever seriously compose such doggerel as this?—‘‘The maske of Cupid, and 
th’ enchant-ed Chamber are displayd; Whence Britomart redeems fair A-moret 
through charms decayd.”—Faerie Queene, iii, 12. Almost in the same breath 
Prof. Ward seems to imply that this masque resembles that in The Tempest. No 
other touchstone is needed. Let any one read Act IV. of The Tempest and then 
decide if the masque in this play can be by the same hand.’]|—THIsELTon: Post- 
humus’s dream is that of an overwrought brain, and constitutes an admirable relief 
to the tension. [This masque has one or two admirable touches (Capell pointed 
them out), but the rest of it is not worth the effusion of any more Christian ink. I 
agree with Fleay; the Dumb Show is genuine.—Eb.| 

42. Mortall Flies] ‘As flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods. They kill us 
for their sport.’—Lear, IV, i, 38. 


380 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. iv. 


from this earth-vexing fmart. 52 
Moth. Lucina \ent not me her ayde, 
but tooke me in my Throwes, 
That from me was Po/fthumus ript, 55 
came crying ’mong’ft his Foes. 
A thing of pitty. 
Sicil. Great Nature like his Anceftrie, 
moulded the ftuffe fo faire : 
That hed feru’d the praife o’th’ World, 60 
as great Szczus heyre. 
1.Bro. When once he was mature for man, 
in Britaine where was hee 
That could ftand vp: his paralell ? 
Or fruitfull obieét bee ? 65 
In eye of /mogen, that beft could deeme 
his dignitie. 
Mo. With Marriage wherefore was he mockt 
to be exil’d,and throwne 
From Leonati Seate, and caft from her, 70 
his deereft one : 
Sweete Jmogen ? 
Sic. Why did you fuffer /achimo, flight thing of Italy, 
To taint his Nobler hart & braine, with needleffe i eloufy, 
And to become the geeke and fcorne o’th’others vilany? 75 
2 Bro. For this, from ftiller Seats we came, 


52. this] his Rowe, +. 66, 67. could...dignitie] One line, Rowe 
earth-vexing] heart-vexing Vaun. et seq. 
54. Throwes] throes F,. 68. wherefore] therefore F;F,, Rowe, 
55. me was] me my Pope,+. my Pope, Han. Theob. Warb. 
womb Johns. conj. my waist Vaun. 70. Leonati] Leonatus’ Pope,+. Leo- 
60. he d ferwd] he difervd F.. he nati’ Cap. Varr. Dyce, Coll. 
deferv'd F3F,. 73-75. Six lines,) By. 
64-67. paralell? ... bee? ... dignitie.] 75. to become] him become Eccles. 
parallel,...be,...dignity? Rowe et seq. geeke] F. geek F;F,. Rowe,+. 
65. fruitfull] rival Rowe, Pope, Han. geck Cap. 
Theob. Warb. fronifull Vaun. oth’} oth’ F>. 


65. fruitfull obiect] CapreLy (p. 119): An object fruitful of love, producing 
love’s fruits. 


66. deeme] Scumipt (Lex.): Judge, estimate. 

70. Leonati Seate] For other examples where proper names are used as ad- 
jectives, such as ‘Verona walls,’ ‘Philippi fields,’ “Tiber banks,’ see ABBOTT, § 22. 

75. geeke] CaPELL (Gloss.): A Cull, Bubble, one easy to be impos’d on. 

76. For this . . . we came] This line and lines 86, 87 (‘no longer exercise 


ACT V, SC. iv.] CYMBELINE 381 


our Parents, and vs twaine, hy) 
That ftriking in our Countries caufe, 
fell brauely,and were flaine, 
Our Fealty, & Zenantius right, with Honor to maintaine. 80 
1 Bro, Like hardiment Po/thumus hath 
to Cymbeline perform’d : 
Then Iupiter,y King of Gods, why haft y thus adiourn’d 
The Graces for his Merits due, being all to dolors turn’d? 
Stcil, Thy Chriftall window ope ; looke, 85 
looke out, no longer exercife 
Vpon a valiant Race, thy harfh,and potent iniuries : 
Moth. Since(Iupiter) our Son is good, 
take off his miferies. 
Sicil. Peepe through thy Marble Manfion, helpe, 90 
or we poore Ghofts will cry 
To’th’fhining Synod of the reft, againft thy Deity. 
Lrothers. Helpe (lupiter) or we appeale, 
and from thy iuftice flye. 
Lupiter defcends in Thunder and Lightning , fitting uppon an 95 
Lagle : hee throwes a Thunder-bolt. The Ghofies fall on 
thei knees. 


lupiter. Wo more you petty Spirits of Region low 98 
77. us twatne] we twain Eccles 85. ope; looke,| ope; looke out; Ff. 
conj. 86. looke out| Om. Ff. 
80. Our...right] One line, F,. 87. Vpon...harfh,] One line, Fy. 
83. Then...Gods] One line, Fy. 92. To’th’...refi,| One line, Fy. 
84. The...due] One line, F,. 635 brothers] Breas Hie 2) reth. 
his] her Ff. Rowe,+. Both Bro. Dyce. 


Vpon a valiant Race, thy harsh and potent iniuries’) WALKER (Crit., iii, 328) 
says ‘read like echoes of Latin poetry.’ In quoting line 76 Walker reads ‘we come.’ 
Whereto Lettsom adds the foot-note: ‘So Walker’s manuscript. I have not 
altered it to came, the reading of all the editions, because I have no doubt that 
“come” was Shakespeare’s word. The aorist is not English, but there are so many 
aorists in the immediate neighborhood that the blunder is excusable.—Dycr 
(ed. ii.) reads come in his text, and in a note pronounces ‘came’ manifestly wrong. 

82. to Cymbeline perform’d] Cotter (ed. ii.): We think it likely that the 
whole of this part of Cymbeline was a quotation from some well-known and popular 
work on the same story. ‘Perform’d’ may there have been the rhyme to ‘adjourn’d’ 
and ‘turn’d’; but even if Shakespeare had himself been imitating that ballad-style 
of composition, he would hardly have been so lax in his writing. 

98-118. THEOBALD: I own, to me, what Jupiter says to the Phantoms seems to 
carry the stamp of our Author, if the other parts of the masque appear inferior. 


382 THE TRAGEDIE OF fact 'V, SC: Iv: 


Offend our hearing : hufh. How dare you Ghoftes 

Accufe the Thunderer, whofe Bolt (you know) 100 
Sky-planted, batters all rebelling Coatfts. 

Poore fhadowes of Elizium, hence, and reft 

Vpon your neuer-withering bankes of Flowres. 

Be not with mortall accidents oppreft, 

No care of yours it is, you know ’tis ours. 105 
Whom beft I loue, I croffe ; to make my guift 

The more delay’d, delighted. Be content, 

Your low-laide Sonne, our Godhead will vplift : 

His Comforts thriue, his Trials well are {pent : 

Our Iouiall Starre reign’d at his Birth, and in 110 
Our Temple was he married : Rife,and fade, 

He fhall be Lord of Lady /mogen, 

And happier much by his Affliction made. 

This Tablet lay vpon his Breft, wherein 


Our pleafure, his full Fortune, doth confine, 115 

And fo away: no farther with your dinne 

Expreffe Impatience, leaft you ftirre vp mine: 117 
tor. Coafts.] coasts? Theob. hosts? 114. [Jupit. drops a Tablet. Rowe,+. 

Col. conj. 


T heartily wish this were the only place where we have reason to complain of irregu- 
larities, either in style or the matter. 

107. The more delay’d, delighted] M. Mason (p. 336): That is, the more 
delightful for being delayed. We should point it thus: ‘The more, delay’d, de- 
lighted.’ [VAUGHAN gives the same explanation, of course, independently, and 
suggests the same punctuation. He probably followed the Var. ’21, where this 
note is not given; it escaped the Cam. Epp. also.|}—STEEVENS: Though it be hardly 
worth while to waste conjecture on the wretched stuff before us, perhaps the 
author of it, instead of ‘delighted,’ wrote dilated, i. e., expanded, rendered more 
copious. [‘Delighted’ has been here explained as the passive participle used for 
the active, and MALone refers to its use in Othello, where the Duke says to Braban- 
tio: ‘If virtue no delighted beauty lack, Your son-in-law is far more fair than 
black,’ I, iii, 320 (of this edition), where it is, indeed, used exactly as here, and 
meaning, as WALKER (Crit., ii, 11) suggests, ‘endowed with delights, delictis exor- 
nata.’ ‘This simple explanation also dissipates the obscurity which has long 
perplexed critics in Claudio’s speech in Meas. for Meas.: ‘the delighted spirit To 
bathe in fiery floods,’ etc., I, iii, 121; although Ingleby says, erroneously, as I 
think, that ‘delighted’ ‘cannot have here the same meaning.’ This rule of Walker 
will solve many a difficulty, and absolve Shakespeare from an_ indiscrimi- 
nate use of passive and active participles, as Steevens has accused him of 


doing. See ‘I am wisht,’ V, i, 3, where there is a good rule of Abbott, founded 
on Walker’s.—Ep.] 


ACT VY, SC. iv. | CYMBELINE 383 


Mount Eagle, to my Palace Chriftalline. Afcends 118 
Sic. He came in Thunder, his Celeftiall breath 
Was f{ulphurous to f{mell : the holy Eagle 120 


Stoop’d, as to foote vs: his Afcenfion is 

More {weet then our bleft Fields : his Royall Bird 

Prunes the immortall wing, and cloyes his Beake, 

As when his God is pleas’d. 
All, Thankes Iupiter. 125 
Sic. The Marble Pauement clozes, he is enter’d 

His radiant Roofe : Away, and to be bleft 


Let vs with care performe his great beheft. Vanifh 
Poft. Sleepe, thou haft bin a Grandfire, and begot 129 
118. Palace] Pallas Bathurst (so 128. Vanifh] Ghosts vanish. Cap. 
quoted, p. 135). 129. [Waking. Theob. 
123. cloyes] claws Tyrwhitt. ‘ bin] been F,. 


126. clozes,| F3. clozes. F2. clofes, Fy. 


118. my Palace Christalline] Stervens: Milton has transplanted this idea 
into his verses In Obitwm Presulis Eliensis: ‘Donec nitentes ad fores Ventum est 
Olympi, et regiam crystallinam,’ [line 62]. 

121. Stoop’d, as to foote vs] MADDEN (p. 203): Again the falcon stooped 
from her pride of place, swift and resistless as a thunderbolt. This time her aim 
was unerring. In the language of falconry she ‘stoop’d as to foot’ her quarry; 
and when Master Petre and the falconer rode up, she had ‘soused’ (see King John, 
V, ii, 150) the partridge, and holding it firmly in her foot, she had begun to devour 
it. 

123. Prunes] Hartinc (p. 131): ‘Prune’ signifies to clean and adjust the 
feathers, and is synonymous with plume. A word more generally used perhaps 
than either is preen—MADDEN (p. 137): To ‘prune’ is ‘one of the kyndeli termes 
that belong to hawkis,’ according to the Boke of St. Albans. When a hawk prunes 
or picks her feathers, ‘she is lyking and lusty, and whanne she hathe doone she will 
rowse hire myghtyly.’ 

123. cloyes his Beake] Farmer: A cley is the same as a claw in old language. 
—STEEVENS: So in Gower, De Confessione Amantis, ‘And as a cat wold ete fishes 
Withoute weting of his clees,’ [p. 39, ed. Pauli]. And in the Boke of Saint Albans, 
1486, it is said: ‘The clees with i the fote ye shall call of right her Pownces.’ [Again, 
‘Now ye shall vnderstande the naamys off the membries of hawkys: to begynne at 
her fete and goo vpwarde as knyghttis been harnesside and armeed, and so we shall 
ename her. Fyrst the grete Clees behynde, that strength the bake of the hande, 
ye shall call hom Talons.’—Ep.]—Hartine (p. 31): ‘Cloyes’ is, doubtless, a mis- 
print for cleys, that is, claws. Those who have kept hawks must often have ob- 
served the habit which they have of raising one foot, and whetting the beak against 
it. This is the action to which Shakespeare refers—Murray (NV. E. D.) gives 
Clee, that is, claw, with all its appropriate definitions; and also ‘cloys,’ from the 
present passage, giving as its definition: ‘Steevens conjectures, “To claw, to scratch 
with the claw’; Johnson: ‘Perhaps, to strike the beak together.” ’—Dict. [Whence 
comes Steevens’s conjecture I do not know.—Eb.] 


384 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT v, SC. iv. 


A Father to me : and thou heft created 130 
A Mother, and two Brothers. But (oh fcorne ) 
Gone, they went hence fo foone as they were borne: 
And fo Iam awake. Poore Wretches, that depend 
On Greatneffe, Fauour ; Dreame as I haue done, 
Wake, and finde nothing. But (alas) I fwerue : 135 
Many Dreame not to finde, neither deferue, 
And yet are fteep’d in Fauours ; fo am I 
That haue this Golden chance, and know not why: 
What Fayeries haunt this ground ? A Book?Oh rare one, 
Be not, as is our fangled world, a Garment 140 
Nobler then that it couers. Let thy effects 
So follow, to be moft vnlike our Courtiers, 
As good, as promife, 
Reades. 144 
131. Brothers.| Ff,+, Coll. brothers; 
Cap. et cet. 


Scorne)| scorn! Rowe et seq. 
132. Gone,| Fi. Gone— Rowe,-+. 


134. done,| done; Theob. et seq. 
135. [Seeing the Tablet. Cap. 

136. deferue,| deserve; Theob. Warb. 
138. why:] why Pope. why. Johns. 


Gone; Ktly. Gone? Coll. iii. lune! Cap. 
et cet. 
borne:] Ff,+. 
born. Cap. et cet. 
133. I am awake] I’m ’wake Elze 
conj. 


born, Coll. i. 


awake.] awake— Pope,+. 

134. Greaineffe,| F2. Greatne/s, F;Fy. 
greatness Rowe, Pope. greatness’ Theob. 
et seq. 

Fauour;| Ff. favour, Knt, Dyce, 


Var. ’73 et seq. 
139. Fayeries| Fairies F3F,. 
Book?] book! Rowe,+, Ktly. 
one,| one! Rowe et seq. 
140. as is] as in Pope ii, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. 
fangled| 
(Omitting zs conj.) 
141. couers.| covers; Cap. et seq. 
142. Courtiers,] courtiers; Theob. 
Warb. Johns. 


new-fangled Ktly. 


Glo. Cam. favour, Rowe et cet. 143. good,] good Pope et seq. 


139. A Book] Wuire: It was not a volume, but a single leaf. Of old, any 
writing was called a book, [Vidilicet, ‘a horn-book,’ which, as we all know, was but 
a single leaf.] 

140. fangled] Sxeat (NV. & Q., V, iii, 133, 1875): As for ‘fangled’ in this line, 
which has small claim to be considered as Shakespeare’s, the sense of it is vague and 
not very material; the sense full of whims, full of oddities, or simply odd, will do well 
enough.—Brab ey (NV. E. D.): That is, characterised by crotchets or fopperies. 

141,142. thy effects ... wnlike our Courtiers] Ecctres reads courtiers’ 
to indicate the genitive case, as he says. He adds, with a truly enviable sense of 
humour, that ‘the effects of courtiers’ may appear a strange and even laughable 
expression, but the idea is, ‘the effects which flow or follow from their promises.’ 

144. Reades] CoLermce (p. 304): It is not easy to conjecture why Shake- 
speare should have introduced this ludicrous scroll, which answers no one purpose, 
either propulsive or explicatory, unless as a joke on etymology.—PortTER and 
Crark: Pope, the first depreciator of this scene, rejected it as spurious. His 


ACT V, SC. iv.] CYMBELINE 385 


HenasaLyonswhelpe, fhalltohimfelfe unknown ywith- 145 
out feeking finde, and bee embracd by a peece of tender 
Ayre: And when from a fiately Cedar fhall be lopt branches, 
which being dead many yeares, /hall after reuiue, bee toynted to 
the old Stocke, and frefhly grow, then shall Pofthumus end his 
miyeries, Britaine be fortunate, and flourifhin Peace and Plen- 1 50 
ie. 
’Tis ftill a Dreame : or elfe fuch ftuffe as Madmen 


Tongue, and braine not : either both, or nothing, 152 
145. Wen as] Whenas Dyce, Sta. 151. Dreame:| dream, Coll. 
Coll. iii. Madmen] mad-men F;F,, Rowe, 
a] the Rowe,+. Pope i, Han. 
whelpe, fhall] whelp fhall F,. 152. Tongue] Do tongue Steev. conj. 
whelp shall, Rowe et seq. either both,| ’Tis either both, 
vnknown] known Var. ’o3, ’13 Rowe. do either both, Pope, Theob. 
(misprint?) Han. Warb. either, or both, Cap. 
147. Ayre:] air, Cam. either of both Hertzberg conj., Vaun. 
149. grow,] Fi,+-, Coll.Cam. grow; nothing,| Ff. mnothing— Warb. 
Cap. et cet. nothing; Rowe et cet. 


various followers forget that this Tablet, like the perfect fulfilling of the Oracle in 
The Winter’s Tale, the apparition of Hecate in Macbeth, and the bidding of Diana in 
the Vision in Pericles, is an element in the solution of the Plot. Shakespeare’s 
plots, moreover, especially in his later years, are plots having relation to the de- 
velopment of the characters as well as to that of events. An inner as well as an 
outer progress and order are requisite. 

147, 148. stately Cedar . . . being dead many yeares] In this dead Cedar 
with its lopp’d branches, which shall freshly grow, BELL (iii, 123) detects a refer- 
ence to a widely disseminated German legend, so distinct in its details that it is 
‘most convincing of Shakespeare’s visit to Germany. This legend is that when a 
pear-tree, long dead, shall revive and put forth new leaves, then Barbarossa will 
awaken from his long slumber in the Unterberg, and fight such a battle as shall 
ensure a lasting peace.’ [‘And there is salmons in both.’—EbD.] 

1st. ’Tis stilla Dreame, etc.] Jomnson: The meaning, which is too thin 
to be easily caught, I take to be this: This is a dream or madness, or both,—or 
nothing,—but whether it be a speech without consciousness (as in a dream), or a 
speech unintelligible (as in madness, be it as it is), is like my course of life. We 
might perhaps read: ‘Whether both, or nothing—.’—WALKER (Crit., iii, 329): 
Something is lost. Perhaps Shakespeare wrote: ‘either both, or nothing; or A 
senseless speaking,’ etc. (Brain nét, as, e. g., a few lines above, ‘Many dream nét to 
find,’ etc. Pronounce ‘either,’ e’r, wt sepe.) [If ‘either’ is to be thus pronounced, 
why not, in modern editions, give the reader warning and so print it? And if it is 
to be printed e’r, why not save ink and type, and print it simply r? To be sure, 
these single letters might be mistaken for drawling, but rhythm would be ap- 
peased, and is not rhythm the end and aim of poetry and a distinct enunciation ab- 
horrent? Dr O. W. Holmes was, indeed, ill advised in beseeching us, ‘when we stick 
on conversation’s burrs, Don’t strew your pathway with those dreadful wrrs!’—Ep.] 

152. Tongue, and braine not] CApELt (p. 119): The coinage in this line were 


25 


386 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acr v, Sc. iv. 


Or fenfeleffe fpeaking, or a fpeaking fuch 153 
As fenfe cannot vntye. Be what it is, 
The A&tion of my life is like it, which Ie keepe Les 


If but for fimpathy. 
Enter Gaoler. 
Gao. Come Sir, are you ready for death ? 
Poft. Ouer-roafted rather : ready long ago. 
Gao. Hanging is the word, Sir, if you bee readie for 160 
that, you are well Cook’d. 


154. untye....is,] unty,...is; Johns. Johns. et seq. ; 
Be] But FF, Rowe, Pope, 157. Enter...] Re-enter Jailers. Cap. 

Theob. Han. Warb. Re-enter First Gaoler. Dyce. 

155, 156. Ile...fimpathy] One line, 160. Sir,] sir; Pope et seq. 


sufficient to prove the scene to be Shakespeare’s had it no other marks of him; for 
two such hardy words, and withal proper, never came from any mint but his own. 
And the rest of the speech is as much in his manner as they are; its first sentence 
wanted only the particle or [see Text. Notes] to make any good sense of it; for 
tis’ or ‘it is’ is carried forward, of course, and prefixed to that sentence, and like- 
wise to the other that follows it. 

154. Be what it is] For examples of the ellipsis of ‘it,’ see ABBOTT, § 404. 

156. If but for simpathy] Scumipt (Lex.): That is, as I am in the same 
situation. [‘Sympathy,’ as equivalent to equality, is not infrequent in Shake- 
speare; thus Iago, ‘there should be . . . simpathy in years, Manners, and Beau- 
ties. —Oth., II, i, 262 of this ed.] 

157. Enter Gaoler] WHITER (p. 167), in discussing a line in Love’s Lab. Lost, 
‘A high hope for a low heaven’ (which he interprets as referring to the ‘heaven’ of 
the stage), remarks in a foot-note: ‘Let not the reader imagine that my conjecture 
respecting this latent allusion is either remote or improbable, as our Poet often 
falls into trains of reflexion which are equally unconnected with the opinions and 
speculations of his age. Mr Volatire himself has nothing comparable to the 
humorous discussion of the philosophic gaoler’ [in the present passage].—KNIGHT 
quotes this last sentence and writes: ‘But it is something more than humorous. 
It is as profound, under a gay aspect, as some of the highest speculations of Ham- 
let. —FLETCHER (p. 68): We by no means agree with those who think that the 
comic scene with the gaoler was introduced by Shakespeare more for the sake of 
making some ‘quantity of barren spectators laugh,’ than for any real regard to dra- 
matic art and propriety. It would be strange indeed to find him so trifling in the 
midst of so much earnestness! No—Shakespeare knew well he was but pre- 
senting to us the last inevitable phases of the mind in him who is at once con- 
demned to death and desiring it,—that ‘lightning before death’ of which he else- 
where tells us,—that careless interval when the man has cheerfully parted with this 
world and is ready to ‘encounter darkness as a bride.’ The single line of Post- 
humus to the gaoler, ‘I am merrier to die than thou art to live,’ conveys at once 
the spirit and the vindication of the whole scene. 

161. you are well Cook’d] There is apparently some culinary allusion here, 
in connection with the hanging of bacon or venison, either before cooking or in- 
stead of cooking —Murray (N. E. D., B.I., 1. Transitive senses, b.): To suspend or 


AGT V; SC. iv.’ CYMBELINE 387 


Poft. So if I proue a good repaft to the Spe&tators,the 162 
difh payes the fhot. 

Gao. A heauy reckoning for you Sir: But the comfort 
is you fhall be called to no more payments, fear no more 165 
Tauerne Bils, which are often the fadneffe of parting, as 
the procuring of mirth : you come in faint for want of 
meate, depart reeling with too much drinke : forrie that 
you haue payed too much, and forry that you are payed 
too much : Purfe and Braine, both empty : the Brain the 170 
heauier, for being too light;the Purfe too light, being 
drawne of heauineffe. Oh, of this contradi€tion you fhall 
now be quit : Oh the charity of a penny Cord,it fummes 
vp thoufands in a trice: you haue no true Debitor, and 
Creditor but it : of what’s paft, is, and to come, the dif- 175 
charge : your necke(Sis)is Pen, Booke,and Counters ; fo 


the Acquittance followes. ify) 
162. if I] if it Pope ii, Theob. Warb. O! of Cap. et cet. 
164. Sir:] sir. Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo. 173. charity] celerity Craig. conj. 
165. is you] is, you FF, et seq. Cord,| cord! Cap. et seq. 
166. often] as often Coll. ii. conj. 174. Debitor] Debtor F,F,,+, Coll. ii. 

as| at Vaun. 174,175. Debitor, and Creditor] debit- 

167. come] came F,, Rowe, Pope. or-and-creditor Del. Craig. 
172. Oh, of] Fi,t+. of Glo. Cam. 176. Sis] Sir Ff. 


tie up (bacon, beef, etc.) in the air to mature, to dry for preservation; 1599 H. 
Buttes Dyets drie Dinner, I, vj, b, ‘Fallow Deere . . . fat, very well chased, hang’d 
until it be tender.’—Eb. 

162, 163. the dish payes the shot] That is, the viands (namely, himself) pay 
the reckoning. _ 

169. haue payed ... are payed] Srervens: That is, sorry that you have 
paid too much out of your pocket, and sorry that you are paid, or subdued, too 
much by the liquor. So Falstaff: ‘with a thought, seven of the eleven I paid.’— 
1 Hen. IV: Il, iv, 213.—MAtone: See ‘he was paid for that,’ IV, ii, 318, above.— 
SraunTON: ‘Paid’ is here equivalent to the slang phrase to settle, now in use, 
as ‘I’ve settled him,’ and the like. With this import, which is that of punished, 
‘paid’ is often met with in old authors. [JoHNson so failed to understand the 
opposition between the two ‘paids’ that he proposed: ‘And merry that you are 
paid so much.’ He took the second ‘paid’ to be "paid, for appaid, filled, satiated. 
His note was omitted by MALONE in 1790 and in all subsequent editions, and 
charitably.—Eb.] 

172. drawne] STEEVENS: In common language, a fowl is said to be ‘drawn’ 
when its intestines are taken out. 

173. penny Cord] Thus, Pistol, in Henry V., ‘let not Bardolph’s vital thread 
be cut With edge of penny cord,’ etc.—HI, vi, 40. 

174, 175. Debitor, and Creditor] JoHnson: For an accounting book. 

176. Counters] Way (Foot-note in Prompt. Parv., s. v. Awgrym): Towards the 


388 THE TRAGEDIE OF [Act Vv, SC. iv. 


Poft. Iam merrier to dye, then thou art to liue. 178 
Gao. Indeed Sir,he that fleepes, feeles not the Tooth- 
Ache : but a man that were to fleepe your fleepe, and a 180 
Hangman to helpe him to bed, I think he would change 
places with his Officer : for, look you Sir, you know not 
which way you fhall go. 
Poft. Yes indeed do I, fellow. 
Gao. Your death has eyes in’s head then: I haue not = 185 
feene him fo pi€tur’d : you muft either bee directed by 
fome that take vpon them to know, or to take vpon your 
felfe that which I am fure you do not know :1or iump the —_188 
in’s| in hi. 188. zor iump] or lump Ff, Rowe, 
ae paren ie Cam. or do eee Theob. oe War. for, jump 


take Glo. (withdrawn). or so take Knt i, Sing. Sta. Ktly, Ingl. 
Vaun. or take Heath, Cap. et cet. 


commencement of the xvi." century the use of the Arabic numerals had in some 
degree superseded the ancient mode of calculating by the abacus; and counters, 
which at the period when the Promptorium was compiled, were generally used. . . . 
They were not, indeed, wholly disused at a time long subsequent. 

180. a man that were to sleepe your sleepe] Apsort (§ 367): That is, 
If there were a man who was destined to sleep your sleep. 

180, 181. and a Hangman to helpe him to bed] Ansott (§95): That is, and 
that too a hangman being ready to help him to bed. In the phrase ‘I think he 
would’ the ‘he’ is redundant. 

185. Your death] VAUGHAN (p. 529): This does not mean ‘death in your case’ 
or ‘your method and kind of death.’ The possessive ‘your death’ here is the simple 
equivalent of death in the abstract and general. So ‘your philosophy,’ ‘your water’ 
is written by Shakespeare for philosophy in general and water in general. [This 
interpretation may be right. DowneEN accepts it. It does not, however, appear 
to me exactly just. I think ‘your’ is not ethical, but emphatic. Is it not parallel 
to ‘your sleep’ in line 180, where it surely does not mean sleep ‘in general’? The 
gaoler says here in effect, I think, ‘if you know the way you’re going, your death 
is not the same as my death; your death has eyes in’s head,’ etc.—Ep. 

188. or] Dyce: Before this ‘or’ the Folio has a blur (occasioned by the sticking 
up of what is technically termed a space), which Mr Knight considers to be an f, 
and prints ‘for, jump,’ etc. [The mistake which Knight makes is not in taking 
the blurred space for a letter, but in following Vernor & Hood’s Reprint instead of 
going to an original copy of the Folio. This Reprint has for; and it is hazardous 
in these latter days to deny that a copy of the Folio exists wherein for is to be 
found, so much do these copies vary. A faint presumption that such a First Folio 
does exist may be possibly found in the fact that Upcott collated Vernor and Hood’s 
Reprint with a Folio, and although he noted fifteen errors in the reprint of this play of 
Cymbeline, the ‘for’ is not among them. The presumption is, therefore, allowable 
that Upcott’s Folio reads distinctly for. Upcott’s original MS., wherein he has 
noted ‘386 errors,’ is now in my possession, duly signed by him after recording that 
he had ‘Finished the collation, Jany 28th, 1809, at 3 minutes past 12 o'clock.’ 


CTE Vy SCa 1V..\| CYMBELINE 389 


after-enquiry on your owne perill: and how you fhall 
fpeed in your iournies end, I thinke you’l neuer returne 190 
to tell one. 

Pofi. 1 tell thee, Fellow, there are none want eyes, to 
direct them the way I am going, but fuch as winke, and 
will not vfe them. 

Gao, What an infinite mocke is this, that a man fhold _195 
haue the beft vfe of eyes, to fee the way of blindneffe : I 


am fure hanging’s the way of winking. 197 
189. perill:] peril, Knt. Rowe. 
190. iowrnies end] journeys-end Pope, 196. fee] seek Rowe ii, Pope, Han. 
+. 197. hanging’s] fuch hanging’s F;F,, 
neuer returne] return never Fy, Rowe, Pope, Han. 


This MS. was formerly owned by Dawson Turner, who has prefixed the following 
note, which as a scrap of Shakespearian bibliographical gossip may be possibly 
worth the space; I do not know that it has ever appeared in print: ‘The contents 
of the following pages are the result of 145 days close attention by a very industrious 
man. The knowledge of such a task having been undertaken and completed 
caused some alarm among the booksellers, who had expended a considerable sum 
of money upon the reprint of Shakespeare, of which this MS. discloses the numerous 
errors. Fearful, therefore, lest this should be published, they made many overtures 
for the purchase of it, and at length Mr Upcott was induced to part with it to 
I. & A. Arch, from whom he expected a handsome remuneration. He received 
a single copy of the reprint! (signed) Dawson Turner, 1820.’ In reference to this 
‘presentation copy’ Upcott himself has appended the following: ‘This copy was 
corrected by me from the following Catalogue of Typographical Errors and was 
sold to the late James Perry, the proprietor of the Morning Chronicle, for six guineas. 
At the sale of his Library in March, 1822 (see Catalogue No. 1339), it produced 
[412, 1, 6—Lowndes has added in pencil] (signed) William Upcott—Yarmouth, 
July 22, 1832.’ The ‘Hood’ in the firm of ‘Vernor and Hood’ was the father of 
Thomas Hood, the poet. 

Kynicut corrected the error in his Second Edition; which was unnoticed by several 
who had blindly followed his First—See Text. Notes —Eb.] 

188, 189. iump the after-enquiry] JoHNSON: That is, venture at it without 
thought. So Macbeth, ‘We’d jump the life to come.’—I, vii, 7.—STEEVENS: To 
‘jump’ is to hazard. Again in Coriolanus, ‘To jump a body with a dangerous 
physick,’ III, i, 154. [The word ‘jump’ is here disputed. An obelus is prefixed 
to the line in the Globe Ed.] 

192. I tell thee, Fellow, etc.] BowDEN (p. 371): This conversation recalls a 
controversial saying of Sir Thomas More: ‘Howbeit, if so be that their way be 
not wrong, but they have found out so easy a way to heaven as to take no thought 
but make merry, nor take no penance at all, but sit them down and drink well for 
the Saviour’s sake, sit cock-a-hoop, and fill in all the cups at once, and then Christ’s 
passion pay for all the shot, I am not he that will envy their good hap, but surely 
counsel dare I give to no man to adventure that way with them.’—Works, Dialogue 


of Comfort. 


390 THE TRAGEDIE OF [acT v, Sc. iv. 


Enter a Meffenger. 198 
Mef. Knocke off his Manacles, bring your Prifoner to 
the King. 200 
Poft. Thou bring’ft good newes, I am call’d to bee 
made free. 
Gao. Ile be hang’d then. 
Poft. Thou fhalt be then freer then a Gaoler;no bolts 
for the dead. 205 
Gao. Vnleffe a man would marry a Gallowes; & be- 
get yong Gibbets, I neuer faw one fo prone: yet on my 
Confcience, there are verier Knaues defire to liue, for all 
he be a Roman ; and there be fome of them too that dye 
againft their willes; fo fhould I, if I were one. I would 210 
we were all of one minde,and one minde good: O there 
were defolation of Gaolers and Galowfes: I fpeake a- 
gainft my prefent profit, but my wifh hath a preferment 


in’t. Exeunt. 214 
199. Manacles,] manacles. Johns. Posthumus, Messenger, and 2. Jailer. 

manacles; Var. ’78 et seq. Cap. Exeunt all but First Gaoler. 
201. newes,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Cam. Edd. 

Cap. Dyce, Glo. Cam. mews. Coll. 207. prone:] prone. Rowe et seq. 

news; Theob. et cet. 212. Galow/fes:] gallowses ! Cap. et seq. 
205. [Exeunt. Ff. Exeunt Post- 213. profit,| profit; Cap. et seq. 

humus and Messenger. Theob. Exeunt 214. Exeunt.] Exit. Ff. 


207. prone] Murray (N. £. D. 7.): Ready in mind (for some action expressed 
or implied); eager. [Present passage quoted.]_ 

208, 209. for all he be a Roman] Axszort (§ 154): ‘For’ in this sense [Z. e., 
in spite of] is sometimes used as a conjunction, as here. That is, Despite that he be 
a Roman. 

209. some of them too] ‘Them’ is emphatic, as referring to the Romans, 
among whom, indifferent as they were to suicide, instances were found of a repug- 
nance to death. 

212. Galowses] That this is a vulgar pronunciation, as has been suggested, ad- 
mits of doubt.—Braptey (N. E. D.): From the 16th century gallows has been 
(except the archaic a ‘pair of gallows’) used as a singular, with a new plural, 
gallowses; the latter, though perhaps not strictly obsolete, is now seldom used; 
1562, Turner, Herbal, II, 46: ‘Mandrag. . . . grows not under gallosses.’ 

213. a preferment] In spite of his pious and altruistic wish that all men might 
be of one good mind, the gaoler cannot quite close his eyes to the main chance, and 
so hastens to add that his wish includes some promotion for himself.—Ep. 


ACT. V,.SC. vi] CYMBELINE 391 


Scena Quinta. 


Enter Cymbeline, Belarius , Guiderius , Arui- 2 
ragus, Ptfanio, and Lords, 
Cyr. Stand by my fide you, whom the Gods haue made 4 


1. Scene m1. Rowe. Scene rv. Pope, 4. fide you,] Ff. side, you, Rowe, 
Han. Warb. Johns. Scene vi. Eccles. Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Varr. Mal. 
Cymbeline’s Tent. Rowe. Steev. Varr. side, you Pope et cet. 


1. Scena Quinta] STEEVENS (Var., 1778): Let those who talk so confidently 
about the skill of Shakespeare’s contemporary, Jonson, point out the conclusion 
of any one of his plays which is wrought out with more artifice, and yet with a 
less degree of dramatic violence than this. In the scene before us, all the surviving 
characters are assembled; and at the expence of whatever incongruity the former 
events may have been produced, perhaps little can be discovered on this occasion 
to offend the most scrupulous advocate for regularity; and, I think, as little is 
found wanting to satisfy the spectator by a catastrophe which is intricate without 
confusion, and not more rich in ornament than in nature——KwicuHT (p. 252): 
The conclusion of Cymbeline has been lauded because it is consistent with poetical 
justice. Those who adopt this species of reasoning look very imperfectly upon 
the course of real events in the moral world. It is permitted, for inscrutable pur- 
poses, that the innocent should sometimes fall before the wicked, and the noble be 
subjected to the base. In the same way, it is sometimes in the course of events 
that the pure and the gentle should triumph over deceit and outrage. The perish- 
ing of Desdemona is as true as the safety of Imogen; and the poetical truth in- 
volves as high a moral in the one case as in the other.—WENDELL (p. 285): No- 
where else in Shakespeare, certainly, is there anything like so elaborate an untying 
of knots which seem purposely made intricate to prepare for this final situation. 
Situation, however, is an inadequate word. Into four hundred and eighty-five 
lines Shakespeare has crowded some two dozen situations any one of which would 
probably have been strong enough to carry a whole Act... . [P. 377.] The 
marked individuality of effect which we observe in both Cymbeline and The Tem- 
pest proves on scrutiny chiefly due to the fact that the dramatic structure of each 
involves a new and bold technical experiment. In each this experiment consists 
chiefly of a deliberately skilful handling of the dénowement. In Cymbeline, after 
four and a half Acts of confusion, comes the last Scene, coolly disentangling the 
confusion by four and twenty cumulative stage situations; in The Tempest, with due 
adherence to the unities of time, of place, and of action, the dénouement is ex- 
panded into five whole Acts. In The Winter's Tale we find an analagous indi- 
viduality of effect due to a similar cause. Structurally, The Winter’s Tale is per- 
haps the most boldly experimental of all. The play is frankly double. The first 
three Acts make a complete independent tragedy. . . . The last two Acts make a 
complete independent comedy, which, taking up the story at its most tragic point, 
leads it to a final dénowement of reconciliation and romantic serenity.— THORNDIKE 
(p. 135): Such a dénouement is evidently not the natural outcome of a tragedy or 
a comedy; it is the elaborate climax in preparation for which the preceding situa- 
tions have been made involved and perplexing. . . . As a matter of fact, the 


392 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, "SCs 


Preferuers of my Throne: woe is my heart, 5 

That the poore Souldier that fo richly fought, 

Whofe ragges, fham’d gilded Armes, whofe naked breft 

Stept' before Targes of proofe, cannot be found: 

He fhall be happy that can finde him, if 

Our Grace can make him fo. 10 
Bel, I neuer faw 

Such Noble fury in fo poore a Thing ; 

Such precious deeds, in one that promift nought 


But beggery, and poore lookes, 14 
5. Throne:] throne. Pope et seq. Var. ’78, ’85, Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. 
7. ragges,) rags, F;. rags Fy, et Coll. Ktly. 

seq. 9. if] Om. Ktly. 

Armes,| arms; Theob. Warb. Cap. 13. nought] naught Dyce. 
8. Targes] Targets F,, Rowe. shields 14. beggery] begg’ry Pope,+. 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. targe Cap. lookes] luck Theob. Han. Warb. 


dénouement of Cymbeline is so ingeniously intricate that it is ineffective on the 
stage, and thereby defeats the purpose for which the ingenuity was apparently 
expended. One feels inclined, indeed, to assert with some positiveness that the 
artistic skill required in manufacturing so elaborate a scene was not exerted with- 
out definite purpose. . . . Again, one feels inclined to conjecture that this artistic 
effort may have been exerted for the purpose of rivalling similarly heightened dé- 
nouements in Beaumont and Fletcher. Without insisting too much on delibera- 
tive rivalry, we may surely say that, just as in the Beaumont-Fletcher romances, 
the elaborate dénouement is the most marked characteristic of the construction of 
Cymbeline. . . . Entirely unprecedented in the preceding plays of Shakespeare, 
such heightened construction of the dénouement is practically unprecedented in 
all earlier Elizabethan plays: it has its only parallel in Beaumont and Fletcher. 

5. woe is my heart] See Apspotr (§ 230) for ‘ungrammatical remnants of 
ancient usage.’ 

8. Targes] WALKER (Vers., 253): Palpably targe’. Targe in the singular would 
not be Elizabethan English. (Had Keats noticed this? Endymion, book iii: 
‘Old rusted anchors, helmets, breast-plates large Of gone sea-warriors; brazen 
beaks and targe; Rudders, that for a hundred years had lost the sway of human 
hands.’)—Co .tier (ed. ii.): Possibly ‘targes’ is right; if so, it must be read in 
the time of a monosyllable-—VaucGHAN (p. 530): The point of the panegyric lies in 
this, that Posthumus with his naked breast was in advance of the whole rank of 
soldiers with shields; the loss of the plural ‘targes’ is not inconsiderable. 

14. But beggery, and poore lookes] WARBURTON: But how can it be said 
that one whose ‘poor looks’ promise ‘beggery,’ promised ‘poor looks’ too? It 
was not the poor look which was promised; that was visible. We must read ‘poor 
luck.’ This sets the matter right, and makes Belarius speak sense and to the 
purpose. For there was the extraordinary thing; he promised nothing but poor 
luck, and yet performed all these wonders.—HEATH (p. 489): The sense is, one that 
promised nothing beyond what appeared, to wit, beggary and a poor exterior.— 
Jounson: To promise ‘nothing but poor looks’ may be to give no promise of 


ACT V, SC. v.] CYMBELINE 303 


Cym. No tydings of him? 15 
Pifa. He hath bin fearch’d among the dead, & liuing ; 
But no trace of him. 
Cym. To my greefe, I am 
The heyre of his Reward, which I will adde 
To you (the Liuer, Heart,and Braine of Britaine ) 20 
By whom (I grant) fhe liues. ’Tis now the time 
To aske of whence you are. Report it. 
LG She 
In Cambria are we borne, and Gentlemen: 
Further to boaft, were neyther true, nor modeft, 25 
Vnileffe I adde, we are honeft. 
Cym. Bow your knees : 
Arife my Knights o’th’Battell, I create you 
Companions to our perfon, and will fit you 


With Dignities becomming your eftates. 30 
16. bin] been F,. 24. Gentlemen:] gentlemen. Coll. 
liuing;] living, Ff et seq. 26. we are] we're Pope,+, Dyce ii, 
1g. [To Bell. Guid. and Arvirag. iii. 
Rowe. 27. knees:| knees, Fy, Rowe, Pope, 
Reward,| reward; Theob. Warb. Han. knees. Johns. Coll. Dyce, Sta. 
et seq. Ktly, Glo. Cam. 
21. lines.) Ffi,+, Coll. Dyce, Ktly, [They kneel. Johns. 
Glo. Cam. lives: Cap. et cet. 28. o’th’] o’the Cap. et seq. 
22. are.| Ff,+, Ktly, Glo. are: Cap. Batiell,| F.. Battle, F;F,. battel; 
elncets Theob. i, Han. battle; Theob. ii. et seq. 


courageous behaviour.—STEEVENS: So in Rich. II: ‘To look so poorly and to 
speak so fair.’—ITI, iii, 128.— VAUGHAN (p. 531): I strongly suspect ‘poor’ to be 
wrong, as we have already in a preceding line ‘such noble fury in so poor a thing,’ 
where ‘poor’ applies to ‘his appearance which promised,’ as ‘noble fury’ applies 
to the action which he performed, and, therefore, would be ill employed again to 
describe the looks which that poor appearance promised, for the thing promised 
would surely be different from the thing promising. Probably we should read 
‘pale looks.’ This conjecture is confirmed by the picture of persons misbehaving 
themselves in actual battle. [See ‘gilded pale looks,’ V, iii, 39, above.] 

zo. Liuer, Heart, and Braine] In Twelfth Night Orsino calls the ‘Liver, 
Braine, and Heart, These sovereign thrones,’ I, i, 128; not only because they are 
the seat of the passions, of judgement, and of sentiment, but they are also what 
was then considered the most vital organs. 

28. Knights o’th’Battell] STEEVENS: Thus in Stowe’s Chronicle, p. 164, 
edit. 1615: ‘Philip of France made Arthur Plantagenet, duke of Brytaine, Knight of 
the fields,’ [p. 244, ed. 1600]. 

30. With Dignities becomming your estates] Eccirs: If, as seems prob- 
able, ‘estates’ was designed to express the rank which he had just raised them to, 
what are the ‘dignities’ yet to be conferred? ‘Estates becoming your dignities’ 


304 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. v. 


Enter Cornelius and Ladies. 31 

There’s bufineffe in thefe faces : why fo fadly 
Greet you our Victory ? you looke like Romaines, 
And not o’th’Court of Britaine. 

Corn. Hayle great King, 35 
To fowre your happineffe, I muft report 
The Queene is dead. 

Cym. Who worfe then a Phyfitian 
Would this report become? But I confider, 
By Med’cine life may be prolong’d, yet death 40 
Will feize the Doctor too. How ended fhe? 

Cor. With horror, madly dying, like her life, 
Which (being cruell to the world ) concluded 
Moft cruell to her felfe. What fhe confeft, 


I will report, fo pleafe you. Thefe her Women 45 
Can trip me, if I erre, who with wet cheekes 
Were prefent when fhe finifh’d. 47 
33. you our] your our F>. 40. By] My F,, Rowe. 
like] like the F,F,, Rowe. : Med’cine] medicine Var. ’78 et 
34. oth’ o’the Cap. et seq. seq. (subs.) 
35. King,] King; Rowe ii. King! ~ 42. her life,| her felf, Fs, Rowe,+. 
Pope et seq. 43. Which] Who Pope,+. 
38. Who] Dyce, Glo. Cam. Whom 45. you.] you; Theob. Warb. et seq. 
Ff et cet. 46. erre,| Ff, Coll. err; Rowe et 
39. become?] become; Fi, Rowe. cet. 


may be thought, perhaps, a more natural appointment. By dignities should, 
possibly, in this place be understood some farther titles and privileges to be added 
to these honours, 7. e., the knighthood already bestowed, as being suitable there- 
unto. 

38, etc. Who worse then a Physitian, etc.] VAucHAN: That is, ‘You 
would, in my judgement, be the most unfit person, being a physician, to report 
death, did I not consider (“‘but I consider”) that, although it is in the physician’s 
power often to prolong life, yet he cannot always avert death, even from himself.’ 
[Accordingly, Vaughan would replace with a comma the interrogation mark after 
‘become,’ and transfer the interrogation mark to the end of the sentence, after 
‘too.’] 

42. With horror, madly dying, like her life] Caprty (p. 120): A direct 
answer to Cymbeline’s question, ‘She ended with horror’; but the meaning of the 
words that come after, is—‘her death was mad like her life.’ [Those who indulge 
the fancy that there lies a similarity between this Play and Macbeth, find in the 
present passage and in Lady Macbeth’s death a confirmation thereof.] 

47. she finish’d] Inciesy thinks that this is equivalent to died, as on the 
strength of the use of ‘finish’ in line 490 of this scene. And he may be right, but 
it may also mean when she had finished her ‘confession.’ After a confession of 
abominable wickedness it is hardly likely that her women would wet their cheeks 


ACT V, SC. v.] CYMBELINE 395 


Cym. Prythee fay. 48 
Cor. Firft, fhe confeft fhe neuer lou’d you : onely 
Affected Greatneffe got by you : not you: 50 


Married your Royalty, was wife to your place : 

Abhorr’d your perfon. 
Cym. She alone knew this: 

And but fhe fpoke it dying, I would not 

Beleeue her lips in opening it. Proceed. 55 
Corn, Your daughter,whom fhe bore in hand to loue 

With fuch integrity, fhe did confeffe 

Was as a Scorpion to her fight, whofe life 

(But that her flight preuented it) fhe had 

Tane off by poyfon. 60 
Cym. O moft delicate Fiend! 

Who is’t can reade a Woman? Is there more ? 
Corn, More Sir, and worfe. She did confeffe fhe had 

For you a mortall Minerall, which being tooke, 


Should by the minute feede on life,and ling’ring, 65 
49. you:] you, Pope, Han. Johns. 58. as a] a F;F,, Rowe, Pope. 
Glo. Cam. 58. fight,| sight; Theob. Warb. Cap. 
50. by you:] by you, Rowe et seq. et seq. 
51. was] Om. Pope, Han. 60. Tane] Ta’en Rowe. 
place:] place, Rowe, Pope, Johns. 64. Minerall,| minerall; | Theob. 
Coll. Cam. place Han. Warb. Cap. et seq. 
54. And] And, Theob. et seq. 65. ling’ring| lingring Ff, Rowe, 
it dying,| in dying, Cam. ii. (mis- Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. lingering 
print?) Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 


56. hand] hand, Rowe i. 


for her death—Ecc tes considers it as not consistent with ‘either probability or 
decorum’ that Cornelius should thus publicly divulge a death-bed confession.— Ep. 

53. She alone knew this] This was a truth so secret that only approaching 
death could have made her reveal it. Hence Cymbeline’s conviction that Corne- 
lius is telling the truth.—Eb. 

56. bore in hand] Murray (WN. E. D., s. v. 3. e.): To profess, pretend; to lead 
(one) to believe. [The present line quoted.] 

59. preuented] Used passim in its Latin derivative sense. 

61. delicate] DownveEn: I take this to mean ingenious here. 

64. mortall Minerall] Moyes (p. 53): This description is quite consistent 
with chronic poisoning by arsenic. 

6s. and ling’ring] Both INcLEBy and VauGcHAN accept ‘ling’ring’ as transi- 
tive, with an objective you, either understood, or expressed after ‘waste.’—ScHMIDT 
and Murray furnish abundant examples from Shakespeare and elsewhere of 
‘linger’ as a transitive verb; but is there any need of thus treating it in the present 
passage? As soon as the deadly mineral is taken, it begins to feed every minute 
on life, and then by lingering it wastes the victim by inches. It might feed on 


396 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. v. 


By inches wafte you. In which time, fhe purpos’d 66 
By watching, weeping, tendance, kiffing, to 
Orecome you with her fhew; and in time 
(When fhe had fitted you with her craft, to worke 
Her Sonne into th’adoption of the Crowne : 70 
But fayling of her end by his ftrange abfence, 
Grew fhameleffe defperate, open’d (in defpight 
Of Heauen,and Men) her purpofes : repented 
The euils fhe hatch’d, were not effected : fo 
Difpayring, dyed. a6 
Cym. Heard you all this, her Women ? 
La. We did, fo pleafe your Highneffe. 
Cym. Mine eyes 
Were not in fault, for fhe was beautifull : 
Mine eares that heare her flattery, nor my heart, 80 
That thought her like her feeming. It had beene vicious 


66. you.] you; Cap. et seq. ate Johns. 
68, 69. Orecome...(When] One line, et seq. 
Mal. -74. euils] ills Pope,+, Var. ’78, 85, 

68. fhew;] shew, Johns. Glo. Cam. Ran. 
fair show Anon. ap. Cam. 


shameless-desperate; Cap. 


hatch’d,| hatch’d Pope et seq. 


and in time] Mal. Coll. i, Dyce i, 
Glo. Cam. and in due time Walker, 
Ktly. and so in time Jervis, Huds. 
so, and in time Nicholson. and thus in 
time Hertzberg conj. yes, and in time 
Fi et cet. 
69. fitted] fit Walker, Huds. 
70. Crowne:] Fi,+, Knt, Coll. Dyce, 
Glo. Cam. crown. Cap. et cet. 
72. fhameleffe defperate,| shameless, 
desperate; Pope,+. shameless, desper- 


76. you] ye Walker (so quoted Vers., 


77. Wa. Lad. E2E;. Lady. F,; 
78. Mine eyes| Yet mine eyes Han. 
79. beautifull:| beautiful, Cam. 
80. heare] heard F3F,, et seq. 
flattery,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
i, Cam. flattery; Theob. ii. et cet. 
heart, heart. F,. heart Steev. 
Cam. 
81. feeming.] seeming; Cap. et seq. 


life every minute and yet kill in a day; but instead of killing speedily, it lingers 
and kills by inches.—Ep. 

68, 81. shew . . . seeming] INcLEBy: It is perhaps worth noting, that if 
‘shew’ here and ‘seeming’ in line 8r change places, the sense and metre of both 
lines are perfect. 

68. and in time] WALKER (Crit., iii, 329): Perhaps, ‘and in due time.’ At 
any rate, yes is wrong.—Dvyce (ed. ii.): The insertion of yes from the Second Folio, 
I confess, I hardly like—Vavcuan (p. 533): All change is unnecessary. ‘Now,’ 
‘how’ and ‘show,’ and similar words are in Shakespeare di-syllabically pro- 
nounced by giving to ‘w’ the distinct enunciation of a syllable—thus, ‘nowu,’ 
‘howu,’ ‘showu’—which they always possess more or less.—[I prefer the Yankee 
‘haow,’ ‘naow’ myself—with a sharp nasal twang.—Eb.] 

76-81. Heard you all this . . . like her seeming] SrauNTON (Atheneum, 
14 June, 1873): The collocation and the metre in this pathetically tender lamen- 


ACT V, SC. v.] 


CYMBELINE 397 


To haue miftrufted her : yet (Oh my Daughter) 82 
That it was folly in me, thou maytt fay, 
And proue it in thy feeling. Heauen mend all. 
Enter Lucius ,Lachimo,and other Roman prifoners, 85 
Leonatus behind, and Imogen. 
Thou comm’ft not Cazus now for Tribute, that 
The Britaines haue rac’d out, though with the loffe 
Of many a bold one : whofe Kinfmen have made fuite 
That their good foules may be appeas’d, with flaughter gO 
Of you their Captiues, which our felfe haue granted, 


So thinke of your eftate. 


Luc. Confider Sir, the chance of Warre, the day 
Was yours by accident : had it gone with vs, 
We fhould not when the blood was cool, haue threatend 95 
Our Prifoners with the Sword. But fince the Gods 
Will haue it thus, that nothing but our liues 
May be call’d ranfome, let it come : Sufficeth, 
A Roman, with a Romans heart can fuffer : 
Augufius liues to thinke on’t : and fo much 100 


For my peculiar care. 


This one thing onely 


I will entreate, my Boy (a Britaine borne) 102 


82. her:] her. Pope,+. 
Daughter)| daughter ! Rowe et seq. 


85. Scene v. Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. 
Tachimo,] Jachimo, the Sooth- 
sayer, Cap. 


86. Leonatus]. Posthumus Han. 
87. Tribute,| tribute; Pope et seq. 
88. Britaines] Britons Theob. ii. 
rac’d) raz’d Theob. et seq. 
(subs.). 
89. one:] one, Johns. 


89, 90. /uite...flaughter] One line, 
Vaun. 
ot. our felfe] ourself Johns. et seq. 
granted,] granted. Pope,+. 


granted: Cap. et seq. 

92. So thinke] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Glo. 
Cam. Dyce ii, iii. So, think Theob. et 
eet. 

93. Warre, the] War the F;F,. war; 
the Rowe et seq. 

95. not] not, Pope et seq. 

cool] cold Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. 
Varr. Mal. Ran. 
97. thus,| thus; Mal. 
98. come:] come. Pope,+. 
100. on’t:| on’t. Pope, Han. Johns. 
on’ t— Theob. Warb. 
102. entreate,| intreat; Pope et seq. 
{Shewing Imo. Cap. 
Britaine| Briton Theob. ii. 


tation seems to demand, ‘Mine eyes that look’d on her,’ or ‘Mine eyes that saw her 
face.’ Mine eyes that saw. Mine ears that heard. My heart that thought. Is this 


too visionary? At any rate, the limp in the first line must be cured. 


that this ‘first line’ is line 76.—Eb.] 
92. So thinke] See Text. Notes. 
a comma after ‘So.’ 


{I suppose 


THEOBALD was, I think, ill-advised in placing 


398 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. v. 


Let him be ranfom’d : Neuer Mafter had 103 
A Page fo kinde, fo duteous, diligent, 
So tender ouer his occafions, true, 105 


So feate, fo Nurfe-like : let his vertue ioyne 

With my requeft, which Ile make bold, your Highneffe 

Cannot deny: he hath done no Britaine harme, 

Though he haue feru’d a Roman. Saue him (Sir) 

And fpare no blood befide, 110 
Cym. I haue furely feene him: 

His fauour is familiar to me: Boy, 

Thou haft look’d thy felfe into my grace, 

And art mine owne. I know not why, wherefore, 


To fay, liue boy: ne’re thanke thy Matter, liue ; 115 
104. duteous, diligent,| duteous-dili- Johns. Mal. Steev. Var. ’03, 713, Knt, 
gent Walker, Dyce ii, iii. Dyce ii, iii, Sta. Singl. Ingl. 
106. NV urfe-like:] nurse-like. Johns. 113-115. Three lines, ending: And 
Coll. art...To fay,...liue; (reading why, nor 
107. which] which, Theob. et seq. wherefore. I say) Var. ’73. (reading 
bold,] bold Pope, Han. why, wherefore I say) Var.’78, ’85, Ran. 
109. haue] hath Rowe,+. 114. why,] why, nor Rowe,+, Cap. 
Roman.] Roman: Cap. et seq. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, Delius, Coll. 
t10. blood] bloud F3F;. Dyce, Sing. Sta. Ktly, Cam. Ingl. 
riz. I haue] I’ve, Rowe,+, Dyce ii, - 114, 115. why,...To fay] why, nor 
iii. wherefore, but I say, Cap. Eccles. 
III, 112. feene ...me:] Separate line, 115. liuwe boy| As quotation, Theob. 
Ingl. Han. Johns. Glo. Cam. Dyce ii, iii, 
112. me:| me. Pope,+, Glo. Cam. Coll. iii. 
112, 113. Boy...grace] One line, Han. Mafter,| master; Cap. et seq. 


103. Neuer Master] Assorrt (§ 84): By the omission of ‘a’ before ‘master,’ 
‘never’ is emphasized and has its proper meaning, ‘at no time.’ 

105. So tender ouer his occasions] Eccrrs: Respecting those matters to 
which it was the duty of his office to pay a particular care and attention. Possibly, 
it may signify, ‘over and above, or beyond what the duty of his place required of 
him.’—Scumipt (Lex., s. v. tender, 2. b.): That is, so nicely sensible of his wants. 
[‘So tender o’re’ occurs twice within six lines in Wint. Tale, II, iii, 160-5 of this 
edition, where I have erroneously asserted that the phrase is nowhere else used by 
Shakespeare, having unaccountably overlooked the present passage. I can plead 
no excuse, but solely beg forgiveness.—En.] 

105. occasions, true] STAUNTON (Atheneum, 14 June, 1873) would omit the 
comma, and explain as ‘his true occasions.’ 

106. So feate] Jounson: That is, so dexterous in waiting —Braptey (N. E. D., 
2.): Of speech: apt, apropos; smart, Dae Of movements: Dexterous, grace- 
ful. [Present line quoted.] 

112. His fauour] JoHNson: I am acquainted with his countenance. 

114, 115. I know not why, wherefore, To say] Matone: I know not what 
should induce me to say live, boy —DeEttvs: Perhaps ‘to say’ refers not to what 


ACT Vi, SC. Vv. | CYMBELINE 399 


And aske of Cyméeline what Boone thou wilt, 116 
Fitting my bounty, and thy ftate, Ile giue it : 
Yea, though thou do demand a Prifoner 
The Nobleft tane, 
fimo. I humbly thanke your Higneffe. 120 
Luc. 1 do not bid thee begge my life, good Lad, 
And yet I know thou wilt. 
Imo. No, no, alacke, 


There’s other worke in hand: I fee a thing 124 
118. Yea,] yes catchword in F,F;. 121. Lad,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Prifoner] Cap. Sta. prifoner, Coll. i, ii. Cam. lad; Theob. et cet. 
imetcets 123. No, no,| No, no; Cap. et seq. 
119. tane] ta’en Rowe. 124. [Eying Jac. Cap. 


follows, but to what precedes, thus: ‘thou art mine own, I know not wherefore I 
should thus say it.’ Then with ‘live, boy’ a new sentence begins.—DEIGHTON: 
Compare Comedy of Errors: ‘Ant. S. Shall I tell you why? Drom. S. Ay, sir, 
and wherefore; for they say every why hath a wherefore.’—Il, 243, 5. We still use 
‘T know not what to say,’ but not ‘I know not why to say,’ equivalent to ‘I know not 
why I should say..—VAUGHAN (p. 534): I would read as does the Folio, but with 
a different punctuation and meaning, thus: ‘And art mine own, I know not why: 
wherefore To say “live” boy ne’er thank thy master; live!’ With this meaning: 
‘Thou hast by mere looking looked thyself into my favour, and art now mine own 
in some mysterious way, for which reason’ (wherefore) ‘thou needest not give to 
me, who am now thy master, any personal thanks for saying as I do, “Live!”’ .. . 
We have still the same form of construction in the common phrase ‘I will thank 
you to do this or that,’ etc., which means, ‘I will thank you for doing this if you 
do it.—DOownEn’s text reads: ‘And art mine own; I know not why; nor wherefore, 
To say, live, boy: ne’er thank thy master; live,’ and thus explains it: ‘I under- 
stand ‘‘I know not why” to refer to the preceding words, and “‘I know not” to be 
understood before ‘‘wherefore.”” I take Lucius to be “thy master.’ [This line 
the Globe ed. obelised, judiciously, I think. As it stands in the Folio it is certainly 
so obscure that it needs some emendation or, at least, change in punctuation.— 
PERRING (p. 452) accepts as correct the full stop after ‘mine own,’ and the omission 
of a connecting particle between ‘why’ and ‘wherefore’ as ‘worthy of admiration.’ 
‘It just gives,’ he remarks, ‘that broken character to the king’s utterances which 
was natural to him under the circumstances; he stuttered and stammered while 
trying to recollect where and on what occasion he had seen the lad.’ Those edi- 
tors who accept Rowe’s nor are generally silent, and leave the explanation of the 
Folio to those who follow it. Vaughan’s punctuation, in substituting a comma 
after ‘mine own’ instead of a full stop, seems to me good, but I cannot follow him * 
in regarding ‘thy master’ as referring, not to Lucius, but to Cymbeline himself.— 
Ep.] 

118. Yea, though thou do demand, etc.] CaPELL (p. 120): Here is a deli- 
cacy that deserves to be noted; the speaker wants some fit occasion to withdraw 
the promise he has made to his subjects, and spare Lucius, whose life, therefore, he 
indirectly puts the boy upon asking. 


400 7 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


[ACT V, SC. v. 


Bitter to me, as death : your life, good Matter, 125 


Mutt fhuffle for it felfe. 


Luc. The Boy difdaines me, 


He leaues me, fcornes me : briefely dye their ioyes, 
That place them on the truth of Gyrles, and Boyes. | 


Why ftands he fo perplext ? 


130 


Cym. What would’ft thou Boy ? 
I loue thee more,and more : thinke more and more 


What’s beft to aske. 


Know’ft him thou look’ft on?fpeak 


Wilt haue him liue? Is he thy Kin? thy Friend ? 


Imo. 


He is a Romane, no more kin to me, 135 


Then I to your Highneffe, who being born your vaffaile 


Am fomething neerer. 


Cym. Wherefore ey’ft him fo ? 


Zmo. Me tell you (Sir)in priuate, if you pleafe 


To giue me hearing. 
Cym. I, with all my heart, 
And lend my beft attention. 
Imo. Fidele Sir. 


140 


What’s thy name ? 


Cym. Thou’rt my good youth my Page 
Ile be thy Mafter’. walke with me : fpeake freely. 145 
Bel. 1s not this Boy reuiu’d from death ? 


125. me,] me F;F,, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Var. ’78 et seq. 

126. it selfe] Ff. (subs.)+. 
Johns. 

130. Why...perplext?| Given to Cym. 
Ingl. 


itself 


perplext] perplex F2. 
131. would’fi] F;F,. wouldft F. 
132, 133. more What's] more, What’s 
Rowe,+. 
134. Kin?] kin, Cap. 
135. Romane,| Roman; Theob. et seq. 
136. Highneffe,| Highness: Theob. et 
seq. 
who...vaffaile] 
who...Vaffal Fy. 
Warb. et seq. 
138. ey’ fi] ey ft thou F;F,, Rowe. 


who...vaffal F;. 
who,...vassal, Theob. 


141. I,] Ay, Rowe. 

144. Thow’rt] Thou art Theob. Warb. 
Johns. 

youth: my Page] youth, my Page, 
Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. youth, my page; 
Theob. Warb. et seq. 

145. me:] me, Rowe,+. 

{Cymbel. and Imo. walk aside. 
Theob. 

146-150. Is not...aline.| Four lines, 
reading and ending: Js not...Sand | An- 
other doth not more resemble than | He 
the sweet rosie lad who died and was | 
Fidele. Ev’n the same dead thing alive. 
Han. Reading: One sand | Another 
not resembles more, than he | That sweet 
and rosy lad, who dy’d, and was | 
Fidele:—What think you?...alive. Cap. 


138. Wherefore ey’st him so] Lapy Martin (p. 216): How intently 
Imogen has been absorbed in watching Iachimo is further shown by the circum- 
stance that, though near her late companions of the cave, she has not observed 


them. 


ACTEV, SCV. | CYMBELINE 401 


Arutz, One Sand another 147 
Not more refembles that fweet Rofie Lad: 
Who dyed, and was Fidele: what thinke you ? 149 
148. refembles] Ff+, Dyce, Sta. 148 Lad:] youth (so quoted) Han. 


Glo. Cam. resembles. Johns. resem- lad Han. Knt, Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 

bles ... Ktly. resembles: Var. ’78 et Coll. iii. Jad, Rowe et cet. 

cet. 149. Fidele:] Fidele. Pope,+, Coll. 
148. that fweet] than he th’sweet Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo. Cam. Fidele— 

Theob. Han. Warb. that’s the sweet Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Ingl. Fidele/ 

Bailey (ii, 138). than he that Hertzberg Dowden. 

conj. what...you?] Om. Han. 


147, 148. One Sand another .. . Rosie Lad] TuHrosarp: One grain of 
sand certainly might resemble another; but it never could resemble a human form. 
I believe I have restored the Poet’s meaning; the verse is none of the smoothest; 
but ‘resembles’ must be pronounced as a dissyllable-—Heratu (p. 489): This is 
utterly impracticable by a human tongue. It is sufficient to say that the third 
foot is an anapest.—JouNson: There was no great difficulty in the line, which 
when properly pointed needs no alteration. [Johnson’s proper pointing is a full stop 
after ‘resembles’ and a comma after ‘lad.’]—WatLkeER (Crit., iii, 329): Qu., one 
sand another 

“Not more resembles [ 

Than he resembles] that sweet rosy lad, 

Who died,’ etc. [This is given as it stands. Walker 
makes no comment.—Ep.]—Dvce (ed. ii.): Imperfectly as this [7. e., the Folio 
text] is expressed, I am inclined . . . to think that we have here what Shakespeare 
wrote. [To the same effect, WaITE.]—VAUGHAN (p. 536): I would, therefore, 
confidently restore sense to these words, and harmony to the lines, by simply 
assigning the speeches of Belarius and Arviragus to Arviragus alone, without any 
other change of the text than the omission of the pleonastic words ‘from death’ 
[and enclosing in parentheses ‘one sand another not more resembles’].—THISELTON 
(p. 48): It should be observed that Belarius’s preceding speech (‘Is not this Boy 
revived from death?’) is evidently unfinished, and is really finished by Arviragus 
(who has impulsively interrupted it) with the words ‘Who died and was Fidele,’ 
which thus do double duty; and hence the colon after ‘Lad’ may be accounted for. 
‘One Sand another Not more’ is, I think, for the purposes of construction, to be 
taken as an adverbial phrase qualifying ‘tesembles,’ and the subject of ‘resembles’ 
is ‘this boy,’ carried down from Belarius’s preceding speech. If we amplify on 
these lines we get, in modern style, ‘This boy—one sand another not more— 
resembles that sweet rosy lad who is dead and was Fidele,’ which is the best gram- 
mar in the world; and such interpretation involves no violent ellipsis —DowpEN: 
My reading varies from Johnson only in putting semicolon and exclamation note 
where he puts full stops. [I prefer after ‘resembles’ Dr. Johnson’s full stop, 
modified into an exclamation mark. Belarius has called the startling vision before 
him a ‘boy.’ Arviragus exclaims in dazed assent, ‘one sand another not more 
resembles,’ and still in assent specifies the ‘boy’ as ‘that sweet rosy Lad,’ etc. 
There is no need of his saying with sedate accuracy, “Yes, it is, that sweet rosy 
lad,’ etc. Is aman to pick his words when he sees the dead walking before him?— 


Ep.] 
26 


402 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. Vv. 


Gui. The fame dead thing aliue, 150 
Bel.Peace, peace, fee further : he eyes vs not, forbeare 
Creatures may be alike : were’t he, I am fure 
He would haue fpoke to vs. 
Gut. But we fee him dead. 
Bel. Be filent : let’s fee further. 155 
Pifa. It is my Miftris : 
Since fhe is liuing, let the time run on, 
To good, or bad. 
Cym. Come, ftand thou by our fide, 
Make thy demand alowd. Sir, ftep you forth, 160 
Giue anfwer to this Boy, and do it freely, 
Or by our Greatneffe, and the grace of it 


(Which is our Honor) bitter torture fhall 163 
151. peace,] peace! Var. ’73 et seq. mistress. Johns. 
further:| more; Pope,+. farther 157. on,| on Cap. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
Coll. Cam. Coll. iii. 
not,| not; Theob. Warb. et seq. 158. [Cym. and Imog. come forward. 
forbeare|] forbeare, Ff,+, Cap. Theob. 
forbear. Coll. forbear; Var. ’73 et cet. 159. fide] fide. Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
152. I am] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. ~Theob. Han. Warb. side; Cap. et seq. 
153. to vs] Pus Pope,+. 160. alowd.] alowd— Warb. 
154. fee] saw Rowe ii. et seq. Sir,] Sir, [To Iachimo. Rowe. 
156-158. [Aside. Rowe. 161. freely,| Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
156. It is] "Tis Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. Coll. freely; Theob. et cet. 
Miftris:|_ mistress— Pope,+. 162. our] your F3F,. 


154. But we see him dead] DowpeENn: Editors follow Rowe in reading saw, 
and perhaps rightly. But the Folio may be right. A moment before Guiderius 
identified the dead Fidele as the living page. Belarius says, ‘If it were Fidele he 
would have spoken to us,’ and Guiderius replies, ‘But we see him, a silent ghost.’ 
Rowe’s emendation seems to forget the fluctuations of wonder, of faith and un- 
faith, and fails to account for the word ‘But.’ [After the ‘boy’ had been heard, 
or seen, talking with the King, Belarius and his sons could not doubt that whoever 
he was, he was alive. Belarius says ‘Creatures may be alike.’ It was not with 
them, therefore, a question, in regard to Fidele, of life or of death, but of identity. 
In answer to Arviragus’s question, ‘What think you?’ Guiderius had answered, 
‘the same dead thing alive.’ He could not, I think, immediately thereafter say 
that he was the same alive thing dead; he means, rather, if it is the same thing we see 
him dead. Dowden’s admonition to us to be mindful of the situation, with its 
bewildering ‘fluctuations of wonder, of faith and unfaith, is well-timed. But 
here in Guiderius’s speech the fluctuations circle, I think, about identity, not life. 
In any case, whether we read ‘see’ or saw, ‘But’ seems to me to retain its adversa- 
tive force; although Craic ingeniously suggests that, retaining ‘see,’ ‘But’ may 
mean ‘unless we see.’—Ep.] 

162,163. by our Greatnesse, and the grace of it (Which is our Honor)] 
In Hen. VIII. Norfolk says, ‘As I belong to worship and affect In honour honesty,’ 


ACT V, SG. v.] CYMBELINE 403 


Winnow the truth from falfhood. One fpeake to him. 

Imo, My boone is, that this Gentleman may render 165 
Of whom he had this Ring. 

Poft. What’s that to him ? 

Cym. That Diamond vpon your Finger, fay 
How came it yours ? 


lach, Thouw’lt torture me to leaue vnfpoken, that 170 
Which to be fpoke, wou’d torture thee. 
Cym. How? me? 172 
164. fal/hood.| falshood— Warb. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. say, Theob. et 
One fpeake] F., Johns. On; cet. 
speak Theob. Warb. Coll. ii, iii. On, 170. wnfpoken, that] unspoken that, 
Speak F;F, et cet. Theob. Warb. Johns. «unspoken that 
165. zs,] ts Cam. Cap. et seq. 
render] tender Ff, Rowe. 171. Which...fpoke,| F2 Which... 
166. [Pointing to it. Coll. iii. Spoke F3F,,+. Which,...spoke, Cap. et 
167. [Aside. Cap. seq. 
him?] him: Ff. woud Ff. 
168. fay] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 172. How?] How! Cap. Var. ’78 et 
seq. 


I, i, 39. This same sentiment, WALKER (Crit., i, 23) remarks, is expressed in these 
lines in Cymbeline. 

164. speake to him] The Cowprn-C1iarkes: Thoroughly characteristic of 
Imogen is her conduct throughout this scene; very subtly indicated are her awak- 
ened suspicion and steadfast watching of Iachimo by Lucius’s words, ‘Why stands 
he so perplex’d?’ and by Cymbeline’s ‘Know’st thou him thou look’st on?’ and 
‘Wherefore ey’st him so?’—very clearly are her disgust and repugnance at the 
thought of again coming into communion with the villain denoted by her offering 
to tell Cymbeline ‘in private’ of her desire Iachimo should be questioned; and 
equally obvious is her determination that she will not question him herself, but 
actually addresses her ‘demand’ through the king, and thus induces him to conduct 
the examination for her. 

170, 171. Thou’lt torture me to leaue vnspoken, that Which, etc.] Dycr 
(ed. ii.): In case this should seem obscure to some readers, I may notice that the 
meaning is,—‘instead of torturing me to speak, thou wouldst (if thou wert wise, 
or aware) torture me to prevent my speaking that,’ etc.—Assorr (§ 356): That is, 
‘You wish to torture me for /eaving unspoken that which, by being spoken, would 
torture you.’—Hupson reads ‘’Twould torture me,’ etc., and remarks ‘the use of 
“would” in the next line declares strongly for the same word here. And Dyce’s 
explanation of the old reading is, I think, enough to condemn it. Iachimo’s next 
speech shows his meaning here to be, that it torments him not to speak the truth 
in question.’ [Does not Hudson overlook Cymbeline’s threat of ‘bitter torture,’ 
to which, I think, Iachimo here refers, not to torture in general?—Ep.]|—VAUGHAN 
(p. 538): Dyce’s interpretation does great violence to language by making ‘wil’t’ 
equivalent to ‘would’st if thou wert wise.’ [Here follows the same paraphrase as 
given by Abbott, which is more simple and exact than that of Dyce, who is not, in 
general, at his happiest when venturing on a paraphrase.] 


THE TRAGEDIZ OF [ACT V, SC. Vv. 


404 

Tach. 1 am glad to be conftrain’d to vtter that 173 
Which torments me to conceale. By Villany 
I got this Ring : ’twas Leonatus lewell, 175 


Whom thou did’ft. banifh :and which more may greeue 

As it doth me : a Nobler Sir, ne’re liu’d (thee, 

’Twixt sky and ground. Wilt thou heare more my Lord? 
Cym. All that belongs to this. 


Tach. That Paragon, thy daughter, 180 
For whom my heart drops blood, and my falfe fpirits 


Quaile to remember. 


173, 174. that Which torments] what 
Torments Pope,+. that which Torments 


Cap. that Torments Ritson, Steev. 
conj., Huds. that Which it torments 
Vaun. 


175. Leonatus] Leonatus’ Pope. 

176. Whom...and] One line, F4. 

176, 177. and which...doth me:] F2. 
and, which...doth me, F3;F, et seq. 
(subs.) 

177. Sir,| Sir or sir Ff et seq. 


Giue me leaue, I faint. 182 


178. Wilt thou] Will you Pope,-+. 
thou heare] Om. Steev. conj. 
(ending line: All that). 
my Lord?| Om. Han. 
179. that belongs to this] to’t belongs 
Vaun. 
179, 180. belongs...daughter,| One line, 
Han. 
182. remember.| remember— Pope et 
seq. 
faint. faint— Rowe,+. 
[Swoonds. Rowe. 


173. to vtter that] BosweLi: If we may lay an emphasis on ‘that,’ it will be 
a hypermetrical line of eleven syllables. There is scarcely a page in Fletcher’s 
plays where this sort of versification is not to be found. [Dyce quotes, in 
all his editions, this last sentence of Boswell, and adds, with a crushing 
exclamation mark: ‘Fletcher’s versification being essentially different from our 
Author’s!’—Ep.] 

173, 174. that Which] Dyce (ed. ii.): Here the ‘Which’ (though we have 
‘that which’ in Iachimo’s preceding speech) would seem to be an addition of the 
transcriber or printer—STAUNTON: We adopt the arrangement of the Folio, but 
agree with Mr Dyce in considering the word an impertinent addition of the tran- 
scriber or printer. 

182. Quaile to remember] VaucHAN (p. 540): That is, ‘my false spirits quail 
in their function of memory.’ ‘Remember’ is an intransitive verb here. [It seems 
impossible to refrain from asking what is gained by regarding ‘remember’ as in- 
transitive when there is a preceding ‘For whom,’ wherefrom an objective whom 
for ‘remember’ is so naturally deduced? Tantum potuit cacethes emendandi sua- 
dere malorum.—Ep.] 

182. I faint] SHERMAN (p. 99): As Iachimo begins his story by summarily con- 
fessing that the ring was Posthumus’s, and got by villainy, Imogen’s colour changes, 
much as doubtless it did when he gave her letters, some months since, from her 
husband. He notes the changed expression, and, as it seems, recognises instantly 
who it is, and with whom he has todo. This near presence, so suddenly divined, 


of the woman for whom he has conceived the deepest reverence, unmans him, and he 
cries out to the King for patience. 


ACT V, SC. v.] 


CYMBELINE 


405 


Cym. My Daughter? what of hir?Renew thy ftrength 183 
I had rather thou fhould’ft liue, while Nature will, 
Then dye ere I heare more: ftriue man, and fpeake, 185 
fach. “pon a time, vnhappy was the clocke 
That ftrooke the houre : it was in Rome, accurft 
The Manfion where : ’twas at a Feaft, oh would 
Our Viands had bin poyfon’d(or at leaft 
Thofe which I heau’d to head:) the good Pofhumus, 190 
(What fhould I fay? he was too good to be 


183. Daughter?| Daught? F.. daughter 
Fj. daughter, Fy+-. daughter! Cap. 
eUCes, 

hir| Fy. 
JStrength\ F;. firength F.. ftrength, 
F,, Rowe, Pope. strength; Theob. et 


seq. ‘ 
184. I had] I’'ad Pope. I’d Theob. 
ii,+. 
Should’ ft) fhoul’ ft FF 4. 


185. more:] more. Johns. Coll. Ktly. 

185. firiue| Strive! Coll. iii. 

186, 187. wnhappy...houre:] In paren- 
theses, Pope et seq. (subs.) 


Pope. hour! Cap. et cet. 

187, 188. accurfl...where:| In paren- 
theses Pope et seq. (subs.) 

188. where:] where, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
where! Cap. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Coll. 
iii. 

188-190. oh...head:)| In parentheses 
Pope et seq. (subs.) 

189. bin] been F. 

poyfon'd] poison’d! Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Varr. Mal. 

190. head:] head! Cap. et seq. (subs.) 

Pofthumus,] Posthumus— Rowe. 

toi. good to] Ff,4+, Var. ’21, Coll. 


187. ftrooke] Ff (subs.). struck Rowe. Dyce, Glo. Cam. good, to Cap. et 
houre:| Ff, Johns. hour, Rowe, cet. 


186. Vpon a time, etc.] Eccrrs: Iachimo’s talent for fiction is almost as 
conspicuous on this as on former occasions; it should not pass unnoticed that a 
considerable part of what he is about here to relate is false; a prior event, of which 
an account is given by the Frenchman at the meeting in the house of Philario at 
Rome, appears to be confounded with what at that juncture happened.—The 
CowpbEN-CLARKES: Shakespeare may have made these variations in details either 
to give the effect of that inaccuracy of memory which often marks the narration 
of a past occurrence even in persons habitually truthful, or in order to denote 
Tachimo’s innate untruthfulness and unscrupulousness, which lead him to falsify 
in minor matters as in those of greater moment.—INcLEBy: Iachimo’s narrative 
rather follows the story of Boccaccio than the circumstances represented in Act I, 
Scene v.—THISELTON (p. 49): The inconsistencies between Iachimo’s narration 
and the facts as they have been represented in the Play are, I believe, designed, 
and suggest that Iachimo is playing upon Cymbeline with a view to being let off 
lightly. The parenthesis, ‘not dispraising whom we prais’d, therein he was as calm 
as vertue’ (lines 207 and 208), seems most artfully intended to enhance the praise 
of Imogen, while the alleged effect of Posthumus’s description of her upon the 
Italian Feasters suggests that Iachimo was not without some excuse (lines 210-212, 
215, 216). The very idea of a ‘Feast’ (line 188) is probably imported [see preceding 
note by Eccles.—Ep.] to excuse the wager, as being rather due to rich fare than of 
rational deliberation. It should be also observed that while Iachimo is plentiful 
in fictitious detail, he astutely suppresses the means whereby the ‘Tokens’ (line 
238), necessary to convince Posthumus of his wife’s dishonour, were forthcoming. 


406 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT ‘Vv, 8C..¥.. 


Where ill men were, and was the beft of all 192 
Among’ft the rar’ft of good ones) fitting fadly, 
Hearing vs praife our Loues of Italy 


For Beauty, that made barren the fwell’d boaft 195 
Of him that beft could fpeake : for Feature, laming 
The Shrine of Venus, or ftraight-pight Minerua, 197 
192. were,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Bailey (i, 263). f 
Coll. were; Theob. et cet. where Cam. 196. laming] ’faming Warb. conj: 
ii. (misprint). (Nichols’s Ilust., ii, 268. Withdrawn.) 
193. Among’ ft] Ff. Among Cap. 197. Shrine of] shrinking Bailey (i, 
rar’ fi] F3Fy. rarft F.. 118). spine of or inclining Hertzberg. 
195. Beauty,] Ff,+, Coll. beauty swim of Elze. stride of Leo (Jhrb., 
Cap. et cet. Xxil, 228). i 
196. {peake:] speak, Glo. Minerua,] Minerva; Pope, 


Feature] stature Theob. figure Han. 


196. Feature] Warpurton: ‘Feature’ for proportion of parts. ‘Venus’ and 
‘Minerva,’ that is, the ancient statues, which exceeded the work of ‘brief nature,’ 
that is, of hasty, unelaborate nature. He gives the same character of the beauty 
of the antique in Ant. & Cleop.: ‘O’er picturing that Venus where we see The 
fancy outwork nature.’—II, ii, 205. [‘Outwork’ here does not refer to ‘feature’ 
or beauty itself, but to the excellence of the execution.] 

197. Shrine] Scumipt (Lex.): The image of a saint. Thus ‘offer pure incense 
to so pure a shrine’ (z. e., Lucree) R. of L., 194; ‘from the four corners of the earth 
they come, to kiss this shrine, this mortal-breathing saint” (7. e., Portia), Mer. of 
Venice, II, vii, 40; ‘if I profane with my unworthiest hand this holy shrine’ (Juliet’s 
hand), Rom. & Jul., I, v, 96.—Staunton: For grace and dignity of form, sur- 
passing those antique statues of Venus and Minerva, whose attitudes are unat- 
tainable by nature-—The CowpEN-CLARKES: This is a poetic license of ellipsis for 
‘the statue of the goddess contained in the shrine of Venus.’—INcLEBY: The 
‘Shrine of Venus’ is equivalent to the embodiment or personal presence of Venus.— 
DeicutTon: This seems to mean the image or statue of Venus, that which enshrined 
her beauty; ‘shrine’ is from the Latin scriniwm, a chest, case, but is especially used 
of that in which sacred things are deposited—Dowpen: ‘Shrine’ is not, I think, 
used for the statue, but, the glory of the shrine being the statue, the superior 
‘feature’ of Imogen ‘lames’ the whole shrine. [Schmidt’s definition is not one of 
his happiest; that of ONrons is possibly better, ‘image (as of a saint),’ and both are 
probably as exact and as concise as it is possible to make them in order to fit the 
various uses of the word by Shakespeare. And yet from the examples given by 
Schmidt,—the only ones, I think, where Shakespeare uses ‘shrine’ in a sym- 
bolical sense,—I think we can eliminate an underlying idea that the word stands 
for that which encloses or enfolds the very soul of absolute perfection: be it beauty 
of feature, perfection of purity: the highest heaven of love, or, as in the straight- 
pight Minerva, the inflexibility of lofty character; all of these shrines are enduring 
in position (‘postures’) and surviving beyond the art of feeble transitory humanity 
to fabricate.—Ep.] 

197. Straight-pight] Scummr (Lex.) and Watney (Cent. Dict.): Straight- 
fixed, erect.—CapELt (p. 121): This epithet has a classical air with it, being char- 


ACT V, SC. Y. | 


Poftures, beyond breefe Nature. 


CYMBELINE 407 


For Condition, 198 


A thop of all the qualities, that man 
Loues woman for, befides that hooke of Wiuing, 200 


Faireneffe, which ftrikes the eye. 
Come to the matter. 


Cym. I ftand on fire. 
Lach. All too foone I fhall, 


Vnleffe thou would’ft greeue quickly. This Po/thumus 


d 


Moft like a Noble Lord, in loue, and one 205 
That had a Royall Louer, tooke his hint, 

And (not difpraifing whom we prais’d, therein 

He was as calme as vertue) he began 

His Miftris picture, which, by his tongue, being made, 

And then a minde put in’t, either our bragges 210 


198. Poftures,| Postures Cap. et seq. 
breefe] bare Bailey (i. 265) 
Natiure.| Fi. nature,Glo. nature; 

Rowe et cet. 

200. for,| Ff, Rowe, Glo. for; Pope 

et cet. 

befides that] Fi, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Coll. ii, Glo. Cam. 
besides, that Han. et cet. 

201. eye.] Fi. eye— Rowe,-+, Dyce, 
Glo. Ktly, Cam. Coll. iii. eye:— Cap. 
et cet, 

202. I...fire.] Closing line 201, Pope 
et seq. 

fire.| Ff,+, Coll. Ktly. fire: 
Cap. et cet. 
205, 206. Mojft...Louer,| In parenthe- 


ses, Pope, +, Cap. Varr. 

205. Lord, in loue,| Ff, Rowe, Var. 
21. lord in love Glo. Cam. lord in 
love, Pope et cet. 

206. his] this Knt. 

hint,| Ff, Rowe, Glo. Cam. 
hint; Pope et cet. 

207, 208. (not...vertue)] No parenthe- 
ses, Rowe et seq. 

207, 208. therein...vertue)| In paren- 
theses, Pope et seq. (subs.) 

209. Mifiris] mistress’ Pope. 
picture,| picture; Pope et seq. 
tongue, being made,| tongue 

made, Pope, Han. tongue being made, 
Theob. et seq. 
210. iwt,| int, F.. iwt; Pope. 


acteristic of the goddess ’tis given to.—WALKER (Crit., i, 66): Was ‘straight- 
pight’ meant as a translation of succinctus? 

198. Postures, beyond breefe Nature] WaArBurToNn’s explanation, adopted 
by many editors, is given above.—Rev. JouN Hunter: Postures of beings that are 
immortal.—INcLEBy: Postures permanently rendered in marble, which are only 
transient in nature. [Has due weight been given to the word ‘Postures’? Is it 
not in opposition to the ‘Shrines’ of Venus and of Minerva?] 

198. Condition] Scumipr (Lex.): Temper, character, habit: ‘the condition of 
a saint, and the complexion of a devil.’—Mer. of Ven., I, ii, 143. 

205. Lord, in loue, and] Let credit be given to Pope for detecting the error ofa 
comma after ‘Lord,’ and the improvement in sense which follows its erasure. See 
Text. Notes.—Ep. 

206. Louer] Scummpt (Lex.) will furnish many instances where ‘lover’ is 
feminine. 

210, then a minde put in’t] VAUGHAN (p. 540): ‘Mind’ I take to mean not 
mere life, but ‘all mental qualities,’ such, for instance, as that more than Dianaic 


408 


THE TRAGEDIE OF 


| PXeaw V1) Ss We 


Were crak’d of Kitchen-Trulles, or his defcription 211 


Prou’d vs vnfpeaking fottes. 


Cym. Nay, nay, to’th’purpofe. 


Tach. Your daughters Chatftity, (there it beginnes ) 
He fpake of her, as Dian had hot dreames , 215 
And fhe alone, were cold : Whereat, I wretch 
Made fcruple of his praife,and wager’d with him 
Peeces of Gold, ’gainft this, which then he wore 
Vpon his honour’d finger) to attaine 


In fuite the place of’s bed, and winne this Ring 


220 


By hers, and mine Adultery : he (true Knight) 


arr. crak’d of] F:. crack’d in Rowe. 
crack’d-of Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. 
crack’d of F3F, et cet. 

Kitchen-Trulles] Ff,+, Dyce, 
Glo. Cam. kitchen trulls Cap. et cet. 

213. to’th’] to the Cap. et seq. 
214. Chajftity,| Ff. chastity; Rowe,+. 
chastity— Johns. et seq. 

(there it beginnes)] Ff, Johns. 
(subs.). there it begins Rowe,+. there 
it begins. Cap. et cet. 

215. her, as] her as Var. ’03, 713, ’21, 
Coll. Sing. Ktly. 
216. alone,| alone Fi et seq. 

Whereat, I wretch] Ff, Rowe, 

Pope, Han. Cap. Whereat, I, wretch, 


Coll. Whereat I, wretch, Dyce, Glo. 
Cam. Whereat, I, wretch! Theob. et 
Cet. 

217. praife,) Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Sta. praise; Theob. et cet. 

wager’d| wag’d Ff,+. 

219. finger)| F.. finger; F3F,, Rowe. 
jinger, Pope et seq. 

220; 226. of’s] F3F,,+, Dyce, Sta. 
Sing. Glo. Cam. ofs F2. of his Cap. et 
cet. 

220. Ring] ring, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. 

221. hers| her Han. 

Adultery:| Ff, Rowe, Cap. 
Varr. Mal. Cam. adultery. Pope et cet. 


chastity which Posthumus actually ascribes to her. Besides, the putting in the 
mind would not contribute to make the Italians ‘unspeaking sots,’ unless such 
mind were put in by the speaking Posthumus. 

arr. crak’d] Scumipt (Lew., s. v. crack): To talk in a blustering manner.— 
Morray (N. E. D., s. v. crack, 6.): To talk big, boast. [Thus also, Wricut, 
E. Dialect. Dict.] 

211. Trulles] Drabs, sluts, slatterns. 

215. as] See ‘As you did meane,’ line 505, below; and for other examples of ‘as’ 
equivalent to as if, see Abbott, § 107. 

217. Made scruple] Onrons (Gloss., s. v. scruple): That is, hesitate to believe 
or admit, to doubt. 

219. honour’d finger] His finger was honoured by bearing on it a token of 
such love and devotion. 

220. In suite] That is, by suing for it. 

221. By hers, and mine] Apsorr (§ 238): Mine, hers, theirs are used as pro- 
nominal adjectives before their nouns. In the following, mine is only separated by 
an adjective from its noun: ‘And his and mine lov’d darling.’—Temp., III, iii, 93. 
More remarkable are ‘what to come is yours and my discharge.’—Jbid., II, i, 253. 
‘By hers and mine adultery,’ [the present line], and ‘Even in theirs and in the 
commons’ ears.’—Coriol., V, vi, 4. It is felt that the ear cannot wait till the end 


ACT ¥V, Sc. v.] CYMBELINE 409 


No leffer of her Honour confident 222 
Then I did truly finde her, ftakes this Ring, 

And would fo, had it beene a Carbuncle 

Of Phcebus Wheele ; and might fo fafely, had it 225 
Bin all the worth of’s Carre. Away to Britaine 

Pofte I in this defigne : Well may you (Sir) 

Remember me at Court, where I was taught 


Of your chafte Daughter, the wide difference 229 
223. Ring,| Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. 226. Bin] Been F,. 

Sta. ring; Theob. et cet. 227. defigne:| design. Johns. 
224-220. And...Carre.| In parenthe- 228. Court,] court; Dyce, Glo. Cam. 

ses, Pope, Han. 229. Daughter,| Ff, Rowe, Johns. Sta. 
225. Phebus] Phebus’ Pope. daughter Pope et cet. 


of the sentence while so slight a word as her or their remains with nothing to depend 
on. The same explanation applies to mine, which, though unemphatic imme- 
diately before its noun, is emphatic when separated from its noun. 

222, 223. No lesser... Then I did truly finde her] Ecctrs: That is, 
perhaps, ‘than I did find her confident of it also.’ The sense of the word, however, 
may be somewhat altered when applied to her; in the latter case it seems to have 
the significance of resolute in maintaining —Scumipt (Lex., p. 1421, b.): Some- 
times one noun is implied by another, as in the present sentence, where the words 
mean ‘than J found her truly honest or honourable.’ 

224. Carbuncle] ‘Carbunculus is a precious stone, and shineth as Fire, whose 
shining is not overcome by night. It shineth in dark places, and it seemeth as it 
were a flame. And the kindes thereof be twelue, and the worthiest be those that 
shine and send out beames, as it were fire, as Isidore sayth. ‘There it is sayde that 
Carbunculus is called Antrax in Greeke, and is gendered in Libia among the Troy- 
lodites. Among these twelue manner kindes of Carbuncles, those Antracites be 
the best that haue the colour of fire, and be compassed in a white veine, which haue 
this propertie: If it be throwen in fire, it is quenched as it were among dead coales, 
and burneth if water be throwen thereon. Another kind of a Carbuncle is called 
Scandasirus: and hath that name of a place in the which it is found. In this 
maner of kind as it were within bright fires, bee seene as it were certaine droppes of 
gold. And this precious stone is of greate price without comparison in respect of 
other. . . . And if this be heated in the Sunne with froting of fingers, it draweth 
to it selfe strawe and leaues of bookes. . . . And if it be sometime graued and 
printed with waxe, it taketh with him a parte of the waxe, as it were with biting of a 
beast.’ [Batman adds: ‘The Carbuncle orient is of the colour of red lead, and in 
the night sparkling like a coale.’]}—Batman vppon Bartholome (Lib., xvi, chap. 26). 
—Pliny, in Chap. vii. of his Thirty-seventh Book, treats of Carbuncles or Rubies, 
and draws little or no distinction between them. Antony commends one of his 
soldiers to Cleopatra who says she will give him an armour all of gold. ‘He has 
deserved it,’ exclaims Antony, ‘were it Carbunkled Like holy Phoebus carre.’— 
IV, viii, 36 of this edition. WALKER (C7it., i, 155) quotes this latter passage and 
the present from Cymbeline among about twenty others as illustrations of Ovid’s 
‘Influence on Shakespeare.’ The description of the chariot of Phcebus is from 
the story of Pheton in Metam., ii, 107.—Eb. 


410 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. V. 


’Twixt Amorous, and Villanous. Being thus quench’d 230 
Of hope, not longing ; mine Italian braine, 

Gan in your duller Britaine operare 

Moft vildely : for my vantage excellent. 

And to be breefe, my practife fo preuayl’d 

That I return’d with fimular proofe enough, 235 
To make the Noble Leonatus mad, 

By wounding his beleefe in her Renowne, 

With Tokens thus, and thus: auerring notes 

Of Chamber-hanging, Pictures, this her Bracelet 


(Oh cunning how I got) nay fome markes 240 
Of fecret on her perfon, that he could not 
But thinke her bond of Chaftity quite crack’d, 242 
231. longing; longing, Theob. et 235. proofe enough,] Fi, Rowe. proof, 
seq. enough Coll. proof enough Pope et cet. 
232. Gan] ’Gan F;F;. 237. Renowne,] renown Cap. et seq. 
operare| F;. operate Ff. 239. Chamber - hanging] Chamber 
233. vildely] vildly F.F;. vilely Fy. hanging Ff, Warb. 
vantage] ’vantage Var. ’73. van- Bracelet| bracelet; Theob. Warb. 
tage, Cap. et cet. bracelet, Han. Johns. et seq. 
excellent.| excellent, Rowe ii, 240. cunning] cunning! Theob. Warb. 
Pope. excellent; Theob. et seq. Johns. cunning, Cap. et seq. 
234. And] And, Theob. et seq. a got)| got it) Ff,t+. got it/ Han. 
preuayl’d| Ff, Rowe, Cap. Sta. Cap. et seq. 
Dyce ii, iii. prevail’d, Pope et cet. 241. perfon,| person; Theob. Warb. 
235. fimular] similar Cap. Johns. 


229, 230. the wide difference ’Twixt Amorous, and Villanous] The 
CowpEN-CLARKES: It well becomes the greatest Poet-moralist that ever wrote 
thus to vindicate a truth too little understood and believed. Love,—true love, 
pure love, love itself,—is as widely different from vileness as heaven from earth. 
Love, in its unselfishness, ungrossness, unmeanness, is as opposite to base and evil 
properties as light and dark. Love, in its divine essence, is as contrary to coarse- 
ness as spirituality to materialism. 

232. your duller Britaine] That is, Posthumus. 

235. simular] Dyce (Gloss.), Scummpt (Lex.), ONtons (Gloss.), CRAIGIE (N. E. 
D.) all give ‘counterfeited’ as a paraphrase of this word. But is this wholly ac- 
curate? What was there untrue or counterfeit in Iachimo’s ‘averred notes’? 
His descriptions of the pictures, the chamber-hangings, etc., were not counter- 
feited, they were true and genuine. So also was the bracelet—even so the mole 
cinque-spotted. None of Iachimo’s proofs was ‘counterfeit.’ Posthumus drew 
wrong inferences from true premises. Would not specious or plausible be a para- 
phrase better than ‘counterfeited’?—Ep. 

238. auerring notes] Jonson: Such marks of the chamber and pictures as 
averred or confirmed my report—DowneN regards ‘averring’ as an active present 
participle equivalent to avouching; wherein I think he is right —Ep. 


ACD ESC oVial} CYMBELINE 


4iI 
I hauing ’tane the forfeyt. Whereupon, 243 
Me thinkes I fee him now. 

243. ’tane] tane Ff. ta’en Rowe. forfeit; whereupon—...now— Johns. 


243, 244. forfeyt. Whereupon,...now.] Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr. forfeit: where- 
F,. forfeit, whereupon,..now. FF. upon—...now! Ktly. forfeit. Where- 
forfeit; whereupon,..now— Rowe,+. upon,—...now— Cap. et cet. 


243. I hauing ’tane the forfeyt] Lapy Martin (p. 217): Imagine Imogen’s 
state of mind during the recital! Oh, the shame, the agony with which she hears 
that her ‘dear lord’ has indeed had cause to think her false! All is now clear as 
day. The mystery is solved; but too late, too late! She remembers the supposed 
treasure in the chest, although Iachimo does not speak of it. Then the lost brace- 
let! How dull she has been not to think before of the way it might have been 
stolen from her! Worst misery of all, Posthumus has died in the belief of her guilt. 
No wonder he wished for her death! What bitter hopeless shame possesses her, 
even as though all were true that he had been told! Only in the great revealing of 
all mysteries hereafter will Posthumus learn the truth. But till then she has to 
bear the burden of knowing with what bitter thoughts of her he passed out of life. 

Ah, dear friend, as I write, the agony of these thoughts seems again to fill my mind, 
as it ever used to do when acting this scene upon the stage. I wonder if I ever 
looked what I felt! It is in such passages as these that Shakespeare surpasses all 
dramatic writers. He has faith in his interpreters, and does not encumber them 
with words. None could express what then was passing in Imogen’s soul. At 
such moments Emerson has truly said, we only ‘live from a great depth of being.’ 

I cannot conceive what Imogen would have done eventually had Posthumus been 
indeed dead. But I can conceive the strange bewildered rapture with which she 
sees him spring forward to interrupt Iachimo’s further speech. He is not dead! 
He has heard her vindication! and she, too, lives to hear his remorse, his self- 
reproaches, his bitter taunts upon his own credulity. [I for one shall be ever 
infinitely grateful to Lady Martin for ushering me reverently into the very heart 
and soul of the women whom she so graciously reveals. Gifted, thrilling actors 
and actresses have there been, but none has had the power so supremely as Lady 
Martin of analysing and interpreting the innermost springs of emotion in the souls 
of the heroines whom she has represented on the stage. I cannot afford to lose 
one golden word of hers.—Ep.] 

244. Me thinkes I see him now] Murpocs (p. 147, gives an account of the 
acting of Posthumus by the younger Kean, ‘at the Arch Street Theatre in Phila- 
delphia about 1832,’ wherein occurs the following): At these words Kean sud- 
denly darted from his concealment, and, dashing down the stage, struck his attitude, 
and exclaimed with a wild outburst of passion, sharp, harsh, and rattling in tone, 
‘Ay, so thou dost, Italian fiend!’ As the instantaneous flash and bolt startle the ' 
beholder, so the actor seemed to electrify his auditors; they broke out into the most 
determined and prolonged applause. There came, in tones of mingled rage and 
remorse, the choking utterance of self-reproach: ‘Aye me, . . . To come.’ Here 
a sudden transition brought out the next lines in bold, ringing notes of adjuration: 
‘Oh give me cord, or knife, or poison, Some upright justicer!’ Now the voice was 
changed to impetuous command, fierce and imperious denunciation, high, strong, 
and full-toned: ‘Thou king, send out . . . A sacriligious thief to do ’t.’ This was 
followed by a mingling of the tearful tones of pity and pathetic admiration on the 


412 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT Vv, SC. v. 


Poft. 1 fo thou do’ft, 245 
Italian Fiend. Aye me, moft credulous Foole, 
Egregious murtherer, Theefe,any thing 
That’s due to all the Villaines paft,in being 
To come. Oh giue me Cord, or knife, or poyfon, 
Some vpright Iufticer. Thou King, fend out 250 
For Torturors ingenious : it is I 
That all th’abhorred things o’th’earth amend 
By being worfe then they, I am Pofthumus, 
That kill’d thy Daughter : Villain-like, I lye, 
That caus’d a leffer villaine then my felfe, 255 
A facrilegious Theefe to doo’t. The Temple 


245. Poft.] Post. [Coming forward. 250. Thou King,) Thou, king, Theob. 
Rowe. Rushing forward. Sta. Warb. et seq. 
I) I, Ff. Ay, Rowe. 251. Torturors| Tortures F2F3. Tor- 
246. Fiend.| fiend:— Cap. fiend! turers F 4. 
Rowe et cet. 252. th’] Ff,+, Dyce ii, ili. the Cap. 
Aye] Ff. Ay Rowe, Pope, Dyce, elicet. 
Sta. Glo. Cam. ah Theob. ii. et cet. oth] F,,+, Dyce ii, ii. oth’ 
247. murtherer| murderer Johns. Var. F.F;. o’the Cap. et cet. 
73 et seq. ; amend] Ff, Rowe i, Dyce, Glo. 
248, 249. being To] being, To Rowe Cam. amend, Rowe ii. et cet. 
et seq. . 254. lye,] lie; Theob. et seq. 
249. come.] come— Rowe,+. come! 256. facrilegious| facrilegious. F2. 
Cap. et seq. Theefe] thief, Theob. et seq. 
or knife] knife F;F4, Rowe. doo’t,| Ffi,+, Cam. Ktly. do’t; 
250. Iujfticer.] justicer! Pope et seq. Cap. et cet. 


words ‘The temple of virtue was she; yea, and she herself.’ Choking sobs now 
give way to vehement utterance and piercing tones that seemed to penetrate the 
brain with the wild notes of insanity: ‘Spit, and throw stones, . . . Be called 
Posthumus Leonatus.’ Here the climax of passion and fury culminated, while the 
words ‘And Be villany less than ’twas’ formed a forcible cadence. Then, as if all 
the elements of indignant reproach and self-condemnation had spent themselves, 
the actor poured forth a flood of tenderness that seemed to upheave the very 
depths of his soul, exclaiming in an ecstasy of love and grief: ‘O Imogen! My 
queen, my life, my wife! O Imogen, Imogen, Imogen!’ 

246. Aye me, etc.] STAUNTON (Atheneum, 14 June, 1873): Absurdly wrong. 
Read, unquestionably: ‘Give me,—most credulous fool, Egregious murderer, thief 
—anything That’s due to all the villains past, in being or To come!’—that is, 
‘Give me any punishment that’s due,’ etc. The old spelling ‘Aye me’ in part, 
perhaps, led to the error. [Does not Staunton overlook the force of ‘anything’? 
Posthumus cannot find epithets vile enough wherewith to stigmatise his own 
conduct, and therefore says, in effect, ‘call me anything that would befit the very 
worst of villains.’-—Ep.] 


250. Iusticer] REED: The most ancient law books have justicers of the peace 
as frequently as justices of the peace. 


INCIY Wy SEB AY] 


CYMBELINE 


413 


Of Vertue was fhe ; yea, and fhe her felfe. 257 
Spit, and throw ftones, caft myre vpon me, fet 
The dogges o’th’ftreet to bay me : euery villaine 


Be call’d Pofthumus Leonatus, and 
Oh Lmogen\ 


Be villany leffe then ’twas. 


260 


My Queene, my life, my wife : oh Jimogen, 


Imogen, Imogen, 
Imo. 


Peace my Lord, heare, heare. 


Poft. Shall’s haue a play of this ? 265 
Thou fcornfull Page, there lye thy part. 


/1f. Oh Gentlemen, helpe, 


Mine and your Miftris : Oh my Lord Pofthumus, 
You ne’re kil?d /mogen till now : helpe, helpe, 


Mine honour’d Lady. 


270 


Cym. Does the world go round? 


257. felfe.| self— Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. self, Var.’21, self Coll. i. (mis- 
print). 

258. Spit] Spet FF. 

me,| me; Coll. 
259. o’th’| oth’. o’the Cap. et seq. 
bay] bait F3;F,, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. 

260. Leonatus,] Ff,+, Coll. Ktly, 
Cam. Leonatus; Cap. et cet. 

261. *twas.]| Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Cap. twas! Theob. et cet. 

261; 262. Oh; oh] O Cap. et seq. 

262. wife:| wife! Rowe ii. et seq. 

263. Imogen.] Imogen! Rowe ii. et 
seq. 

264. Peace] Peace, F3F,. 


Lord,| Ff,+. lord! Coll. lord; 
Cap. et cet. 
heare.| Ff, Cap. hear! Knt, 


Ktly. hear— Rowe et cet. 
265. Shall’s] Shalls Fo. 


265, 266. Shall’s...Page] One line, 
Han. Cap. et seq. 

206. [Striking her, she falls. Rowe. 
He throws her from him: she falls. 
Ingl. 

267; 268. Oh] O, Cap. et seq. 

267. Gentlemen,| Gentlemen Ff. 

helpe,| Oh, help, Han. help, 
help! Cap. Huds. help Var. ’78, ’85, 
Mal. Knt, Sta. help, help Steev. Varr. 
Ktly. help! Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
[Catching her. Cap. 

268. Miftris:| Mistress— Rowe,+, 

Cap. Var. ’78, 85. Mistress. Coll. 
Pofthumus,] Posthumus! Rowe 
et seq. 

269. now:] Ff, Sta. mow. Coll. Dyce, 
Ktly, Glo. Cam. now— Rowe et cet. 

helpe, helpe,| Fi, Rowe ii,+. 
help, help! Rowe i. et cet. 

270. Lady.| Lady— Rowe,+. lady! 
Cap. et seq. 


257. and she her selfe] JOHNSON: That is, She was not only the temple of virtue, 


but virtue herself. 


260, 261. and Be villany lesse then ’twas] VAucHAN: That is, ‘let the 
term “villainy” hereafter signify some degree of criminality much less than it used 
to mean.’—Dowpen: Let any other villany seem little in comparison with my 


offence. [Unquestionably.—Eb.] 


264. heare, heare] Coxrrer (ed. ii.): It may perhaps be doubted whether 
Imogen does not mean here, here! intending to avow herself to Posthumus. 

268. Mine and your Mistris] See, for the use of ‘mine,’ line 221, or ABBOTT, 
§ 238. In the present case it is possible that ‘mine’ is used for the sake of euphony. 


414 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. v. 


Pofth, How comes thefe ftaggers on mee? 272 
Pife. Wake my Miftris. 
Cym. If this be fo, the Gods do meane to ftrike me 

To death, with mortall ioy. 275 
Pifa. How fares my Miftris ? 
Imo. Oh get thee from my fight, 

Thou gau’ft me poyfon : dangerous Fellow hence, 

Breath not where Princes are. 


Cym. The tune of Jmogen. — ; 280 
Pife.Lady, the Gods throw ftones of fulpher on me, if 
That box I gaue you, was not thought by mee 282 
272. comes] come Rowe et seq. 279. Breath] Fi, Rowe, Cap. Breathe 
273. Wake] Wake, Rowe ii. et seq. Pope et cet. 
Mijftris.| F;F,, Rowe, Pope, Cap. 280. Imogen.] Imogen! Pope et seq. 
Mijtais F,. Mistress! Theob. et cet. 281. Lady...on me,| One line, Pope,+, 
6. Miftris?] Pope et seq. Miftris. Cap. ; 
petal sy : the Gods...me, if] One line Mal. 
277. Oh] O Pope ii. et seq. et seq. 
fight,| sight; Theob. Warb. et 281. fulpher| fulphure F.F3;. sulphur 


seq. sight, Pisanio. Elze. Fy. : 
278. hence,| Ff, Rowe, Pope. hence; 281, 282. if That box] If what Pope-+, 
Cap. hence! Theob. et cet. If that Cap. 


272. comes] See ABBOTT (§ 335) for other instances of the ‘inflection in -s 
preceding a plural subject.’ ‘When the subject is as yet future and, as it were, 
unsettled, the third person singular might be regarded as the normal inflection.’ 

272. staggers] JOHNSON: This wild and delirious perturbation. 

280. The tune of Imogen] Eccres: Intended, probably, to express the nat- 
ural sweetness of her voice, which served to confirm her discovery. [From the in- 
terpretation suggested by Eccles there is not among editors, as far as I know, a 
dissenting voice, and, in confirmation, references are made to Arviragus’s ‘How 
angell-like he sings,’ IV, ii, 65, and to quotations furnished by Schmidt’s Lew., 
such as, ‘with thy tongue’s tune delighted,’ Sonn., 141; ‘the tune of your voices,’ 
Coriol., II, iii, 92, etc. Yet in the present instance it is not the tune of ‘a voice’ 
or of ‘a tongue,’ but of a woman. Is not ‘tune’ here the character, temper, dis- 
position? When Macduff hears that his wife and babes have been savagely 
slaughtered by Macbeth, he exclaims, ‘But gentle heavens, Cut short all inter- 
mission; front to front Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself; Within my 
sword’s length set him; if he ’scape, Heaven forgive him too!’ Thereupon Mal- 
colm replies, ‘This tune goes manly.’ There can be no reference here to the sound 
of a voice. It is the mood, the temper, the disposition. ‘Thus also it seems to me 
that ‘tune’ is used in the present passage, which I do not, and cannot, and will not 
believe Shakespeare ever wrote.—Ep.] 

281. stones of sulpher] Scummpt (Zex.): Thunderbolts. In Othello, ‘Are 
there no stones in heaven But what serve for thunder?’ V, ii, 234; and in 


Coriol., ‘And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt That should but rive an oak,’ 
Wail ex 52: 


ACT V, SC. v.} 


CYMBELINE 


415 


A precious thing, I had it from the Queene. 283 


Cym. New matter ftill. 
fmo, It poyfon’d me. 
Corn. Oh Gods! 


285 


I left out one thing which the Queene confeft, 


Which muft approue thee honeft. 


If Pa/anio 


Haue (faid fhe) giuen his Miftris that Confe@tion 
Which I gaue him for Cordiall, fhe is feru’d, 290 


As I would ferue a Rat. 


Cym. What’s this, Cornelius? 


Corn. The Queene (Sir) very oft importun’d me 
To temper poyfons for her, ftill pretending 
The fatisfaction of her knowledge, onely 295 
In killing Creatures vilde,as Cats and Dogges 


Of no efteeme. 


I dreading, that her purpofe 


Was of more danger, did compound for her 

A certaine f{tuffe, which being tane, would ceafe 

The prefent powre of life, but in fhort time, 300 
All Offices of Nature, fhould againe 


Do their due Funétions. 


Haue you tane of it ? 


Imo. Mott like I did, for I was dead. 303 


283. thing,]) thing! Wan. thing: 
Theob. Warb. et seq. 

284. full.| still? Pope et seq. 

288. honeft.| honest: Cap. et seq. 

288-201. If...Haue () giuen...Rat.] 
As quotation, Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 
Ktly. 

288. Pafanio] Fx. 

294. her,| Ff, Glo. Cam. her; Rowe 
Ge Cae: 

295. knowledge,| 
Glo. Cam. 

296. vilde] vild F3. vile Fy. 


knowledge Dyce, 


2906. Dogges| dogs, Cap. Varr. Mal. 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
297. efteeme.] 
Rowe et cet. 
I dreading,| I, dreading Theob. 

Warb. et seq. 

209; 302. tane] ta’en Rowe. 

299. cease] feize Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. 

300. life,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Glo. 
Cam. life; Theob. et cet. 

301. Nature,| Nature F, et seq. 


efieem, Ff. esteem; 


204. To temper] CoLzter (ed. ii.): This does not here mean merely to pre- 
pare or compound poisons, but to render them of the peculiar strength the queen 
might require. 

303. for I was dead] ‘That is, insensible, fainting, in a state of suspended 
animation,’ remarks Lertsom apud WALKER (Crit., ii, 329), who says: Compare 
‘Enter Arviragus, with Imogen dead,’ etc., IV, ii, 253. One might, perhaps, 
compare Spencer’s ‘Our pleasant Willy, ah! is dead if late.” So understood Sidney, 
Arcadia, Book iii, p. 297, led. 1598, p. 315 verso, ed. 1590]: ‘His Impresa was a 
catoblepta which so long lies dead, as the Moone (whereto it hath so naturall a 
sympathie) wants her light.’ Spenser, F. Q., Book iv, C. vii, St. ix.: ‘For she 


416 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. Vv. 


Bel. My Boyes, there was our error. 


Gui. This is fure Fidele. 305 

ImoWhy did you throw your wedded Lady fro you? 
Thinke that you are vpon a Rocke, and now 307 

304. My Boyes] As closing line 303, sure, Steev. Varr. Knt, Sing. Ktly. 
Han. Cap. Var. ’78 et seq. 306. fro] from Rowe et seq. 

305. is fure] is, sure, Theob. Warb. 307. Rocke,| rock; Cap. et seq. 


Johns. Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 1s 


(deare ladie) all the while was dead, Whilest he in armes her bore; but, when she 
felt Herself down soust, she waked out of dread Straight into griefe,’ etc —VAUGHAN 
(p. 541) imagines that this, ‘if correctly printed,’ is here ‘equivalent to “I was 
put to death.’”’ y 

306. Why did you . . . fro you ?] SPRENGEL (p. 9): This question seems to 
me to be more appropriate to Cymbeline than to Imogen. 

307. Thinke that you are vpon a Rocke, etc.] WarsurTon: ’Tis plain 
that the true reading is ‘upon a mock,’ 7. e., a farce, a stage play. Besides, the 
common reading is nonsense.—JoHNSON: In this speech or in the answer there 
is little meaning. I suppose she would say: Consider such another act as equally 
fatal to me with precipitation from a rock, and now let me see if you will re- 
peat it—CapELt (p. 121): To be hunting for either allusion or metaphor, or 
looking farther than the mere natural sense of the words of this speech, is to want 
perception of tenderness; and of the wild effusions of it, which a heart like that of 
the speaker’s pours out upon such occasions as this is—Mr Smita (apud Grey, 
ii, 228): The reading ‘rock’ is not true, as may easily be perceived by Posthumus’s 
answer: ‘Hung there like fruit,’ etc. From whence it is plain that Imogen had 
compared him to some tree upon a rock, and that the tree had slipt out of the text. 
T think it should be restored thus: ‘Think that you are a cedar on a rock, and now,’ 
etc., z. e., think that you are in a durable, permanent state of happiness, of which a 
cedar on a rock is a beautiful and strong metaphorical similitude. Further, the 
cedar beareth fruit at all times of the year; new fruit and old, the leaf never falleth. 
[As a distinctive family name, ‘Mr Smith’ can be hardly deemed a success. But 
he looms large when we learn, as we do from Dr Grey’s Preface, that he was ‘the 
most friendly and communicative man living,’ and furthermore that he was ‘the 
reverend Mr Smith of Harleston in Norfolk.’ He contributed valuable notes to 
Grey’s volumes.—Ep.]—HEatu (p. 490): Consider that you have just escaped 
being wrecked in the full persuasion of my infidelity and death, and are at last got 
safe on a rock; now throw me from you again if your heart will give you leave — 
Ecctes: She intends by the suggestion of imaginary peril to inspire him with an 
apprehension of his actual danger, and that remorse which he is likely to incur by a 
repetition of such violence.—PyYE (p. 281): Imogen comes up to Posthumus as soon 
as she knows the error is cleared up, and, hanging fondly on him, says, not as up- 
braiding him, but with kindness and good humour, ‘How could you treat your wife 
thus?’ in that kind of endearing tone which most of my readers, who are husbands 
and fathers, will understand, who will add poor to wife. She then adds, now you 
know who I am, suppose we were on the edge of a precipice, and throw me from you; 
meaning, in the same endearing irony, to say, I am sure it is as impossible for you 
to be intentionally unkind to me as it is for you to kill me. [Let me hasten to 
swear to the reader of the foregoing note that, to the best of my knowledge and 


ACT. V, SC. Vv. CYMBELINE 417 


[307. Thinke that you are vpon a Rocke, etca| 


belief, Pye did not intend it as burlesque. Nay, Singer prints it seriously as his 
own, word for word, without quotation marks or any reference to the real author. 
And be it remembered that for twenty-three years Pye was Poet Laureate of 
England!—Ep.]—Wautte (ed. i.): A passage. of impenetrable obscurity. There 
is probably a corruption of ‘you are upona rock.’ ‘Rock’ may be a misprint of 
neck; and perhaps the original words were something like ‘Think she’s upon your 
neck.’ No explanation has been given that is worth repeating —Dvyce (ed. ii, 
quoting White’s note): I believe the simple meaning of this affecting passage 
is: ‘Now prove your love; if you throw me from your arms now, my fall will be 
as fatal to me as if you had precipitated me from a rock.’—Hunson: There may, 
indeed, be some doubt as to what Imogen means by ‘rock,’ whether the edge of a 
precipice or something else. But she has a rare vein of humour in her composi- 
tion which crops out now and then; though, apparently, without her being at all 
conscious of it; as when she calls her hands ‘these poor pickaxes.’ Here her humour 
.2ems to take on a form of loving and trustful irony; for, after what has just passed 
in her hearing, she knows right well that her husband would die a hundred times 
rather than lift his finger to hurt her. So I think Heath’s explanation is very 
satisfactory.—INGLEBY: ‘Rock’ is here usually interpreted as a synonym for cliff 
or precipice. But it is surely enough to take it to mean rocky eminence, as a man 
who in shipwreck has found such a refuge. That Shakespeare meant this is proved 
by his recurrence to the nautical metaphor in line 468, below: ‘Posthumus anchors 
on Imogen.’ It is there he has found anchorage for his tempest-tossed ship; 
and with this in mind she very touchingly adds, ‘ Now throw me from you,’ 7. e., cast 
yourself once more adrift—TuiIsELToN: That is, ‘upon the firmest of firm ground.’ 
The idea of ‘a rock’ is the exact opposite of that suggested by ‘staggers,’ line 272.— 
DowDEN (p. 197): I would doubtfully make a suggestion, though I do not construct 
an emendation. Posthumus has struck Imogen to the ground; she has risen, 
clasped him in an embrace, and challenges him to throw her again. The action 
might playfully be imagined as that of wrestlers; in connection with ‘throw,’ 
a wrestling word which means grip (and also meant embrace), might be the right 
substitute for ‘rock.’ The word ‘lock,’ used by Milton in his Letter on Education, 
‘the locks and grips of wrestlers,’ might in some measure suit the situation, but 
I go no further than to mention this as a point possibly worth bearing in mind. 
[A plausible suggestion, indeed,—thus modestly, almost timidly, put forth by an 
editor whose learning and experience would almost justify a Warburtonian dog- 
matism; it cannot but enlist prepossession in its favour, coupled with a wish that 
further investigation may add to its probability or even certainty. Happily, this 
proves to be the case; in an ‘Additional Note’ (p. 212) Dowden continues]: When 
the foregoing note was written I had before me no example of such a phrase as 
‘upon a lock’ in the wrestling sense of the word ‘lock.’ Mr Hart gave me Eliza- 
bethan examples of the word,—not the phrase,—from Dekker’s Honest Whore 
(Pearson’s Dekker, ii, 149), and from Sir John Harington’s Epigrams, 16. He added 
from A Mistaken Husband (1675), IV, i: ‘If you are upon that lock.’ Through 
the kindness of Mr Bradley and Dr Murray I have seen the article of the NV. EF. D. 
which deals with ‘lock.’ It gives an excellent example of the word of the date 1616: 
J. Lane, Squiere’s Tale (Chaucer Soc.), 129, note: ‘Both closelie graplinge with a 
mutual locke.’ And under this wrestling sense of the word the Dictionary cites: 
1650, Cromwell in Carlyle’s Letters and Speeches (1871), iii, 40: ‘Being indeed 


27 


418 THE TRAGEDIE OF [AcT Vv, SC. v. 


Throw me againe. 308 
Poft. Hang there like fruite, my foule, 

Till the Tree dye. 310 
308. [Throwing her arms about his 310. Till] ’Till Rowe,+, Cap. Varr. 

neck. Han. dye.| die! Pope et seq. 


upon this lock’; 1672, Marvel, Reh. Transp., i, 159: ‘the lock... that I have 
the Nonconformists upon’; 1699, R. ’L’Estrange, Erasm. Colloq. (1711), 225: 
‘He was now upon the same lock with Balbinus’; 1723, Woodrow, Corr. (1843): 
‘_rather than put the Colonel wpon the lock.’ It seems certain that if Imogen 
had said, ‘Think that you are upon a lock, and now Throw me again,’ the words 
would have been in accordance with the usage of the language, and they would 
have been at once understood as meaning, ‘Think that you are engaged in a 
wrestling embrace, and give me another fall.—HerErorp: That is, as a ship- 
wrecked sailor. Cf. the close of Goethe’s Tasso: ‘So klammert sich der Schiffer 
endlich noch Am Felsen fest.—Rotre: If we suppose that Imogen here throws 
her arms about her husband’s neck, all is clear enough. Having done this, she 
says, ‘Now imagine yourself on some high rock, and throw me from you again— 
if you have the heart to do it.’ This action is necessary also to explain the reply 
to Posthumus, ‘Hang there,’ etc. Ingleby . . . thinks his interpretation is con- 
firmed by the nautical metaphor on ‘anchors,’ but it is too far off to have any bear- 
ing on the figure here. Besides, it is in the mouth of another speaker. [If Imogen’s 
words were to all of us, as to Grant White, of ‘impenetrable obscurity,’ I think we 
should gladly accept at once Dowden’s lock as an emendatio certissima; but to some 
of us the obscurity is so penetrable that whatever of vagueness there be, we find 
therein a heightened poetic charm. We recall that Posthumus has wavered in 
his sworn faith beyond the limits of forgiveness; and that even to his resolve to die 
he has not been steadfast. Natures like this, unless they are to be for ever feathers 
to every wind that blows, must consent to find peace and rest at last only on founda- 
tions as firm set as earth’s base. Such granitic foundation Imogen’s unshaken 
devotion offered.—Eb.] 

309, 310. Hang there like fruite, my soule, Till the Tree dye] From 
The Memoir of Lord Tennyson by his son (ii, 425, Oct., 1892) : ‘On Monday morning 
at 8 o’clock he sent me for his Shakespeare. I took him Steevens’s edition, Lear, 
Cymbeline, and Troilus and Cressida, three plays which he loved dearly. He read 
two or three lines, and told Dr Dabbs that he should never get well again. . . 
At his request I read some Shakespeare to him. . . . On Tuesday . . 


. at noon he 
called out, ‘‘Where is my Shakespeare? I must have my Shakespeare.” Then he 
said, “I want the blinds up, I want to see the sky and the light.” . . . On Wednes- 
day . . . at 2 o’clock he again asked for his Shakespeare, and lay with his hand 
resting on it open, and tried to read it. . . . Suddenly he gathered himself together 
and spoke one word about himself to the doctor— Death?” Dr Dabbs bowed his 
head, and he said, “That’s well.” . . . At a quarter to four he tried to read, but 


could not. He exclaimed, “I have opened it.”” Whether this referred to the 
Shakespeare opened by him at “Hang there like fruit, my soul, Till the tree die,” 
which he always called among the tenderest lines in Shakespeare; or whether one 
of his last poems, of which he was fond, was running through his head I cannot tell: 
“Fear not thou the hidden purpose of that Power which alone is great, Nor the 
myriad world, His shadow, nor the silent Opener of the Gate.” He then spoke his 


ACT V9 SC Vii CYMBELINE 419 


Cym. How now, my Flefh? my Childe ? 311 
What, mak’ft thou me a dullard in this AG? 
Wilt thou not fpeake to me? 
fmo. Your bleffing, Sir. 
Bel. Though you did loue this youth, I blame ye not 315 
You had a motiue for’t. 
Cym. My teares that fall 
Proue holy-water on thee ; /mogen, 
Thy Mothers dead. 
Imo, 1 am forry for’t, my Lord. 320 
Cym. Oh, fhe was naught ; and long of her it was 
That we meet heere fo ftrangely : but her Sonne 


Is gone, we know not how, nor where. 
Pifa. My Lord, 


Now feare is from me, Ile fpeake troth. Lord Cloten 325 
311. now,| now! Coll. Sing. Ktly. seq. 
Flefh?| flesh, Cap. et seq. 318. thee; thee! Theob. et seq. 
312. What,] What! Coll. Sing. Ktly. 319. Mothers] Mother’s F5F 4. 
314. [Kneeling. Rowe. 320. IT am] I’m Pope,+, Var. ’85, 
315. [To Guid. Arvir. Pope. Dyce ii, iii. 
Though| Tho’ Rowe ii,+. 321. Oh,] O/ Coll. O, Cap. et cet. 
ye] you Fy, Rowe,+, Var. ’78, naught] nought F,. 
85, Mal. long] *long Johns. Varr. Steev. 
not,|] not; Cap. et seq. Varr. Coll. Sta. Sing. Ktly. 
317. teares...fall| Ff, Coll. Dyce, Sta. 325. me, Ile] me. Ill Rowe ii. 
Glo. Cam. tears,...fall, Theob. et cet. troth| truth F,,+. 
318. holy-water| holy water Cap. et Cloten] Clotten F-.F;. 


last words, a farewell blessing, to my mother and myself. For the next hours the 
full moon flooded the room and the great landscape outside with light; and we 
watched in solemn stillness.’ 

312. mak’st thou me a dullard in this Act?] Sraunron: Do you give me, 
in this scene, the part only of a looker-on? Shakespeare was thinking of the stage. 

315. Though you did loue this youth, I blame ye not] Eccies: What 
cause for blame could possibly arise from their affection for the supposed youth 
it is not easy to discover. The turn of thought would be more natural by the sub- 
stitution of That for ‘Though.’ [Possibly, Cymbeline recalled his own opposition 
to Posthumus, whom, in express words, he has not yet pardoned; and we have here 
an intimation that the pardon will be eventually freely given, since it is given to 
those who, although brothers, were comparative strangers.—ED.] 

317. My teares] The tears are not shed in memory of the queen, albeit the 
punctuation of the Folio might give that impression.—Eb. 

321. and long of her] Possibly, in a very correct modern text it would be 
proper to print, as many editors have printed (see Teat. Notes), ‘and long of her,’ 
i. e., ‘along of her.’ The N. E. D. gives the present line under ‘Along.’ ‘Long’ 
occurs, however, so frequently in Shakespeare and elsewhere that, I think, the 
apostrophe is needless.—Ep. 


420 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. Vv. 


Vpon my Ladies miffing, came to me 326 
With his Sword drawne, foam’d at the mouth, and fwore 
If I difcouer’d not which way fhe was gone, 
It was my inftant death. By accident, 
I had a feigned Letter of my Matters 330 
Then in my pocket, which directed him 
To feeke her on the Mountaines neere to Milford, 
Where in a frenzie, in my Mafters Garments 
(Which he infore’d from me) away he poftes 
With vnchafte purpofe, and with oath to violate 335 
My Ladies honor, what became of him, 
I further know not. 
Gui. Let me end the Story: I flew him there. 
Cym. Marry, the Gods forefend. 
I would not thy good deeds, fhould from my lips 340 
Plucke a hard fentence : Prythee valiant youth 


326. Ladies] lady’s Rowe. 336. honor,| Ff. honour. Johns. 
327. drawne,| drawn; Cap. et seq. Ktly. honour; Rowe et cet. 
Jfwore] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 337- further] farther Coll. 

Knt, Sta. swore, Theob. et cet. ~-338. Let...Story:]| One line, Pope et 
328. was gone] went Pope,+. seq. 
329. death.] Ff,+, Coll. Dyce, Glo. ~ Story:] story. Coll. i. 

Ktly, Cam, [Advancing. Cap. 
330. Mafters] master’s Rowe. 339. forefend.| forefend! Theob. et 
331. pocket,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. seq. 

Cap. Coll. Sta. pocket; Theob. et cet. 340. deeds, fhould| deeds fhould F , et 
331, 332. him...her| her...him Rowe, seq. 

+. him...him Var. ’73. 341. Prythee] Prethee F..  prithee 


332. Milford,] Milford; Pope et seq. F3F,. 


328. she was gone] WALKER (Cyit., ii, 203), in scanning this line, finds that 
‘she was’ occurs in a place where ‘it is clear that [it] must have been pronounced as 
one syllable, in whatever manner the contraction was effected.’ Let the Text. 
Notes show how bravely Pope and his followers, rather than barbarously slur the 
English language, overleaped the difficulty.—Ep. 

330. feigned Letter] Craic: Either a misleading letter, or else the word is 
used to blind the eyes of Cymbeline to the savage conduct of Posthumus, or it may 
be that Pisanio wrote another forged (what might be called forged) letter. 

335. With vnchaste purpose] Eccrrs: We have heard the expression of 
of such purpose by Cloten, only in soliloguy—WatkeERr (Crit., iii, 332) asks, ‘did 
Pisanio learn it from a subsequent conversation with the prince in his apartments?’ 
That there was such a conversation Walker probably inferred from III, v, 181, 
where Cloten tells Pisanio to bring Posthumus’s apparel to his chamber, and that 
he must be ‘a voluntary mute to his design.’ 

337. I further know not] WyarT: It is not altogether satisfactory to me that 


Pisanio here drops out of the play without any recognition from Posthumus and 
Imogen of his sterling fidelity. 


ACT V; SC. V,] CYMBELINE 421 


Deny’t againe. 342 
Guz. I haue fpoke it,and I did it. 
Cym. He was a Prince. 
Gut. A moft inciuill one. The wrongs he did mee 345 

Were nothing Prince-like ; for he did prouoke me 

With Language that would make me fpurne the Sea, 

If it could fo roare to me. I cut off’s head, 

And am right glad he is not ftanding heere 

To tell this tale of mine. 350 
Cym. 1am forrow for thee : 

By thine owne tongue thou art condemn’d, and muft 


Endure our Law: Thou’rt dead. 353 
343: I haue) I’ve Pope,+, Dyce ii, 348. head,] head; Theob. Warb. et 
ili. seq. 
did it| did’t Walker (Vers., 79), 350. this tale of mine] the tale of me 
Ktly. Han. 
345. inciuill] uncivil Cap. Mal. Steev. 351. I am] I’m Pope,+, Dyce ii, iii. 
Varr. Coll. Ktly. forrow] Ktly. fory F2. forry 
one.| Ff,+, Coll. one: Cap. et F,F, et cet. 
Cele 353. Law:] law, Coll. Ktly. 
348. If it could] could it Pope, Theob. Thouw'rt] thou art Varr. Mal. 
Han. Warb. Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. Sing. 
me.| me; Cap. et seq. dead.| dead! Sta. 


off’s] offs F2. off his Ktly. 


342. Deny’t againe] VAUGHAN (p. 542): ‘Again’ here does not mean ‘over 
again,’ because Guiderius had already affirmed once, and had never once denied, 
but means ‘in contradiction to what you have affirmed.’ [Vaughan may be right, 
but I cannot perceive that his whole paraphrase is not contained in the one word 
‘deny’ and with no reference to ‘again.’ ‘Again’ has many a meaning besides 
repetition. In the Mer. of Venice Portia says that the Scottish lord borrowed a 
box of the ear of an Englishman and swore ‘he would pay him again when he was 
able’ (I, ii, 87). This does not mean he would pay him ‘over again.’ This example 
is taken from the V. E. D. (s. v. A. 2.) under ‘reaction, or reciprocal reaction,’ 
where a second example is also given, from Ven. & Ad.: ‘Who did not whet his 
teeth at him again,’ line 1113. Thus here, I would paraphrase: ‘Speak once 
more and deny what you have said.’—Eb.] 

351. I am sorrow for thee] Dyce: No one, I presume, will attempt to defend 
[‘sorrow’] who recollects that the expression ‘I am sorry’ occurs more than fifty 
times in our Author’s other plays——DeEtius: Perhaps ‘am’ should be omitted, and 
‘sorrow’ taken as a verb.—VAUGHAN (p. 452): Shakespeare, when he desires to 
represent a person affected by any condition in a high degree, styles him by the 
name of the abstract condition itself. Thus we have had ‘vanities,’ ‘miseries,’ 
and ‘sins,’ all instead of ‘vain,’ ‘miserable,’ etc. So here ‘I am sorrow for thee’ 
is Shakespeare’s genuine language, probably, for ‘I am truly and greatly grieved 
for thee,’ a more than adequate description of his natural state. [Thus Philip 
calls Constance, ‘O fair affliction.’ I think Vaughan isright. In the second line 
of this very scene the King has said, ‘woe is my heart.’—Ep.] 


422 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. v. 


Imo. That headleffe man I thought had bin my Lord 

Cym. Binde the Offender, 355 
And take him from our prefence. 

Bel. Stay,Sir King. 
This man is better then the man he flew, 
As well defcended as thy felfe, and hath 


More of thee merited, then a Band of C/otens 360 

Had euer fcarre for. Let his Armes alone, 

They were not borne for bondage. 362 
354. That headleffe man] Closing line 350. thy felfe,| thyself; Theob. Warb. 

, Pope et seq. et seq. 

fs bin] ae F,. 360. merited,| merited Dyce, Glo. 
355. [To his Guard. Cap. Cam. : 
357. King.] Ff, Rowe i, Coll. King, 361. fcarre] fcar F3F, soar Bailey 

Rowe ii, +. King: Cap. et cet. (ii, 138). 

[Advancing with Ary. Cap. alone,| alone; Theob. Warb. et 

358. This man] This Coll. i. (mis- seq. 

print). This youth Ktly conj. [To the Guard. Theob. 


362. borne] born F3F,. 


360. Band] For Epwarps’s humourous conjecture, pond, see IV, ii, 219. 

361. Had euer scarre for] CAPELL (p. 120): That is, for meriting or in at- 
tempting to merit—WuitEe: But Cloten had received no wounds in the King’s 
cause; he was killed before hostilities commenced. We have here, it would seem, 
the same word which has made so much trouble in All’s Well, IV, ii, ‘men make ropes 
in such a scarre.’ See Supplementary Notes, [where we find this quotation from 
Lingua, I, vi, Sig. B.: ‘Peasants Tle curb your head-strong impudence, And make 
you tremble when the Lyon roares, Yea [ye] earth-bred wormes, O for a looking 
glasse: Poets will write whole volumes of this scarre.’ Hereupon White remarks, 
“Now, here we have the same word [as in AJl’s Well] with exactly the same spelling: 
and in both passages the word refers to a startling event or emergency.’]}—Dycr 
(ed. ii.): I can see no reason to question the correctness of this passage —COLLIER 
(ed. ii.): ‘Scarre’ can hardly be right; possibly sense would be a fitter word.— 
SincER: It is impossible to make sense of ‘scarre.? There can be no doubt that 
the Poet’s word was score, and that the meaning is ‘than a band of Cloten’s had 
ever credit for, or than could be scored to their account.—The CowpEN-CLARKES: 
‘Scar’ appears to us as a very characteristic word for a veteran soldier to use, who 
can conceive no better claim of merit than having plenteous ‘scars’ to show.— 
Hupson: ‘Scar,’ in any sense known to us, can have no possible fitness here. 
Doubtless ‘scarre’ is a misprint for scorse, an old word used repeatedly, both as 
noun and verb, by Spenser, Drayton, Jonson, and others, in the general sense of 
bargain, exchange, offset, equivalent, payment. So that the meaning here is, ‘this 
man is worth more to thee than a whole regiment of such men as Cloten ever had 
an equivalent for.’—INcLEBy: That is, ever showed evidence of ‘desert in service,’ 
earning a like recognition. . . . The argument is simply, that how great soever is the 
desert of Cloten, or of any number of such fellows, it is less than that of Guiderius. 
[To me again, as heretofore, the difficulty lies, not in Shakespeare’s words, but 
in that any obscurity should have been found in them.—Eb.] 


ACT V, SC. v.] _ CYMBELINE 423 


Cym. Why old Soldier : 363 
Wilt thou vndoo the worth thou art vnpayd for 
By tafting of our wrath? How of defcent 365 


As good as we? 
Aru In that he fpake too farre. 


Cym. And thou fhalt dye for’t. 368 
363. Soldier:| Souldier: F.F;. Soul- Warb. Cap. 
dier, Fy. soldier Pope. soldier, Rowe 365. tafling...wrath] tainting...worth 
et cet. Craig conj. ap. Dowden. 
364. for] for, Pope.et seq. 368. Cym.] Cym. [To Gui. or To Bel. 


365. tafting| tempting Han. hasting Nicholson ap. Cam. 


365. By tasting of our wrath] WARBURTON: But how did Belarius ‘undo 
or forfeit his merit by “‘tasting” or feeling the King’s wrath? We should read 
hasting, 1. e., by hastening, provoking; and as such a provocation is undutiful, the 
demerit, consequently, undoes or makes void his former worth, and all pretensions 
to reward.’—HeEartu (p. 490): Here again Mr Warburton’s perverse subtility will 
not let him understand one of the most common figures in poetry. ‘But how,’ 
quoth he, ‘did Belarius undo or forfeit his merit by tasting or feeling the King’s 
wrath?’ Why, only by doing that which he knew must draw the King’s wrath 
upon him, and in consequence of which he must taste it. ’Tis the well-known me- 
tonymy of the effect for the cause. [To the same effect, Dr JonNson.|—CApELL 
(p. 120): Notwithstanding what [Heath] has urged in behalf of it, the old reading, 
‘tasting,’ cannot be justify’d; the ‘worth’ or desert of Belarius could not be undone 
by ‘tasting’ the King’s ‘wrath,’ but by doing what would cause him to taste it, by 
provoking or ‘hasting’; a word of the last editors, that is very happily put in its 
room. [That is, in Capell’s text. This reference to Warburton as the ‘last editor’ 
is one of the very few proofs that Capell’s edition, undated on the title-pages of the 
volumes, was, at last, prepared before Johnson’s, and after Heath’s Revisal; the 
title pages of both Johnson and of Heath bear the same date.—Ep.]—STaunTon: 
Johnson’s may be the true sense of the expression; but we have always conceived 
‘tasting’ here to mean trying, testing, etc., as in Twelfth Night, III, i: ‘Taste your 
legs, sir.’ And again, in Act III, iv: ‘put quarrels purposely on others, to taste 
their valour. —The CowpEN-CLARKES: We agree with Mr Staunton in thinking 
that here ‘tasting’ may be used in the sense of testing, trying. —INGLEBY: ‘Tasting’ 
is equivalent to ‘incurring (or sharing) some measure of.’ The word is used in the 
same sense in line 479 of this scene. The Clarkes think that in the present line 
the sense suggested by Staunton may lurk—viz., testing—but that it is a strained 
interpretation. [That the Clarkes consider Staunton’s interpretation strained, 
Ingleby may have learned by correspondence with them. I can find nothing to 
that effect in their edition—Ep.|—VAUGHAN: The sense is: ‘Why wilt thou de- 
stroy the claims of thy present deserving by making an officious trial of what our 
anger can do?’ [In reading paraphrases of Shakespeare’s language, it is always 
such a comfort to have the original to go to! In the foregoing discussion it is 
difficult to take any interest. As to the meaning of ‘taste,’ it is likely that even 
Falstaff, who lost his voice with halloing and singing of anthems, would have 
recalled the Psalm, ‘O taste and see that the Lord is good’; and for the rest of us, 
who can forget that solemn chapter in St. Luke where Christ says that ‘there be 
some standing here which shall not taste of death’?—Ep.] 


424 THE TRAGEDIE OF 


Bel. We will dye all three, 


[ACT Vv, SC. v. 


But I will proue that two one’s are as good 370 


As I haue giuen out him. 


My Sonnes, I muft 


For mine owne part, vnfold a dangerous fpeech, 


Though haply well for you. 
Arui. Your danger’s ours. 


Guid. And our good his. 375 
Bel. Haue at it then, by leaue 

Thou hadd’ft (great King )a Subieét, who 

Was call’d Belarius. 
Cym. What of him? He is a banifh’d Traitor. 379 


369. three,] three: Cap. et seq. 


370. proue] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Coll. 


Dyce, Glo. Cam. prove, Theob. et cet. 

one’s} of us Varr. Mal. Ran. 
Steev. Varr. Knt, Ktly. on’s Ff et cet. 
o’us Vaun. 

371. I haue] I’ve Pope,+. 

him.) of him. Rowe,+. 

371, 372. muft...part], Fi, Rowe i. 
must...part Han. Coll. Cam. must... 
part Johns. must,...part, Rowe ii. et cet. 

372. mine owne| my own Theob. ii. 
Warb. Johns. Varr. Mal. Ran. 

373, 374. Though...danger’s| One line, 
reading danger is, Steev. Var. ’03, 713. 

374. danger’s] dangers F3. 

375. And] Ay, and Cap. 

good his.) good, his. Theob. 
Warb. Johns. good yours Han. good is 
his Cap. good is your good. Elze. good 
is yours. Vaun. 


376, 377. then, by leaue Thou] Ff, 
Rowe. then, by leave: Thou Pope,+, 
Dowden. then—by leave; Thou Var. 
73. then, byleave. Thou Coll. Sta. Glo. 
Cam. then! By leave,—Thou Dyce. 
then.—By leave:— Thou Cap. et cet. 

by leaue...who] One line, 
Cap. Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, 
Dyce, Elze, Vaun. 

377, 378. Thou...call’d] One line, 
Pope,+, Var. ’21, Coll. 

377. hadd’/t| hadst erewhile Anon. ap. 


Cam. 


378, 379. Belarius...Traitor] One line 
(omitting He is) Pope,+. (retaining He 
is) Var. ’73. Belarius. Cym. Belarius! 
What of him?...Traitor Dowden conj. 

379. What...He is] Separate line, Cap. 
Varr. Mal. Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt, Coll. 
Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 

He is] he’s Sta. 


369,370. We will dye all three, But I will proue] The CowpEN-CLarRKEs: 
We follow the Folio in putting merely a comma after ‘three.’ Belarius is not 
asserting the simple fact that he and his sons are willing to die; he is saying that he 
and they will be willing to die if he be not able to prove that two out of the three 
are as well-born as he has declared Guiderius to be. [The comma after ‘all three,’ 
which the Cowden-Clarkes thus carefully note that they have retained, is recorded 
in the Text. Notes of the Cambridge Edition as omitted by them. I should not 
have referred to the oversight had it not apparently misled DowpeEn, who opines 
that ‘possibly the Clarkes are right in removing the comma.’—Ep.]—E1zE (p. 333): 
Cymbeline’s speech (‘And thou,’ etc.) is shown by the context to be addressed to 
Belarius, and not to Arviragus, who has committed no offence whatever. The two 
persons condemned to death by the King are Guiderius and Belarius, whilst Arvi- 
tagus is allowed to live; consequently, he is the only person to whom the words 
‘we will die all three’ can be assigned. [If the interpretation by the Clarkes be 


correct (and it seems undeniable), the latter portion of Elze’s note is rendered 
needless.—Eb.] 


ACT EV, .SC. Vail CYMBELINE 425 


Delile itas, that hath 380 
Affum’d this age : indeed a banifh’d man, 
I know not how,a Traitor. 

Cym. Take him hence, 
The whole world fhall not faue him. 

Bel. Not too hot ; 385 
Firft pay me for the Nurfing of thy Sonnes, 
And let it be confifcate all, fo foone 
As I haue receyu’d it. 


Cym. Nurfing of my Sonnes? 389 
381. age] age, Cam. 383. hence,| Ff. hence. Coll. i. 
man,| man; Theob. et seq. hence! Coll. ii, iii. hence; Cap. et cet. 
382. not] Om. F3F,. 385. hot;| hot. Johns. 
how, a] Ff. how a Rowe, Pope, 386. Sonnes,| sons; Theob. et seq. 
Han. Johns. Knt, Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. 388. I haue] I’ve Pope,+, Cap. Sta. 
Coll. iii. Dyce ii, iii. 
a Traitor] As quotation, Sta. 389. Sonnes?] sons! Dyce, Sta. Ktly, 
Glo. Cam. 


381. Assum’d this age: indeed a banish’d man] StTEEvENs: I believe 
[‘assumed’] is the same as reached or attained his age-——Tyrwuttt: As there is no 
reason to imagine that Belarius had assumed the appearance of being older than he 
really was, I suspect that instead of ‘age’ we should read gage; so that he may be 
understood to refer to the engagement which he had entered into a few lines before: 
“We will die all three: And I will prove that two of us are as good As I have given 
out him.’—HEntEy: ‘Assum’d this age’ has a reference to the different appearance 
which Belarius now makes, in comparison with that when Cymbeline last saw him. 
—VAaucHAN (p. 545): The editors and critics, down to Dyce inclusively, all show by 
their punctuation and remarks that they mistake the drift of this speech. It must 
be taken in conjunction with ‘indeed a banished man,’ and printed with this punctu- 
ation: ‘He it is, that hath Assumed this age indeed a banished man; I know not 
how a traitor.’ Meaning: ‘He it is that has indeed passed his days from youth 
into old age such as you see in banishment—but no traitor.’ [Dogmatism begets 
dogmatism. It is not difficult to assert that Vaughan utterly misses the point of 
this speech. Cymbeline’s exclamation consists of a question (‘What of Belarius?’) 
and an assertion (‘He isa banish’d Traitor’). Belarius answers the one, and denies 
the other, by replying calmly, ‘He it is that has reached this venerable age,’ and 
then with more warmth repels the assertion, ‘7 very truth a banish’d man, but what 
right have you to call him traitor?’ Waughan sadly mistakes the point, which is 
clear to every ‘editor and critic, down to Dyce inclusively,’ by making ‘indeed’ 
qualify ‘old age’—a point not in dispute, and omitting it as a concession to ‘banish- 
ment’ in order to make the denial of treachery more emphatic. Vaughan’s con- 
clusions appear to be frequently hasty, and, once formed, he is colour-blind to every 
other view. His notes are interesting and to be accepted with due consideration 
of his personal equation, which, indeed, is true of all notes——Ep.] 

387. all, so soone] DowbEN judiciously omits the comma, ‘believing that “all 
so soon” is a single phrase.’ 


THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. Vv. 


426 


Bel. Jam too blunt,and fawcy : heere’s my knee: 390 
Ere I arife, I will preferre my Sonnes, 
Then {pare not the old Father. Mighty Sir, 
Thefe two young Gentlemen that call me Father, 
And thinke they are my Sonnes, are none of mine, 
They are the yffue of your Loynes, my Liege, 395 
And blood of your begetting. 
Cym. How? my Iffue. 
Bel. So fure as you, your Fathers : I (old Morgan) 
Am that Be/arius, whom you fometime banifh’d : 


Your pleafure was my neere offence, my punifhment 400 
It felfe, and all my Treafon that I fuffer’d, 

Was all the harme I did. Thefe gentle Princes 

(For fuch,and fo they are) thefe twenty yeares 403 


301. Ere] E’er Rowe i. Glo. Cam. issue? Rowe et cet. 


arife,| arise Knt, Sta. Ktly, 
Cam. 
Sonnes,| sons; Cap. et seq. 
392. Then] Ffi,+, Dyce, Glo. Cam. 
Then, Cap. et cet. 
303. Father,| father Pope, Han. Glo. 


308. you, your Fathers:| you, your 
father’s. Johns. you your father’s. 
Cap. et seq. 

400. neere] near F3F,,4+, Cap. Varr. 
Mal. mere Tyrwhitt, Ran. et seq. 

401. and| made Vaun. 


Cam. Treafon that] treason: that Pope 
304. mine,| mine; Theob. Warb. et et seq. 
seq. Juffer’d,| suffer’d Knut, 
397. How?] How! Cap. et seq. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. Ktly. 
Iffue.] Ff. issue! Dyce, Ktly, 


Coll. 


391. I will preferre my Sonnes] That is, advance, promote, as in Imogen’s 
speech to Cloten, IT, iii, 148. 

400. Your pleasure was my neere offence, etc.] Jonson: I think the 
passage may better be read thus: ‘was my dear offence, my punishment Itself was 
all my treason; The offence that cost me so dear was only your Caprice. My 
sufferings have been all my crime.’-—Tyrwutrrt (p. 13): ‘Neere’ of the Folio 
plainly points out to us the true reading—meere, as the word was then spelt. 
[‘Mere’ means, of course, in its derivative sense, pure, only, and is a happy emenda- 
tion; but ‘neere’ is not without a meaning if transposed, ‘neere my offence.’ 
And thus THISELTON (p. 50) accepts it and paraphrases: ‘Your pleasure was almost 
my offence, my punishment was that offence itself.’ Transposition is so far from 
unusual in Shakespeare that it ought not to prove an insuperable objection — 
Scumipt (Lex., s. ». Meere, 1.) holds that in the present line mere should be trans- 
posed and the passage read: ‘Your mere pleasure was my offence.’—Ep.] 

403. (For such, and so they are)] VAUGHAN: Were ‘such’ and ‘so’ mere equiv- 
alents, we could plausibly amend the pleonasm thus: ‘For such in sooth they are.’ 


The phrase may well mean, ‘for they are princes both in princely qualities and in 
actual fact.’ 7 


ACT RVG ESCarvel| CYMBELINE 


427 
Haue I train’d vp ; thofe Arts they haue, as I 

Could put into them. My breeding was (Sir) 405 
As your Highneffe knowes : Their Nurfe Euriphile 
(Whom for the Theft I wedded) ftole thefe Children 
Vpon my Banifhment : I moou’d her too’t, 

Hauing receyu’d the punifhment before 

For that which I did then. Beaten for Loyaltie, 
Excited me to Treafon. Their deere loffe, 

The more of you ’twas felt, the more it fhap’d 

Vnto my end of ftealing them.’ But gracious Sir, 
Heere are your Sonnes againe, and I mutt loofe 
Two of the fweet’ft Companions in the World. 415 
The benediction of thefe couering Heauens 

Fall on their heads liks dew, for they are worthie 

To in-lay Heauen with Starres. A418 


410 


404. thofe Arts] such arts Pope,+. 
405. Could...was| One line (reading 
them; and my) Cap. 
405, 406. Could...As] One line, Johns. 
et seq. 
405. put into them] put ’em to Vaun. 
My...(Sir)| Sir, my breeding was, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
406. knowes:] knowes, Fo. 
F,F,. knows. Pope et seq. 
407. Children] children. Johns. 
408. Banifhment: I] banishment I 
Johns. 
too't,| FF; tot, Fy, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Glo. Ktly, Cam.  {to’t; 
Hiheobmetacet- 
409. before] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 


knows, 


Han. Warb. Cam. before, Johns. et cet. 


410. Beaten] Beatings Han. beating 
Ktly. 
Lovyaltie,| Loyalty, Ff. loyalty 
Cap. et seq. 
411. Treafon.| Fi,+, Coll. Ktly. 


treason: Cap. et cet. 
413. gracious] Om. Pope,+. 
414. againe,| againe: Ff et seq. 
loofe] lofe F 4. 
415. World.] Ff,+, Coll. Glo. Cam. 
world: Cap. et cet. 
417. liks| Fy. 
dew,| Ff, Rowe, Coll. ii, tii. 
dew! Pope et cet. 
418. in-lay] inlay Cap. et seq. 
Heauen| Heavens F,, Rowe. 


404. as] For instances of ‘as’ ‘approaching the meaning of a relative pro- 
noun,’ see ABBOTT, § 280. 

407, 408. stole these Children Vpon my Banishment] It is strange that the 
period which JoHNson put after ‘Children’ has not been followed.— VAUGHAN, ap- 
parently not aware of it, recommends a colon, and remarks: ‘Clearly, Belarius 
instigated her as soon as he received his sentence of banishment, and because of it; 
and Euriphile did not steal before Belarius instigated her to do so. The motive of 
Euriphile’s theft was not the banishment of Belarius, but his bribe and instigation, 
while the motive of Belarius’s instigation was his banishment.’ 

410. Beaten for Loyaltie] Apporr (§ 413): That is, ‘my having been beaten,’ 
where ‘the nominative is implied from the participial phrase.’ 

41s. sweet’st] For other examples of similar contraction, see ABBOTT, 


§ 473. 


428 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. v. 


Cym. Thou weep’ft,and fpeak’ft : 
The Seruice that you three haue done,is more 420 
Vnlike, then this thou tell’ft. I loft my Children, 
If thefe be they, I know not how to wifh 
A payre of worthier Sonnes. 
Bel. Be pleas’d awhile ; 
This Gentleman, whom I call Poldore, 425 
Moft worthy Prince, as yours, is true Guiderius : 
This Gentleman, my Cadwall, Aruiragus. 
Your yonger Princely Son, he Sir, was lapt 
In a moft curious Mantle, wrought by th’hand 
Of his Queene Mother, which for more probation 430 
I can with eafe produce. 
Cym. Guiderius had 
Vpon his necke a Mole, a fanguine Starre, 
It was a marke of wonder. 
Bel. This is he, 435 
Who hath vpon him ftill that naturall ftampe : 
It was wife Natures end, in the doqaTey 


To be his euidence now. 438 
419. {peak’/t:] speak’st. Johns. et seq. 429. th’hand] the hand Cap. et seq. 
421. tell’ft.| Ff,+, Coll. Glo. Cam. 430. Queene Mother] queen-mother 

tell’st: Cap. et cet. Pope,+. 

Children,| Fi. children— Rowe, 433. Starre,] star; Theob. Warb. et 
+. children; Cap. et seq. seq. 
424. awhile;] a while: Ff. a while— 435. is he,| Ff, Coll. zs he; Rowe et 

Rowe,+. a while. Cap. et seq. Get. 

426. as yours, is] as your’s is Coll. 437. end,...donation] Ff. end,...dona- 
428. Son,| Ff. son. Ktly. son, tion, Rowe,+.  end...donation, Han. 
Rowe et cet. Cap. et seq. 


lapt] lapp’d Mal. 


419-421. Thou weep’st .. . this thou tell’st] JoHNson: ‘Thy tears give 
testimony to the sincerity of thy relation; and I have the less reason to be incredu- 
lous, because the actions you have done within my knowledge are more incredible 
than the story you relate.’ The King reasons very justly. 

433. a Mole, a sanguine Starre] The CowpEN-CLARKES: Most poetically, 
as well as with a most subtle philosophical knowledge of Nature’s workings in the 
matter of kindred and inherited distinctive marks, has Shakespeare in this play 
given to the prince brother an almost precisely similar personal badge-spot with the 
one which lies upon the snow of the princess sister’s breast. Imogen’s ‘mole , cinque- 
spotted like the crimson drops i’ the bottom of a cowslip,’ and Guiderius’s ‘mole, a 


sanguine star,’ are twinned in beauty with a poet’s imagination and a naturalist’s 
truth. 


ACT V, SC.Vi4] CYMBELINE 429 


Cym. Oh, what am I 
A Mother to the byrth of three? Nere Mother 440 
Reioyce’d deliuerance more : Bleft, pray you be, 
That after this ftrange ftarting from your Orbes, 
You may reigne in them now : Oh Jmogen, 
Thou haft loft by this a Kingdome. 
fmo. No,my Lord: 445 
I haue got two Worlds by’t. Oh my gentle Brothers, 
Haue we thus met? Oh neuer fay heereafter 
But I am trueft fpeaker. You call’d me Brother 
When I was but your Sifter : I you Brothers, 
When we were fo indeed. 450 
Cym. Did you ere meete? 
Arut. I my good Lord. 
Gut. And at firft meeting lou’d, 453 


439. Oh,] O, Cap. OF Coll. 

what am I). what am I? Han. 
Walker, Cam. what, am I Dyce, Glo. 
Coll. iii. 

440. three? 
Johns. Walker. 
Nere] Ne’re Fy. Ne’er Rowe. 
441. Reioyc’d| Rejoiced at Ktly 
conj. 

Bleft, pray you be,| Ff, Glo. Cam. 
Bless’d, pray you be, Coll. i, ii, Dyce, 
Sta. blest, may you be, Rowe et cet. 
(subs.) 

443. now:] Ff, Rowe, Pope. now. 
Johns. Coll. i, ii. 2ow/ Theob. et cet. 


three! Theob. Warb. 


444. Thou hafi]| Thow ast or Thou’st 
Pope,+. 

Brothers] brother Var. ’03, ’13, 
’21 (misprint). 

447. heereafter| Fi, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Dyce, Sta. Glo. Cam. hereafter, Theob. 
CiGeL. 

449. Brothers,| Brother, Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, brothers; Theob. Warb. Johns. 

450. we] Ff, Rowe i. ye Rowe ii,+, 

451. ere] e’er Rowe. 

452. I] Ay, Rowe. 

453. low’d,| lov’d; Theob. et seq. 


440, 441. Nere Mother Reioyc’d deliuerance more] ScumipT (Lezw., s. v. 2. 
trans. 6.) here defines ‘rejoice’ as ‘to be joyful at,’ but gives only one other example 
of a similar use: ‘which I in sufferance will heartily rejoice. —Hen. V: II, ii, 159.— 
ONIONS gives the same definition with the same two examples.—ROLrFe excellently 
obviates any forced meaning of ‘rejoice’ by considering ‘deliuerance’ as the subject 
and ‘Mother’ the object of the verb. 

442. starting from your Orbes] This is generally explained as a reference 
to the Ptolomaic system, wherein the Sun and seven planets moved in concentric 
spheres, to which Shakespeare several times refers, and this may be the explanation. 
I incline to think, however, that ‘orb’ here means rank, station, coupled as it is with 
the assertion that the young princes are to return and again reign therein. For 
reference to the Ptolomaic system, see Ant. & Cleop., III, xiii, 175; Mer. of Venice, 
V, i, 74; Mid. N. Dream, II, i, 7, all of this edition, with notes thereon.—Ep. 

450. When we were so indeed] Jounson: If the Folio be right, we must give 
this speech to Arviragus.—WuiteE: Possibly Rowe erred in making the change 
[from ‘we’ to ye]. 


430 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. v. 


Continew’d fo, vntill we thought he dyed. 
Corn. By the Queenes Dramme fhe {wallow’d. 455 
Cym. O rare inftinct! 

When fhall I heare all through? This fierce abridgment, 

Hath to it Circumftantiall branches, which 

Diftinction fhould be rich in. Where? how liu’d you ? 


And when came you to ferue our Romane Captiue ? 460 

How parted with your Brother? How firft met them ? 

Why fled you from the Court ? And whether thefe? 462 
454. he] she Han. 460. when] whence Johns. (1771) ap. 
457. fierce] first Ktly. forc’d Coll. Cam. < 

conj. brief Bailey (i, 120). 461. Brother| brothers Rowe ii. et 
458. to it] to’t Han. ii. seq. 

459. Where?...you?] Where,...you, 462. And whether thefe?| and whether? 

Knt. These, Theob. et seq. 


456. O rare instinct] WALKER (Crit., iii, 330): Cannot ‘O’—sepius inter- 
polatum—be dispensed with here? At any rate, we must pronounce zmstinct. 
Thus IV, ii, 229: ‘’Tis wonder That an invisible instinct should frame them To 
Royalty Vnlearn’d.’ 2 Hen. IV: I, i, 85: ‘He that but fears the thing he would 
not know Hath by instinct, knowledge from-others’ eyes.’ Middleton and Rowley, 
Changeling, ed. Dyce, vol. iv, p. 289, [V, ii.], ‘O, but instinct is of a subtler strain!’ 
And so Milton, Par. Lost., x, 263: ‘By this new felt attraction and instinct.’ [It 
is strange that neither Walker nor his editor, Lettsom, noticed that, on the very 
passage quoted from this play, Malone’s note states that ‘the accent was laid on 
the second syllable of the word instinct. —ED.] 

457-459. This fierce abridgment ... rich in] GeErvinus (ii, 258, ate 
Aufl.): Whatsoever might be regarded as somewhat capricious or arbitrary in the 
weaving of the outer circumstances of the plot is far counter-balanced by the 
inimitable dénouement in the last scene. This found favour in even Dr. Johnson’s 
eyes. It is so rich in its abridgement that verily the Poet seems to be praising 
himself for it in these lines. 

457. fierce] Jonnson: ‘Fierce’ is vehement, rapid. 

459. Distinction should be rich in] Srervens: That is, which ought to 
be rendered distinct by a liberal amplitude of narrative. 

462. And whether these ?] Here we have an example of THEOBALD’s clear 
vision in emendation, for which not one syllable of commendation did he receive 
from his successors who profited by it. His note is as follows: ‘The King is asking 
his Daughter how she lived since her elopment from the Court; when she entered 
herself in Lucius’s service; how she met her brothers, or parted from them; why she 
fled from the Court and to what place; and having enumerated so many particu- 
lars, he stops short, and cries, “All these circumstances, and the motives of Belarius, 
Guiderius, and Arviragus to the battle, together with a number more of occur- 
rences by the bye, I want to be resolved in.””’ If Steevens had printed this note in 
full in the Variorum of 1778, MoncK Mason would have been spared the trouble 


of informing us (p. 377) who the ‘three were whose “motives” led them “to the 
battle.” ’—Ep. 


ACTEV GE SCs Vial] CYMBELINE 431 
And your three motiues to the Battaile ? with 463 
I know not how much more fhould be demanded, 

And all the other by-dependances 405 


From chance to chance? But nor the Time, nor Place 
Will ferue our long Interrogatories. See, 
Pofthumus Anchors vpon /mogen ; 


And fhe (like harmleffe Lightning) throwes her eye 
On him: her Brothers, Me: her Mafter hitting 470 
Each obie¢t with a Ioy : the Counter-change 


Is feuerally in all, 


Let’s quit this ground, 


And f{moake the Temple with our Sacrifices. 
Thou art my Brother, fo wee’l hold thee euer. 


Imo. 
To fee this gracious feafon. 
Cym. All ore-ioy’d 


You are my Father too. and did releeue me: 475 


Saue thefe in bonds, let them be foptall too, 478 


463. Battaile?] F:. 
Rowe. battle? Pope. 
Theob. et seq. 

464. more should] more, should Theob. 
et seq 


Batile; FF, 
battel, or battle, 


demanded,| demanded; ‘Theob. 
et seq. 

465. by-dependances] F,F;, Rowei,+, 
Cam. by dependances F,, Rowe ii. by- 
-dependencies Coll. Dyce, Sta. Glo. 
by-dependancies Cap. et cet. 

466. chance?| chance: Theob. et seq. 

But nor| But not F3F4,+-. 
467. our] Om. Pope,+, Cap. 
Interrogatories| Ffi,+, Var. ’78 
Ran. Ktly. inter-rogatories Cap. imn- 
tergatories Var. ’85, Mal. Steev. Varr. 
Knt. inter’gatories Coll. Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. 


470. On him: her Brothers, Me:] on 
him, her brothers, me, Rowe et seq. 
Majier] master, Rowe, Knt, 
CollS Dycem i, ii, Stas) Glow Cam: 
master; Pope et cet. 
471. Loy:] joy. Pope,+. 
472. Let’s quit] Lets quite F>. 
474. [To Belarius. Rowe. 
Brother,| brother; Theob. et seq. 
475. Father too,) Pope,+, Glo. 
Mother too, Ff, Rowe. father too; Cap. 
et cet. 
me:|] me, Rowe ii. et seq. 
476. feafon.| feafon! F,, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. 
477. toy’d| Ff, Rowe, Ktly. joy’d, 
Pope et cet. 
478. bonds,] Fi, Rowe. 
bonds; Pope et cet. 


bonds! Ktly. 


465. by-dependances] DowDEN: 
meaning. 


467. Interrogatories] TyRwHitr remarks that 


Our word 


‘side-issues’ comes near the , 


certain editors [see Text. 


Notes] have unnecessarily omitted ‘our’ in this line, inasmuch as ‘interrogatory’ is 
used by Shakespeare as a word of five syllables; see Mer. of Ven., ‘And charge us 


there upon intergatories,’ V, i, 325; again, two lines after: 
intergatory,’ etc., where the First and Second Quartos spell it ‘intergotories.’ 
‘let me answer to the particular of the intergatories,’ IV, iii, 207. 


in All’s Well, 


This spelling has been adopted by those editors who retain ‘our.’ 


‘Let it be so, the first 
Again, 


See Text. Notes. 


471, 472. the Counter-change Is seuerally in all] DricHton: That is, 


each reciprocates the other’s joy. 


432 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT VoaSCrave 


For they fhall tafte our Comfort. 
Imo. My good Matter, I will yet do you feruice. 480 
Luc. Happy be you. 
Cym. The forlorne Souldier, that no Nobly fought 
He would haue well becom’d this place, and grac’d 
The thankings of a King. 
Poft. Tam Sir 485 
The Souldier that did company thefe three 
In poore befeeming : ’twas a fitment for 
The purpofe I then follow’d. That I was he, 
Speake Jachimo, I had you downe, and might 


Haue made you finifh. 490 
lach. 1 am downe againe : 
But now my heauie Confcience finkes my knee, 492 


480. My good Master] Closing line I am, sir, he Vaun. I am, sir King 


479, Pope et seq. 

481. you.] you! Pope et seq. 

482. no] fo Ff. 

483. becom’d] become Warb. Johns. 
Coll. 

485. I am Sir] F.. ’Tis I am, sir, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. J am, great 


Sar, Ketly am) Si ahah et cee: f 


Anon. ap. Cam. Huds. 
488. follow’d.] Ff,+, Coll. Dyce, Glo. 
Cam. follow’d: Cap. et cet. 
489. Iachimo,] Jackimo; 
seq. 
~~ 490. you finish] your finish Ff, Rowe, 
Theob. Warb. 
492. [Kneels. Theob. 


Cap. et 


482. forlorne Souldier] DowpeEwn: I think this means lost, not to be found; but 
it is also used (as in ‘forlorn hope’) of soldiers who dared utmost peril. [The stage 
direction at the opening of the Second Scene of the present Act reads: ‘Enter... 
Leonatus Posthumus following like a poore Souldier.’ Does not ‘poor’ here refer 
to the garb, indicating that Posthumus was meanly dressed? Is it not to this mean 
attire that the King refers when he used ‘forlorn’? That Posthumus so under- 
stood the reference is, I think, clear by his direct response to it in his answer: 
‘Iam,’ he says, ‘the soldier . . . in poor beseeming.’ Hence, as it seems to me, in 
‘poor beseeming,’ or in poor appearance, we may probably find the meaning of 
‘forlorn.’—Ep.] 

483. becom’d] For other examples of ‘irregular participial formations,’ see 
ABBOTT, § 344. 

485. I am Sir] The Text. Notes reveal the struggles of editors to supply a gap 
in the metre, which the pause between two speeches renders needless.—Ep. 

487. a fitment] According to Bartlett’s Concordance this word is used—I’ll 
not say by Shakespeare—in only one other place in the Third Folio. It occurs in 
Pericles, TV, iii, 6, in the sense of what is befitting, which is, possibly, the exact 
sense of the present passage, where Posthumus’s forlorn or poor beseeming befitted 
his purpose.—Ep. 

490. finish] That is, die. See ‘Were present when she finish’d,’ line 47 of this 
scene. 


492. sinkes my knee] Lest we should fail to comprehend the meaning of 


ACT. V,,SC. V..| CYMBELINE 433 
As then your force did. Take that life, befeech you 493 
Which I fo often owe: but your Ring firft, 

And heere the Bracelet of the trueft Princeffe 495 


That euer {wore her Faith. 
Poft. Kneele not to me: 
The powre that I haue on you, is to fpare you: 
The malice towards you, to forgiue you. Liue 
And deale with others better. 500 
Cym. Nobly doom’d : 
Wee’l learne our Freeneffe of a Sonne-in-Law : 
Pardon’s the word to all. 
Aru. You holpe vs Sir, 
As you did meane indeed to be our Brother, 505 
Ioy’d are we, that you are. 
fof, Your Seruant Princes.Good my Lord of Rome 
Call forth your Sooth-fayer : As I flept, me thought 
Great Iupiter vpon his Eagle back’d 509 


493. befeech] ’beseech Theob. ii,+, 
Varr. Mal. Steev. Varr. Knt, Ktly. 

404. firft,] first; Theob. Warb. et 
seq. 

495. the Bracelet] your bracelet F3F4, 
Rowe, Pope, Han. 

499. forgiue you.] Fi, Coll. forgive 
you: Cap. et cet. 

500. better.| better! Theob. Warb. 
Johns. 


501. doom’d:] doom’d. Coll. doom’d! 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. 

504. holpe] Fz. 
holp FF, et cet. 

[To Pos. Cap. 

505. Brother,| brother; Theob. et seq. 

507-543. Good...Well] In margin, 
Pope, Han. 

509. Eagle back’d] eagle back Var. ’o03, 
“TG UOTE 


help’d Pope,+. 


these dark and enigmatic words THEOBALD thoughtfully and benignantly added a 
stage direction, ‘kneels,’ and has been followed, I think, by every succeeding editor. 
CAPELL is even more considerate. When Iachimo says ‘but your Ring first,’ 
Capell inserts a double dagger to make us understand that the ring is here presented; 
and when Iachimo continues, ‘and here the Bracelet,’ the editor, unwearied in 
kindness, inserts another set of daggers. A mother’s devotion during our infant 
hours in running to catch us when we fell and kissing the place to make it well, is as 
nothing to this fostering care of Shakespearian editors over our tottering dramatic 
steps.—Eb. 

505. As you did meane] That is, as if. See line 215, above, or ABBOTT, 
§ 107. 

509. vpon his Eagle back’d] In reference to what is possibly a misprint, 
“eagle back,’ in the last three Variorums, Collier remarks that if it were intentional 
it should have been printed ‘eagle’s back.’-—WALKER (Cyit., iii, 33): Would eagle- 
back be according to the laws of Elizabethan grammar? Horse-back was horse’- 
back, King John, I, i, 289: ‘Saint George . . . Sits on his horse’ back at mine 
hostess’ door.’ 1 Hen. IV: II, iv, 268: ‘this horse’-back-breaker.’ 

28 


434. THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT v, SC. v. 


Appear’d to me, with other fprightly fhewes 510 
Of mine owne kindred. When I wak’d, I found 
This Labell on my bofome ; whofe containing 
Is fo from fenfe in hardneffe, that I can 
Make no Collection of it, Let him fhew 
His skill in the conftruction. 515 
Luc. Philharmonus. 
Sooth. WHeere,my good Lord. 
Luc. Read,and declare the meaning. 


Reades. 
HenasaLyonswhelpe, fhalltohim/elfevnknown,with- 520 
out feeking finde, and bee embracd by a peece of tender 
Ayre: And when from a fiately Cedar /hall be lopt branches, 
which being dead many yeares, fhall after reuiue, bee toynted to 
the old Stocke, and frefhly grow, then fhall Pofthumus end his 
miferies, Britaine be fortunate, and flourifhin Peace and Plen- 525 
ite. 
Thou Leonatus art the Lyons Whelpe, 
The fit and apt Conftruction of thy name 
Being Leonatus, doth import fo much: 


The peece of tender Ayre, thy vertuous Daughter, 529 
510. fprightly| Fi. spritely Steev. et Wh. i, Sta. 
_ seq. spritelike Coll. ii. conj. 528. Leonatus] Ff. Leo-natus Cap. 
519. Reades.] Soo. [reads] Cap. et seq. 
520. W Hen as] Ff. Whenas Dyce, 529. [To Cymb. Theob. 


510. sprightly shewes] STEEvENS: Are groups of sprites ghostly appear- 
ances? 

512, 513. whose containing Is so from sense in hardnesse] Whose con- 
tents are so incomprehensible. ‘From sense’ means remote from sense. See ‘her 
value . . . words him . . . a great deal from the matter.’—I, v, 18, 10. 

514. Collection] Ontons: Inference, deduction. 

519. Reades] For CoLertpce’s opinion of this scroll, see V, iv, 144.—CoLLIER 
(ed. i.): It is very possible that the scroll and the vision were parts of an older 
play, [ed. ii.|—and such riddles were so popular, especially on our old stage, that 
Shakespeare may not have liked to omit it—WutreE (ed. i.): This scroll and the 
four following speeches are, in my judgement, plainly not from Shakespeare’s pen, 
which, however, I trace again in the last lines of the play—Staunton: This 
precious scroll, and its equally ridiculous exposition, form an appropriate sequel 
to the vision, and were doubtless the work of the same accomplished hand. Mr 
Collier’s suggestion is extremely probable. 

529. The peece of tender Ayre] I think we have here another instance of 
‘piece’ applied to woman. See Staunton’s admirable conjecture, V, i, 22.— 
Morray (NV. E. D., s. v. piece, subst. II, 9. b.) quotes an illustration of its applica- 


ACT IVGESCa vil] CYMBELINE 435 


Which we call Mollis Aer, and Mollis Aer 530 

We terme it Wulier ; which Mudier I diuine 

Is this moft conftant Wife, who euen now 

Anfwering the Letter of the Oracle, 

Vnknowne to you vnfought, were clipt about 

With this moft tender Aire. 535 
Cym. This hath fome feeming. 
Sooth. The lofty Cedar, Royall Cymbeline 

Perfonates thee: And thy lopt Branches, point 


Thy two Sonnes forth : who by Belarius ftolne 539 
532. this] Ff. thy Cap. Dyce ii, Wh. 532. [Lo Pos. Cap. 

i, Vaun. his Hertzberg conj. 534. to you] Ff. you, Rowe et seq. 
532. Wife] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. were] wert Vaun. Thiselton. 


wife; Theob. et seq. 


tion ‘to a woman or a girl’: ‘all princely graces, That mould up such a mighty 
piece as this is’ [Queen Elizabeth]—Hen. VIII: V, v, 26.—Ep. 

531. We terme it Mulier] According to Herrtzprre the derivation of 
mulier from molities is due to Varro, Cicero’s friend, as is found in Tertullian (de 
Vel. Virg., 204). It is found later in Lactantius, according to Dr W. Atp1s WricHt 
(NV. & Q., VIL, ii, 85, 1886), in the following passage: ‘Item mulier, ut Varro inter- 
pretatur, a mollitie est dicta, immutata et detracta littera, velut mollier.’—De 
opificio Det, c. xii. About three hundred years later (Circa A. D. 620) the same 
derivation, in nearly the same words, and attributed to Varro, occurs in the Origines 
of Isidore, as was pointed out by S. Srncteton (NV. & Q., II, ii, 163, 1857). The 
derivation of mulier from the comparative mollior, of mollis, is now accepted as the 
true one. The first appearance of Mollis Aer in English air fmishes the quest. 
F. C. Brrxpeck Terry (V. & Q., VII, iv, 105, 1887) pointed out, in Caxton’s 

’ Game of the Chesse, the first book printed in England, about 1474-75, the following 
passage: ‘For the Women ben lykenede unto softe waxe or softe ayer, and there- 
fore she is callyd Mulier whiche is as moche to say in latyn as mollis aer and in 
englissh softe ayer.’—The fifthe chapitre of the thyrd book. (Facsimile of V. Figgins, 
1853.) In the meantime, Dr WRIGHT points out that in A World of Wonders, . . . 


written in Latine by Henrie Stephen, . . . London, 1607, the following is to be 
found: ‘If any shall reply and say, that . . . the ancient Latinists neuer me’tioned 
these etymologies, . . . I answer that they had as good dexteritie in giving Ety- 


mologies of ancient latin words: witnesse the notation of Mulier, quasi mollisaér.’ 
Another example, proving its geographical distribution, is given by E. Scammpr 
(Hist. Monatsblatter, Posen, Feb., 1902, p. 28). ‘It appears,’ he observes, ‘that 
half a century before Cymbeline was written, this somewhat rare derivation occurs 
in a communication from the Starost Andreas von Koszezielecz to the city of 
Dantzig, in 1555. From this writing we learn that the daughter of a Burgher, 
one Stanislaus Papuga, had been put in prison for some offence not specifically 
mentioned. The Starost petitions the City authorities to set the damsel free out 
of regard, on the one hand, for the father’s anguish, and, on the other, that a woman 
is fashioned as delicately as the air: ‘“‘videant Dominationes Vestre huius sexus 
labilem naturam, ut merito natura mulier dicitur quasi molis [séc] aer.”’—-Ep. 


THE TRAGEDIE OF [Act Vv, SC. Vv. 


436 


For many yeares thought dead, are now reuiu’d 540 
To the Maiefticke Cedar ioyn’d; whofe Iffue 
Promifes Britaine, Peace and Plenty. 


Cym. Well, 
My Peace we will begin : And Cazus Lucius , 
Although the Victor, we fubmit to C@/ar, 545 


And to the Romane Empire ; promifing 

To pay our wonted Tribute, from the which 

We were diffwaded by our wicked Queene, 

Whom heauens in Iuftice both on her, and hers, 

Haue laid moft heauy hand. 550 
Sooth. The fingers of the Powres aboue, do tune 

The harmony of this Peace : the Vifion 

Which I made knowne to Lucius ere the ftroke 553 


543. Well,| Ff, Om. Pope,+. Well; 
Glo. Cam. 


540, 550. Whom...Haue] On whom 
heav’n’s justice...Hath Pope,+, Cap. 


544. My] By Han. Cap. Ran. 
begin:] begin, Theob. Warb. 
begin. Coll. Wh. Glo. Cam. 
546. Empire;] empire, Johns. 
547. Tribute,| tribute; Var. ’73. 
548. Queene,| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Queen; Theob. Warb. et seq. 


Varr. Ran. 

540. both...hers,| (both...hers) Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Varr. Mal. 
Ran. Steev. Varr. Knt, Sing. 

550. hand.] hand on. Ktly. 

552. Peace:] peace. Cap. Var. 773 et 


seq. 


544. My Peace we will begin] Jounson: I think it better to read: ‘By 
peace,’ etc.—Mason (p. 337): I have no doubt but Johnson is right. The sooth- 
sayer says that the label promised to Britain ‘peace and plenty,’ to which Cym- 
beline replies: ‘We will begin with peace, to fulfil the prophecy.’—Cottier (ed. ii.): 
There seems to be no other material objection to Johnson’s amendment that the 
change is not required. Cymbeline may mean by ‘My peace’ the peace which was 
to begin during his reign; he therefore adds that, for the sake of peace, he will 
submit to Cesar, and pay ‘the wonted tribute.’ 

545. we submit to Cesar, etc.] Boas (p. 577): So quixotic a surrender of 
the fruits of a hard-fought campaign is a fitting close to a work whose fantastic 
remoteness from ordinary experience gives it much of its peculiar charm,—a charm 
which is ill-served by the criticism that seeks in this dramatic romance the same 
profound significance as in the Tragedies or Historical Plays. 

549, 550. Whom heauens...on her, and hers, Haue laid most heauy hand] 
It is, as we all know, common in Shakespeare to omit, in relative sentences 
the preposition belonging to a verb. The old Shepherd in The Wint. Tale sae . 
‘To die upon the bed my father died,’ IV, iv, 508. Beatrice, in Much Ado 
says: ‘let me go with that I came,’ V, ii, 45.—Matong, in the Var. rioo 
gives many instances, and see ABBorT, § 394. In the present line we have hock 


‘on her’ and ‘hers,’ where the ‘on’ seems sufficiently to suggest the government 
of ‘whom.’—Ep. 


AGT AV ESGa pl CYMBELINE 437 


Of yet this fcarfe-cold-Battaile, at this inftant 
Is full accomplifh’d. For the Romaine Eagle 555 
From South to Weft, on wing foaring aloft 
Leffen’d her felfe, and in the Beames o’th’Sun 
So vanifh’d ; which fore-fhew’d our Princely Eagle 
Th’Imperiall Ce/ar, fhould againe vnite 
His Fauour, with the Radiant Cymbeline, 560 
Which fhines heere in the Weft. 

Cym. Laud we the Gods, 
And let our crooked Smoakes climbe to their Noftrils 
From our bleft Altars. Publifh we this Peace 
To all our Subieéts. Set we forward : Let 565 
A Roman, and a Brittifh Enfigne waue 
Friendly together : fo through Luds- Towne march, 
And in the Temple of great lupiter 
Our Peace wee’! ratifie : Seale it with Feafts. 
Set on there : Neuer was a Warre did ceafe 570 
(Ere bloodie hands were wafh’d) with fuch a Peace. 

Exeunt. 


lPaloNGSy, 573 


554. yet this] F., Wh.i. this yet F3F, 
ELiseds 


564. Altars.| Ff, Rowe, Pope, Coll. 
Dyce, Glo. Cam. altars! Theob. et 
Jcarfe-cold-Battaile| Fi (subs.). cet. 


scarce cold battle Johns.  scarce-cold 567. Luds-Towne] F2. Lud’s-Town 
Battel (or battle) Rowe et seq. F;. Lud’s Town F;,. 

555- accomplifh’d.| accomplish’d: Cap. march,| F3F,, Johns. Coll. 
et seq. martch, F:. march. Pope, Han. 


Romaine] Roman F,F 4. 
557. o'th’| oth’ F,. o’the Cap. et seq. 
559. Th] Ffi,+, Coll. Dyce, ii, ii. 
The Cap. et cet. 
562. Gods,| Gods! Theob.+. 
Rowe et cet. 


gods; 


march: Theob. et cet. 
569. ratifie:| ratifie. F;F,,+. 
570. on] on, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
570. there:] there! Coll. Dyce, Sta. 
Glo. Cam. there. Ktly. 
572. Exeunt.] Exeunt omnes. Rowe. 


554. yet this] Ware (ed. i.): The reading of the First Folio is in accordance 


with the usage of Shakespeare’s time. 


[In his ed. ii. White abandoned ‘the usage 


of Shakespeare’s time,’ and reads ‘this yet.’ Presumably by advice of his washer- 
woman, to whom, in difficult passages, as he states in his Preface, p. xii, he resorted.] 


567. Luds-Towne] See ITI, i, 39. 


572. Exeunt] Lapy Martin (p. 220): You know how I said that I never could 
leave my characters when the scene closed in upon them, but always dreamed them 


over in my mind until their end. So it was with Imogen. 


Her sufferings are over. 


The ‘father cruel,’ made so by the ‘step-dame false,’ has returned to his old love and 


438 THE TRAGEDIE OF [ACT V, SC. Vv. 


Se 


[572. Exeunt] 
pride in her,—the love made doubly tender by remembrance of all that he has caused 
her to suffer. The husband—ah, what can measure his penitence, his self-abase- 
ment! That he had dared to doubt her purity, her honour,—he who had known 
her inmost thoughts from childhood! But Imogen—can she think of him as before? 
Yes! She is truly named the ‘divine Imogen’; at least, she has so much of the 
divine ‘quality of mercy’ in her that she can blot from her memory all his doubts, 
all his want of faith, as if they had never been. Her love is infinite— beyond be- 
yond.’ Hers is not a nature to do things by halves. She has forgotten as well as 
forgiven. But can Posthumus forgive himself? No! I believe, never. The 
more angel she proves herself in her loving self-forgetfulness, the blacker his tem- 
porary delusion will look in his own eyes. Imogen may surmise at times the 
thorns which prick his conscience so sharply. Then she will quietly double the 
tender ways in which she delights to show her love and pride in him. But no 
spoken words will tell of this heart-secret between them. In her brothers Imogen 
has none but sweet and happy memories. These ‘two worlds’ are an immense and 
unlooked-for gain to her life; they fill it with new thoughts, new sympathies. She 
has their future to look forward to, their present to help. One can see how their 
unsophisticated natures will go forth to her; how the tender memory of the ‘rare 
boy’ Fidele will give an added charm to the grace and attractiveness of the sweet 
sister-tie; how, in their quiet hours with her, they will repeat the incidents of the 
cave-life. Imogen will never tell them the whole of her sorrow there. She fears 
they would not forgive Posthumus. We can suppose, too, how, in this so new 
life to them, the young princes would be for ever seeking this sweet councillor 
to guide them in the usages and customs ‘of the Court life, all so strange to them. 
Men will ask from women what they would be shy of asking from one another. 
Think of the pleasant banterings there would be at times between them! How 
amused Imogen would be at their mistakes in the Court etiquette! How often, 
laughingly, she would have to put them right; and how all these things would 
draw them nearer to each other! Then, too, the old soldier Belarius,—the tried 
retainer and friend, Pisanio! What a group of loving hearts about the happy 
princess! Caius Lucius also, in Rome, carrying in his memory tender thoughts of 
his once ‘kind duteous’ page Fidele, together with the admiring respect he feels for 
the noble Imogen, Princess of Britain. And Iachimo! The time is to come when 
his repentance will flow from a still deeper source. While at the Court of Britain 
he could not fail to hear all the misery he had wrought upon the noble lovers. With 
his own ears he heard the despair of Posthumus on learning the truth—his agony, 
his self-accusations—at the thought that he had taken away the life of the maligned 
princess. But even bitterer pangs of remorse than he then felt will assail Iachimo 
and never leave him,—for we find he is capable of feeling them,—when he learns 
that, before very long, the young noble life is quenched through the suffering and 
bitter trials which his treachery had brought upon it. For quenched, I believe, 
it is. Happiness hides for a time injuries which are past healing. The blow which 
was inflicted by the first sentence in that cruel letter went to the heart with a too 
fatal force. Then followed, on this crushing blow, the wandering, hopeless days 
and nights, without shelter, without food, even up to the point of famine. Was 
this delicately nurtured creature one to go through her terrible ordeal unscathed? 
We see that when food and shelter came, they came too late. The heart-sickness 
was upon her: ‘I am sick still—heart-sick.’ Upon this follows the fearful sight of, 


ACT V, SC. v.] CYMBELINE 439 


[572. Exeunt] 

as she supposes, her husband’s headless body. Well may she say that she is ‘noth- 
ing; or if not, nothing to be were better.’ When happiness, even such as she had 
never known before, comes to her, it comes, like the food and shelter,—too late. 
Tremblingly, gradually, and oh, how reluctantly! the hearts to whom that life 
is so precious will see the sweet smile which greets them grow fainter, will hear the 
loved voice grow feebler! The wise physician Cornelius will tax his utmost skill, 
but he will find the hurt too deep for mortal leech-craft to heal. The ‘piece of 
tender air’ very gently, but very surely, will fade out like an exhalation of the 
dawn. Her loved ones will watch it with straining eyes until it ‘Melts from The 
smallness of a gnat to air; and then Will turn their eyes and weep.’ And when, as 
the years go by, their grief grows calm, that lovely soul will be to them ‘Like a star 
Beaconing from the abodes where the Immortals are’; inspiring to worthy lives, 
and sustaining them with the hope that where she is, they may, in God’s good time, 
become fit tobe. Something.of this the ‘divine Imogen’ is to us also. Is it not so? 
This was my vision of Imogen when I acted her; this is my vision of her stil]. 


re 


ii 


IN de de Vel IN) ADE IL 


il ; = = 1 
) - a 
: F r = 
& 
: F 
a 
4 
4 
+ 
an 
hy b. 
h 
“a 
” 
} i 
*, 
OR: 
' 
i 
a 
-: 
1 
j 
a 
= 
( men the 
a 
~~, ; 
: i 
i 
I : 
; i r 
t. ; 
~ i 7" 
, : 


AG Pal NG ID iaS 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 


THE earliest attempt to determine the dates of Shakespeare’s Plays was made 
by Matone in the Variorum of 1778, vol. i, p. 320. In a list of the Plays there 
given chronologically, beginning with Titus Andronicus, in 1589, and ending 
with Twelfth Night, in 1614, Cymbeline is placed the thirty-first, and dated 1604. 
‘Cymbeline,’ says Malone, ‘was not entered on the Stationers’ books, nor reprinted, 
“until 1623. It stands the /ast in the earliest Folio edition; but nothing can be 
“collected from thence, for the Folio editors manifestly paid no attention to chrono- 
‘logical arrangement. Not containing any intrinsic evidence by which its date 
“might be ascertained, it is attributed to this year [1604] chiefly because there is 
‘no proof that any other play was written by Shakespeare in 1604. And as in the 
‘course of somewhat more than twenty years he produced, according to some, 
“forty-three, in the opinion of others, thirty-five, dramas, we may presume he was 
‘not idle during any one year of that time. This play was perhaps alluded to 
“in an old comedy called The Return from Parnassus: “Frame as well we might 
«ce, . Stories of love. . . . Or make some sire acknowledge his lost sonne,* 
““Found when the weary act was almost done.” [Prologue, lines 71, 72, ed. 
‘Macray.] If the author of this piece had Cymbeline in contemplation, it must 
‘have been more ancient than it is here supposed; for from several passages in 
‘The Return from Parnassus that comedy appears to have been written before 
‘the death of Queen Elizabeth, which happened on the 24th of March, 1603. 
‘Mr Steevens has observed that there is a passage in Beaumont and Fletcher’s 
‘Philaster which bears a strong resemblance to a speech of Iachimo in Cymbeline. 
“TSee V, ii, 9-13.] In Philaster, Philaster says, “I am hurt; The gods take part 
““Cacainst me; could this boor Have held me thus else?”’ [IV, iti, ad fin., ed. Dyce.] 
‘Philaster is supposed to have appeared on the stage about 1609; being men- 
‘tioned by John Davies of Hereford in his Epigrams, which have no date, but 
‘were printed, according to Oldys, in or about that year.’ For this assertion by 
Oldys, Malone gives, in a foot-note, as his authority: ‘Additions to Langbaine’s 
“Account of the Dramatic Poets. MS.’ Dyce gives Oldys’s MS. note in full: 
Philaster] ‘Written ab‘ the year 1610. See Davis, his Scourge of Folly, an epi- 
‘gram on it.’ 

In the next Variorwm, 1785, Malone repeats the date of Cymbeline as 1604, but 
places the play as the twenty-sixth in chronological order, and repeats the same 
comment just given. 

In Malone’s Own Edition, 1790, the date is changed to 1605; and its number is 
advanced to twenty-seventh, and it is placed between Lear and Macbeth. In his 


*‘Tn the last Act of Cymbeline two sons are found. But the author might 
have written “son” on account of the rhythm.’ 
+ The Return from Parnassus is now known to have been performed in 1597. 
See p. viii, ed. Macray. 
443 


2 x 
444 APPEND 


comments on the play itself Malone expresses his belief that Shakespeare having 
found the name ‘Leonatus’ in the Arcadia while writing King Lear, the name 
‘adhered to his memory, and he has made it the name of one of the characters in 
‘Cymbeline. The story of Lear lies near to that of Cymbeline in Holinshed’s Chron- 
‘icle; and some account of Duncan and Macbeth is given incidentally in a sub- 
‘sequent page, not very distant from that part of the volume which is allotted 
‘to the history of those British Kings. In Holinshed’s Scottish Chronicle we find 
‘a story of one Hay, a husbandman, who, with his two sons, placed himself athwart 
‘a lane, and by this means stayed his flying countrymen; which turned the battle 
‘against the Danes. This circumstance [which Shakespeare used in the Fifth Act 
“of Cymbeline], connected with [the name Leonatus from the Arcadia], renders it 
‘probable that the three plays of Lear, Cymbeline, and Macbeth were written 
‘in the same period of time, and in the order in which I have placed them. . . . 
‘In Cymbeline mention is made of Cesar’s immeasurable ambition and Cleopatra’s 
‘sailing on the Cydnus; from which, and other circumstances, I think it probable 
‘that about this time Shakespeare perused the lives of Czsar, Brutus, and Mark 
‘Antony.’ 

In the Variorum editions of 1803 and 1813 Malone continued to give Cymbeline 
the same date, 1605, and the same numerical position, the twenty-seventh, between 
Lear and Macbeth, together with the same comments. 


DRAKE (ii, 466) in all respects follows Malone, without discussion. 


In the Variorum of 1821, however, Malone changed its date to 1609, and changed 
its position in the list from the twenty-seventh to the thirtieth, and placed it be- 
tween Anthony and Cleopatra, 1608, and Coriolanus, 1610. The only change in his 
comments is that of substituting 160g for ‘1605’; all the rest remains the same, 
even to the oversight of repeating that he had placed it between Lear and Macbeth. 
He added, however, a solitary paragraph: ‘The versification of this play bears, 
‘I think, a much greater resemblance to that of The Winter’s Tale and The Tem- 
‘pest than to any of our Author’s earlier plays.’ 

Thus far we have traced the date only as it was computed by Malone, who 
was, in fact, the only editor who had paid any attention to the question. In 1799, 
however, there came a critic to the front, GEORGE CHALMERS, who, from external 
and internal evidence, greatly altered Malone’s List. In the order of composition; 
Chalmers (Supplemental Apology, etc., p. 419) placed Cymbeline the twenty- 
seventh, and between Lear and Macbeth (herein following Malone’s earlier arrange- 
ment), but attributed its composition to the year 1606. To this date he was led 
by what he deemed to be a piece of internal evidence, as follows: ‘In Act IT, Sc. i, 
‘[line 13], Cloten complains of a jackanapes, “who took him up for swearing.” 
‘This is a slight stroke at the statute, for “restraining the abuses of the players,” 
‘by imposing penalties on such dramatists as profanely used the name of God 
‘in any play or interlude. Shakespeare aimed many a stroke at the correcting 
‘hand of the players’ abuses, although he was, at the same time, deriving benefits 
‘from it; but he cuts delicately with a razor, and never, like Ben Jonson, with a 
‘cleaver. By putting his complaint into the mouth of such a prince as Cloten our 
“Poet shows his usual skill in the knowledge of mankind, and gives an additional 
‘specimen of his discrimination of character. This reforming statute commenced 
‘its operations on the players from the end of the session, on the 27th of May, 
‘1606.’ And, consequently, Cymbeline was written while the yoke still sat uneasy 


DATE OF “COMPOSITION—COLERIDGE—COLLIER 445 


‘on their necks, in 1606.’ Another piece of internal evidence Chalmers found in 
Belarius’s use of that puzzling word ‘Babe,’ III, iii, 27 (see the notes thereon), 
which he transformed into the Scotch coin, now generally spelled bawbee. ‘This 
‘was a sly stroke at the Scots coin, which King James had regulated by proc- 
‘lamation.’ i 


At three periods of his life CoLERmDcE ‘attempted’ (his own word) a Classifica- 
tion of Shakespeare’s Plays. A comparison of these different classifications would 
prove highly interesting, but hardly germane here, where we are solely concerned 
with the date of Cymbeline. Such a comparison would be a study of Coleridge’s 
mind rather than of Shakespeare’s. It is, perhaps, worth while, however, to note 
how Coleridge shifted the position of Cymbeline, as regards priority of composi- 
tion. In his list, attempted in 1802 (p. 246), this play is the very last, with The 
Winter’s Tale, The Tempest, and Othello as its immediate predecessors. In the 
last of 1811-12 (p. 59) it appears among the ‘Mature Plays,’ thus: Mer. of Ven., 
Tro. & Cress., Cymbeline, Macbeth, Lear, Hamlet, Othello, Tempest, and The Winter’s 
Tale. In the classification attempted in 1819 (p. 249) Coleridge says, ‘I think 
‘Shakespeare’s earliest dramatic attempt,—perhaps even prior in conception to the 
‘Venus and Adonis, and planned ‘before he left Stratford,—was Love’s Labour’s 
‘Lost. Shortly afterwards I suppose Pericles and certain scenes in Jeronymo to have 
“been produced; and in the same epoch I place The Winter’s Tale and Cymbeline, 
‘differing from Pericles by the entire rifacimento of it, when Shakespeare’s celebrity 
“as a poet, and his interest, no less than his influence as a manager, enabled him to 
‘bring forward the laid-by labours of his youth. The example of Titus Andronicus, 
‘which, as well as Jeronymo, was most popular in Shakespeare’s first epoch, had 
‘led the young dramatist to the lawless mixture of dates and manners.’ 


In 1836 Cottier published (New Particulars, etc.) extracts from a MS. (Ashm, 
MS., 208, art. x, leaf 200, Bodleian Lib.) bearing the following title: ‘The Book of 
‘Plaies and Notes thereof, per Formans, for common Pollicie.’ ‘These notes,’ says 
Collier, ‘were by Dr Simon Forman, the celebrated physician and astrologer, who 
‘lived in Lambeth, in the same parish in which Elias Ashmole afterwards resided. 
‘Forman was implicated in the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, but he died in 
‘1611, before the trial, the register of his burial in Lambeth churchyard being 
‘dated on the 12th of September in that year. The last date in his ‘‘Book of 
““Plays” is the 15th of May, 1611, so that he was a frequenter of the theatres 
‘until a short period before his sudden decease in a boat on the Thames. He was 
‘notorious long before his connection with Lady Essex, and excited a vast deal of 
‘jealousy on the part of the regular medical practitioners of London by giving 
“unlicensed advice to the sick, as well as by casting nativities; but he was at length 
‘able to procure a degree from Cambridge. . . . The words “for common policy” 
‘in the title of Forman’s “Notes” mean that he made these remarks upon plays 
‘he saw represented, because they afforded him a useful lesson of prudence or 
‘“Holicy” for the “common” affairs of life. I do not understand how it happens 
‘that the dates of his ‘‘Notes” are so irregular, but he begins with the 30th of April, 
‘1611, and goes on to the 15th of May, in the same year, and ends with the zoth of 
‘April, 1610.’ The heading to Forman’s account of ‘The Winter’s Talle’ states 
that it was ‘at the glob 1611 the 15 of Maye.’ Forman does not state at what date 
nor where he saw Cymbeline, but, as Collier says, ‘it must have been about the 
‘same time,’ and had it not been at the same theatre Forman would probably have 


446 APPENDIX 


mentioned it. The ‘note’ from the diary, which is here given, is copied from 
the facsimile by Halliwell, facing p. 416 of his Introduction to the present play. 
His modernised version of this facsimile, Collier’s also, and that of the New Shake- 
speare Soc. (Trans., 1875-76, p. 417) supply a punctuation which is lacking in 
Forman’s MS.: 

‘Of Cimbalin king of England 

‘Remember also the storri of Cymbalin king of England in Lucius tyme, howe 
‘Lucius cam from octauus cesar for Tribut and being denied. after sent Lucius 
‘with a greate Arme of Souldiars who landed at milford hauen, and Affter wer 
‘yanouished by Cimbalin and Lucius taken prisoner and all by means of 3 outlawes 
‘of the w’h 2 of them were the sonns of Cimbalin stolen from him when they were 
‘but 2 yers old. by an old man whom Cymbalin banished. and he kept them as 
‘his own sonns 20 yers wt him in Acave. And howe of [sic] of them slewe Clotan that 
‘vas the quens sonn goinge to milford hauen to sek the loue of Innogen kinge 
‘daughter whom he had banished also for louinge his daughter. and howe the 
‘Italian that cam from her loue convoied him selfe into ACheste and said yt was a 
‘chest of plate sent from her loue & others to be p’sented to the kinge. And in 
‘the depest of the night she being aslepe. he opened the cheste, & cam forth of yt 
‘And vewed her in her bed and the markes of her body. & toke awai her braslet 
‘& after Accused her of adultery to her loue &c And in thend howe he came wt 
‘the Romains into England & was taken prisoner and after Reueled to Innogen. 
‘who had turned her self into man apparrell & fled to mete her loue at milford 
‘hauen, & chanchsed to fall on the Caue in the wode wher her 2 brothers were & 
‘howe by eating a sleping Dram they thought she had bin deed & laid her in the 
‘wode, & the body of cloten by her in her loues apparrell that he left behind him, 
“& howe she was found by lucous, &c.’ 

For full particulars of the life of Dr Simon Forman, with its violent vicissitudes 
from surfeiting to starvation, and ‘abysmal inversions of the centre of gravity,’ 
to borrow a vigorous phrase of Carlyle, see article in D. N. B., by Sir Sidney Lee. 

Although Forman’s ‘Notes’ do not yield an exact date, yet what they do give 
is so far fixed that it proves an excellent anchor to control and steady the wavering 
fluctuations which helplessly drift about the dates of a majority of Shakespeare’s 
plays, and they cannot be but a soothing comfort to those betossed souls who deem 
the Date of Composition of prime importance. Five years either way is a margin 
adequately satisfactory to those readers whose interest centres solely in the plays 
themselves, and not in their external accidents. Forman’s year, 1610 or 1611, is 
a barrier this side of which there cannot be a date for the composition of Cym- 
beline, but all the years from the day when young Shakespeare first came up to 
London down to this barrier are as free as air to the chronologers. When Coleridge 
hinted that Cymbeline might belong to Shakespeare’s very earliest year he cast a 
seed which in the fullness of time was destined to germinate. It fell in Knicur’s 
path, and straightway, in fancy, it burgeoned on the spot. As a preliminary clear- 
ing of the ground Knight sprinkles Malone with withering scorn. The evidence 
adduced by that worthy workman is regarded by Knight as ‘conceived in the very 
‘lowest spirit of the comprehension of Shakespeare.’ Hereupon follows, by way of 
proof, a sentence (given above) from Malone, and Knight adds his comments: 
‘“Shakespeare having occasion to turn to that book [the Arcadia] while he was 
Poe King Lear, the name of Leonatus adhered to his memory, and he has 
: made it the name of one of the characters in Cymbeline.” Having occasion to 
turn to that book!—a mode of expression which might equally apply to a tailor 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—HUNTER—LLOVD 447 


‘having occasion for a piece of buckram. Sydney’s Arcadia was essentially the 
‘book of Shakespeare’s age—more popular, perhaps, than The Fairy Queen, as 
‘profoundly admired by the highest order of spirits, as often quoted, as often pres- 
‘ent to their thoughts. And yet the very highest spirit of that age, thoroughly 
‘imbued as he must have been with all the poetical literature of his own da y and 
‘his own country (we pass by the question of his further knowledge), is repre- 
‘sented only to know the great work of his great contemporary as a little boy ina 
‘grammar-school knows what is called a crib-book.” Knight gives no more heart- 
easing outburst before he turns to Chalmers and Forman. Malone having placidly 
remarked that he thought ‘it probable that about this time Shakespeare perused 
‘the lives of Caesar, Brutus, and Mark Antony.’ ‘“Perused the lives!”’ shrieks 
“Knight, but we really have not patience to waste another word upon this inso- 
‘lence, so degrading (for it is nothing else) to the country and the age which pro- 
‘duced it.’ As to Chalmers and his statute of 1606 against profanity on the stage, 
Knight offers no objection to ‘this ingenious suggestion’ except that it is not con- 
clusive as to the date of Cymbeline, because ‘we know from the Quartos that 
‘passing allusions were constantly inserted after the first production of Shake- 
‘speare’s plays.’ As to Forman’s ‘Note’—Collier having remarked that it gives 
the ‘impression of the plot upon the mind of the spectator, at about the time when 
‘the play was first produced’—Knight withholds his assent to this inference. ‘For- 
‘man’s note-book,’ he demurs, ‘is evidence that the play existed in 1610 or 1611; 
‘but it is not evidence that it was first produced in 1610 or 1611. Mr Collier, in 
‘his Annals of the Stage, gives us the following entry from the books of Sir Henry 
‘Herbert, Master of the Revels: ‘On Wednesday night, the first of January, 1633, 
““Cymbeline was acted at Court by the King’s players. Well liked by the King.” 
‘Here is proof that for mere than twenty years after Forman saw it Cymbeline 
‘was still acted and still popular. By parity of reasoning it might have been 
‘acted, and might have been popular, before Forman saw it.’ Knight’s conclu- 
sion in general is that ‘it will probably some day be established to demonstration 
‘that The Winter’s Tale and The Tempest belong to the Shakspere of six-and- 
‘thirty rather than to the Shakspere of six-and-forty. To whatever age they shall 
‘be ultimately assigned we have no doubt that on every account,—from the nature 
‘of the fable, as well as the cast of thought, and the construction of the language,— 
“Cymbeline will go with them. But, however this may be, we heartily join in the 
‘belief, so distinctly expressed by two such master-minds as Coleridge and Tieck, 
‘that the sketch of Cymbeline belongs to the youthful Shakspere.’ 


JosepH Hunter (ii, 292): The kind of history to which [this play] belongs 
renders it probable that it was written about the same time with King Lear, the 
date of which is about 1606. . . . I would not, however, be at all confident that 
this beautiful play, which classes rather with those produced in the freshness of 
the Poet’s age and genius, does not belong to the reign of Elizabeth, about the time 
when he produced As You Like It. 


W. W. Liovp (p. 499, Singer’s ed.): Proceeding upon judgement of internal 
evidence, there seems reason for conjecturing that Cymbeline has some obligations 
to an earlier year. Despite the unembarrassed mastery that pervades the greater 
part of it, some traces of quaintness obtrude themselves that are of a lower tone 
than Shakespeare’s absolute inspirations, and we are disposed to ask whether, for 
instance, in the vision of Posthumus and the interpretation of the Tablet, it is a 


448 APPENDIX 


reminder from another hand or from his own at an earlier period, that he did not 
trouble himself to obliterate at its last revision. 


Uxrict (ii, 172, Bohn’s ed.) is inclined to think that in Cymbeline we have a 
youthful attempt, which possibly ‘made but a temporary appearance on the stage, 
‘and was remodelled long afterwards. . . . That the whole piece belongs to 
‘the last years of Shakespeare’s poetical activity admits of no doubt... . Iam 
‘inclined to believe that Cymbeline was first performed somewhere towards the 
‘beginning of r61r.’ 


Tuomas Epwarps, whose satisfactory trouncing of Warburton’s dogmatism 

(‘grotesque audacities,’ Leslie Stephens calls it) has been so often recorded in the 
preceding pages, added to his Canons of Criticism: ‘The following REMARKS 
‘{which] are copied from Mr Roderick’s papers and inserted here as containing 
‘acute yet sober criticisms on Shakespeare’s words, and judicious yet easy explana- 
‘tions of his sense,’ etc. Accordingly, at the close of his remarks on Henry VIII. 
(p. 263), Roderick continues as follows: ‘It is very observable that the measure 
‘throughout this whole play has something in it peculiar which will very soon 
‘appear to any one who reads aloud; though at first he will not discover wherein 
‘it consists. . . . I think it can scarcely escape the notice of any pronouncer. . 
‘zy, There are in this play many more verses than in any other which end with 
‘a redundant syllable. . . . This fact (whatever Shakespeare’s design was in it) is 
‘undoubtedly true; and may be demonstrated to reason and proved to sense; 
‘the first, by comparing any number of lines in this play with an equal number 
‘in any other play; by which it will appear that this play has very near ‘wo redun- 
‘dant verses to one in any other play. And to prove it to sense, let any one read 
‘aloud an hundred lines in any other play, and an hundred in this, and, if he per- 
‘ceives not the tone and cadence of his own voice to be involuntarily altered in the 
‘latter case from what it was in the former, I would never advise him to give much 
‘credit to the information of his ears. Only take Cranmer’s last prophetic speech 
‘about Queen Elizabeth, and you will find that in the 40 lines it consists of, 32 are 
‘redundant and only 17 regular. . . . 2. Nor is this the only peculiarity of measure 
‘in this play. The Cesure, or pauses of the verse, are full as remarkable. The 
‘common pauses in English verses are upon the sth or the 6th syllable (the 6th 
‘I think most frequently). In this play a great number of verses have the pause on 
‘the 7th syllable. [‘‘Hepthemimeral cesura” the old grammarians callit. Bathurst 
uses it.—Ep.] . . . 3. Lastly, it is very observable in the measure of this play 
‘[Hen. VITT.] that the emphasis arising from the sense of the verse, very often clashes 
‘with the cadence that would naturally result from the metre, 7. e., syllables that 
‘have an emphasis in the sentence upon [sic] the account of the sense or meaning 
‘of it, are put in the uneven places of the verse; and are in the scansion made the 
‘first syllable of the foot, and consequently short; for the English foot is iambic. 
‘. . . What Shakespear intended by all this, I fairly own myself ignorant; but that 
‘all these peculiarities were done by him advertently, and not by chance, Sse 
‘think, as plain to all sense as that Virgil intended to write metre and not prose 
‘in his Aineid.’ 

These ‘remarks’ fell on unheeding ears in their own day, and as far as deriving 
from them a clew to the chronological order or dates of Shakespeare’s plays was 
concerned, they remained absolutely unknown for over a hundred years, until, in 
1871, the idea of employing this redundant syllable as a ‘verse-text’ occurred 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—HERTZBERG 449 


independently to Dr W. Hertzserc of Bremen, who applied it to this very play of 
Cymbeline, in the Introduction to his translation of it for the Ausgabe der Deutschen 
Shakes peare-Gesellschaft. His conclusion is as follows: ‘Finally, we come to the 
‘freer metrical movement. At the outset the ratio of feminine endings stands 
‘forth as the sure indication of chronological proof. The further I have pursued 
‘my investigations in this direction, the firmer has this criterion approved itself. 
‘I have ceased to restrict my calculations to a single act, but in the following 
“seventeen plays I have thoroughly and carefully extended my calculations through- 
‘out the whole play. The following result shows the percentage of the relation of 
‘eleven syllabled lines to the sum total of Iambus in dialogues (six feet iambics 
“and shorter lines included): 


‘Love’s Lab. Lost, 4%} Titus And., 5%; King John, 6%; 
IRAE IEE 11.39%; Com. of Err., Tape Two Gent., 15%; 
‘Mer. of Ven., mes Tam. Shr., 16%; Rich. III, 18%; 
‘As You Like It, 18%; Tro. & Cress., 20%%; All’s Well, 21%% 
“Othello, 26%; Wint. Tale, 31.00%; Cymb., 32%. 
‘Tempest, 32%; Hen. VIII, 44%; 


‘It is evident from this summary that those plays whereof the Date of Com- 
‘position can be positively determined by other sources, here fall into the rank 
‘which chronologically belongs to them. . . . Accordingly, we are enabled to 
“decide that the date of the composition of Cymbeline is 1611.’—(p. 292, seq.) 

Hertzberg notes also that other metrical forms, such as apparent Alexandrines, 
weak endings, etc., more or less bear out the same result as the ratio of feminine 
endings. As to rhymes, he says wisely, the test must be used with caution, regard 
must be had to the subject and its appropriate emotions. 


In 1874 The New Shakespeare Society was founded, with the avowed purpose of 
discovering the dates and chronological order of the plays. The publicity thence 
accruing brought to light the labours of FLray, who had been for years silently at 
work applying verse-tests to all the chief dramatists of the Elizabethan age. Then 
numberless zealous brains and countless busy fingers began counting rhymes, 
cesuras, female endings, strong endings, weak endings, anapzsts, and iambics, 
until at last the list is held to be complete, and Shakespeare’s ghost would be dis- 
credited if he denied a single date. But be the wise and just words of FURNIVALL 
never forgotten, when he said: ‘In no sense can metrical tests be called “scientific.” 
‘They get their value from the coincidence of their results with those of esthetic 
“criticism and external data. They are merely empirical; and though they yield 
‘the right result in twenty-five applications, there is no reason why they should do 
“so on the twenty-sixth. . . . To suppose that any one empirical test, like that 
‘of Rhyme, can settle the stage of development of a myriad-sided mind like Shake- 
‘speare’s is, to me, a notion never to be entertained. If, after close study, the 
‘results of any one such test are found to coincide all through with the results of 
‘sesthetic criticism and external evidence, I shall hold it a happy accident, not a 
‘scientific necessity. —New Shakespeare Soc. Trans., 1874, p. 32. 


After a thorough and painstaking enumeration of the ‘light and weak endings’ 
in all the plays, Professor INGRAM was enabled to make a list, wherein Ant. & Cleop. 
stands the twenty-sixth, with a percentage of both light and weak endings of 3.53; 


29 


450 APPENDIX 
Coriolanus, 4.05; Pericles (Shakespeare’s part), 4.17; Tempest, 4.59; Cymbeline, 4.83 
(the thirtieth in the list); and Winter’s Tale, 5.48. Prof. Ingram says that it seems 
fairly deducible from the list (of which I have given above only the last fourth of 
the number) that Cymbeline ‘undeniably belongs to the “weak-ending Period.”’’ 
The ‘weak-endings,’ be it observed, are ‘and, as, at’, but (=sed and =except), by, 
for (prep. and conj.), from, if, in, of, on, nor, or, than, that (rel. and conj.), to, with 
[t7 or 20 in all].—New Shakespeare Soc. Trans., 1874, pp. 448, 451. 


Freay (Life and Work of Shakespeare, p. 246, 1886): Cymbeline was probably 
produced after the Roman plays and before Winter’s Tale, and the Iachimo part 
was doubtless then written. There is, however, strong internal evidence that the 
part derived from Holinshed, viz., the story of Cymbeline and his sons, the tribute, 
&c., in the last three acts, was written at an earlier date, in 1606 I think, just 
after Lear and Macbeth, for which the same chronicler has been used. All this 
older work will be found in the scenes in which Lucius and Belarius enter. A 
marked instance in the change of treatment will be found in the character of 
Cloten. In the later version he is a mere fool (see I, iii; I, i.); but in the earlier 
parts he is by no means deficient in manliness, and the lack of his ‘counsel’ is 
regretted by the King in IV, iii. Especially should III, v. be examined from this 
point of view, in which the prose part is a subsequent insertion, having some 
slight discrepancies with the older parts of the scene. Philaster, which contains 
some passages suggested by the play, was written in 1611—IBw. (Chronicle of 
the English Drama, ii, 193, 1891): The historical part dates earlier, probably, 
c. 1606. As we have it, the play has been touched up by a second hand. Perhaps 
it was not acted in 1609, that being a plague year, and was not finished for the 
stage till after Shakespeare’s retirement. -[Fleay at first placed the date, accord- 
ing to the rhyme-test, in 1604, but he afterwards found that this extremely early 
date was due to a numerical error and he retracted it—See New Shakespeare 
Society Trans., 1876.] 


C. M. INcLesy: The conclusion I have arrived at [concerning the Date of Com- 
position] is that II, ii; III, i, and V, ii—v. were written as early as 1606-7, and 
the play completed in 1609-10; so that I agree, on the whole, with Mr Fleay’s 
first view, with an extension of the interval he supposed to have elapsed between 
the two compositions. 


Dr Ricwarp Garnett (Shakespeare Jahrbuch, p. 209, 1901) contributes, to this 
discussion of the date, what I cannot but regard as one of the most plausible of the 
manifold theories, founded as it is on grounds which occurred to me independently, 
and greatly influenced me throughout my study of the play. I much regret that 
space forbids the insertion of the whole of Garnett’s essay, instead of the following 
digest: ‘The Rev. John Ward, in the latter part of the seventeenth century, 
‘records the tradition that Shakespeare, when living at New Place, regularly sup- 
‘plied the London stage with two plays a year. That this tradition existed is 
‘unquestionable. Its authenticity is another matter,—this can be tested only 
‘by its harmony with what we know of Shakespeare’s dramatic productiveness 
‘in his later years, and its freedom from chronological impossibilities.’ Hereupon 
Garnett calls attention to a ‘remarkable phenomenon’ which has never yet received 
sufficient attention, and quite justifiably, inasmuch as it demands an admission 
to Shakespeare’s innermost councils; this reason Garnett does not bring forward, 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—GARNETT 451 


yet I think it may be urged in extenuation of the neglect. This ‘phenomenon,’ 
then, is ‘the extent to which Shakespeare endeavours to diminish the labour of 
‘dramatic composition. In every play known with certainty to have belonged to 
‘his later period, The Winter’s Tale only excepted, recourse is had to some device 
‘tending to save trouble to the author. In Tro. & Cress., as now generally admitted, 
‘he revives a former play. The Tempest is much the shortest of his dramas.’ [Is 
this quite correct? Are not Macbeth and Com. of Err. shorter than The Tempest?— 
Ep.] ‘Parts of Cymbeline seem to be from another hand. In Ant. & Cleop. and 
‘Coriol. he follows Plutarch, and, although with exquisite judgement, transcribes 
‘freely from his author. In Pericles and Timon he either adapts an old play, com- 
‘pletes the work of a contemporary, or hands his own drafts over to be pieced out 
‘by another. In Hen. VIII. and The Two Noble Kinsmen (if he had any hand in 
‘the latter) he collaborates with Fletcher. Except for the use of Plutarch in Jul. 
“Ce@s., and of Holinshed in the English Historical Plays, there is no trace in the 
“earlier works of the proceedure which we find so nearly universal in the later.’ 
The causes for the evasion of labour Garnett plausibly attributes to Shakespeare’s 
financial ease, and to his consciousness that his fame was already secure. In like 
manner, Pope, when finding that no version of the Odyssey could enhance the fame 
he had won by the J/iad, turned a portion of the work over to Fenton and Broome. 
“The labour-saving tendency of Shakespeare’s later period must be recognised as 
‘undeniable; and an obligation to produce two plays a year, with or without the good 
‘will of Minerva, affords as plausible a way of accounting for it as can be con- 
‘ceived.’ As for the date when Shakespeare retired to Stratford and began this 
labour-saving, we may suppose that it began with the first year wherein he affords 
distinct evidence of indebtedness to a colleague or to a predecessor. ‘This may be 
‘very fairly taken as 1607. Timon of Athens is such an instance, and there can 
‘be hardly any doubt that it either immediately followed or immediately suc- 
“ceeded Ant. & Cleop., which, from the Stationers’ Registers, we have every rea- 
son ‘to believe was produced in the winter of 1607-08.’ The termination of Shake- 
speare’s literary activity is generally placed in 1611. If then his contract to furnish 
two plays a year began to run in 1607, there must be eight plays allotted to these 
four years. But Garnett believes that his literary activity extended beyond 1611, 
even to a portion of the year 1613, wherein The Tempest was produced, so that two 
more plays are required, making ten in all. For Garnett’s arguments in favour of 
this late date, 1613, see p. 302 in The Tempest in The New Variorum edition. I 
must refer the student to the Jahrbuch for the reason why Macbeth and Othello are 
selected as these two additional plays; we are now concerned only as to the date 
of Cymbeline. The eight plays which may be assigned with ‘almost absolute 
‘certainty,’ says Garnett, to the period 1607-11 are: Pericles, Ant. & Cleop., 
Wint. Tale, Coriol., Two Noble Kinsmen (if partly Shakespeare’s). It remains to 
place the two additional plays, and apportion the twins to each year. This Garnett 
does in the final summary of his article as follows: ‘We conclude, therefore, that 
‘the tradition recorded by Ward is intrinsically probable, that it explains some 
‘remarkable phenomena connected with Shakespeare’s later plays, and that it 
‘might very well be accepted, if we could see our way to bring the dates of Othello 
‘and Macbeth a few years lower. Quite independently of Ward’s tradition, there 
‘is, we think, sufficient reason for reconsidering the accepted chronology of these 
‘dramas, although it may never be possible to arrive at an entirely satisfactory 
‘solution of the question. . Assuming provisionally that Ward is to be relied upon, 
‘and that Shakespeare did for some time contribute to the stage at the rate of two 


452 APPENDIX 


‘plays a year, we append a table showing the most probable order of their produc- 
‘tion: 

‘1607, Pericles, Ant. & Cleop. 

‘1608, Timon, Othello. 

‘1609, Tro. & Cress. (revival), Macbeth. 

‘1610, Cymbeline, Winter’s Tale. 

‘1611, Coriolanus, Two Noble Kinsmen (?). 


‘Here Shakespeare’s regular activity as a writer for the stage terminates. In 
“1613 he produces The Tempest and Henry VIII, but both are occasional pieces. 
‘The Tempest is entirely from his pen, but his share in Henry VIII is not con- 
‘siderable.’ 

In the earliest note on the Date of this play, quoted at length above by Malone, 
it is there stated that a parallelism had been detected by Steevens between a pas- 
sage in Cymbeline and one in Beaumont and Fletcher’s Philaster. These parallels 
abound in the commentaries on all of Shakespeare’s plays, and serve, apparently, 
little purpose but to display the extent of the commentator’s reading and the 
retentiveness of his memory. 

In the present instance, however, this parallel in Philaster turns out to be of 
more importance than usual; and thereby hangs a tale. Ever since Malone’s 
remark that the versification of Cymbeline bears a resemblance to that of The 
Winter’s Tale and of The Tempest much greater than to any of Shakespeare’s 
other plays, the conviction has gradually grown that these three plays, 
not in their versification alone, but in their general dramatic treatment, 
stand in a class by themselves, and that they are among the last, if not the 
very last, which Shakespeare wrote. This conviction has been assured by the 
substantial agreement of external evidence and internal evidence, such as metrical 
tests, etc. 

The exact date of Philaster is uncertain, but it was known vaguely to be con- 
temporaneous with these last plays; the precise date becomes of importance, how- 
ever, if we are to know whether or not Shakespeare followed (and shall we say— 
imitated?) Beaumont and Fletcher. 

In a note already quoted Malone (Var., 1821, ii, 453) observes that Philaster 
appeared before 1611; inasmuch as it is mentioned in an epigram by John Davies 
of Hereford. ‘Dryden,’ adds Malone, ‘mentions a tradition (which he might have 
‘received from Sir William D’Avenant) that Philaster was the first play by which 
‘Beaumont and Fletcher acquired reputation. . . . It may, therefore, be pre- 
‘sumed that it [Philaster] was represented in 1608 or 1609.’ Dyce (Introd. to 
Philaster, p. 199) quotes Malone’s note, and adds: ‘Perhaps so; but in conjec- 
‘tures of this kind little confidence can be placed.’ He gives, however, no closer 
date than Malone’s. If, then, Davies of Hereford refers to Philaster, the date 
of his book, The Scourge of Folly, becomes needful. Here we meet with a rebuff. 
The book bears no date on the title page; and our nearest authority is The Sta- 
tioners’ Registers. It is there entered as follows: ‘Richard RepMeER, entred for 
ane ae ae ae John wilson A booke called The Scourge of 

-, lil, 446). A. B. Grosart, who reprinted all of 
Davies’s Works, does not refer to that entry, which was first pointed out, I think, 
by Fray, and was unaware of its existence; he believed that the first endated 


edition was issued in 1611. Davies’s cmiseeable epigram,’ as Dyce befittingly 
terms it, is as follows: 


DATE OF COMPOSITION—GARNETT 453 


‘To the well deseruing Mr John Fletcher, Epig. 206, 
‘Loue lies ableeding, if we should not prone 

“Her vttmost art to shew why it doth loue: 

‘Thou being the subiect (now) it raignes vpon; 
‘Raign’st in arte, iudgement and inuention: 

‘For this I loue thee; and can do no lesse 

‘For thine as faire as Faithfull Sheepheardesse.’ 


Merely on the authority of this epigram, with its reference to Philaster or Love 
lies a Bleeding, it will hardly do to accept the Stationers’ Registers date of 1610 as 
proof that the play was written in that very year, or even very close to that year. 
This same epigram mentions another of Beaumont and Fletcher’s plays, The 
Faithful Shepherdess, concerning which Fleay (Eng. Dram., p. 178) has ‘no doubt 
‘that it was published in 1609.’ And I think, from Fleay’s subsequent remarks, 
that he might without violence have pushed the date into 1608. It is all, however, 
conjecture, as it is also with regard to Cymbeline. All that is absolutely assured 
from external evidence, in the case of both plays, is that they were in existence in 
1610; the question of precedence, being thus impossible of proof, offers an oppor- 
tunity for ingenious speculation so alluring that one well-equipped scholar, Dr 
AsHLEY H. THORNDIKE, has availed himself of it, and, in a recent interesting and 
highly valuable pamphlet, On the Influence of Beaumont and Fletcher on Shake- 
speare, has endeavoured to show that to this influence may be ascribed nearly all 
that differentiates these last plays of Shakespeare from their predecessors. 

Dr Thorndike’s contention, broadly stated, is that Shakespeare, always and 
dutifully anxious to catch popular favour, had been impressed by the instant and 
extraordinary applause wherewith Philaster had been greeted by his own audience 
at ‘The Globe, and had thereupon written Cymbeline,’ in which, ‘with varied and 
‘intense situations, and with tragic and idyllic contrasts, culminating in an elabor- 
‘ate dénouement, he followed so closely the style of play which Beaumont and 
‘Fletcher had made popular that, consciously or unconsciously, he adopted their 
‘methods of characterisation, and even made some use of their conventionalized 
‘types’ (p. 145). 

In vindication of his contention, Dr Thorndike very naturally seeks to prove 
that Philaster was written before Cymbeline. But his path is not clear in the ob- 
scurity which envelops both plays. His most positive assertion there anent is, I 
think, as follows: ‘[Philaster] was certainly acted by the King’s men while Shake- 
‘speare was still writing for the company. So, probably, were others of Beaumont 
‘and Fletcher’s plays; their fame was certainly high before he retired from the 
‘theatre. Our investigation makes it probable that Philaster and other of their 
‘romances preceded any one of his. The bare facts make it clear that, so far as the 
‘chronology is concerned, there was opportunity for direct influence between 
‘Beaumont and Fletcher and Shakespeare’ (p. 95). Unquestionably, but would 
not this influence rain from the heaven above upon the earth beneath? From the 
greater upon the less? With a scholar’s wise caution, Dr Thorndike speaks of the 
result of his investigation as ‘probable.’ His zeal is well tempered. And yet I fear 
his wish is father to the thought,—perhaps not a real, genuine, acknowledged 
father, but a step-father possibly. 

A large proportion of Dr Thorndike’s pamphlet is devoted to the plays of Beau- 
mont and Fletcher, and his chapter on Shakespeare and comparisons of Cymbeline 
and Philaster are chiefly concerned with the drama and the dramatic treatment; 


454 APPENDIX 


they are, therefore, not germane to our present subject, albeit of unusual interest. 
It is here sufficient to note that he regards the date of Cymbeline as ‘probably within 
‘the year of 1610’ (p. 30). On page 92 he questions whether Philaster were not 
written in 1608. 

In 1885 there appeared an Essay by Dr B. LEONHARDT, in Anglia (Bd viii, 3 Hit, 
p. 242), on The Relationship between Philaster and Hamlet and Cymbeline. T have not 
referred to it in its chronological order; its discussion of dates is more or less inci- 
dental. He does not enter deeply into the question of the dates of any of the 
three plays. The date of Philaster he places in 1607-1608, and holds that Cym- 
beline was written at the same time, which he conceives is amply justified by 
Forman’s Diary in 1610-1611. It is perhaps noteworthy that in the comparison 
between these two plays, made both by Leonhardt and later by Thorndike, parallel- 
isms are drawn (without exception, I think) from the Imogen-story. All the Holin- 
shed portion is as completely ignored as if it were non-existent. Naturally, a major- 
ity of the parallelisms are weak and shadowy, and derive what value they have from 
their cumulative force. Moreover, in noting these parallels, very seldom is at- 
tention called to the infinitely superior poetic beauty of Shakespeare’s thought, 
thus precluding the idea, as I think, that it was derived from Beaumont and Fletcher, 
which, however, Leonhardt does not suggest. 


RECAPITULATION: 
2778 } Epmonp MALONE 
ryig | POMOND | MEALONEE « jalinidis o'iesaie\iaeigair iat ena Gates a 1604 
£700 MALONE Sots chars bs Saves ares dcia arte eke Cee roe ote OT eee 1605 
T7090. ‘GEO: CHALMERS, +5102. .2e oleae cronies io abit oe See eT 1606 
E520 IVEATONE. 4 rem vers sree oeicter lente Sg ro al ais sate eet eee STs tone ee a RE 1609 
£943) J.B. Comimra.-. oe Ha asdhencictttenchote lars teee Canter eee not earlier than 1609 
1845. Reve JOSEPH. ELUNTER'.. fe a scrisreeteran eee tee ee about 1606 
1847 SULRICE i). trae. eee cet tee ee first performed at beginning of 1611 
TSS SINS DE UIUS oy. cavctore-toraroveterr tev atte eters aero eae shortly before 1610 or 1611 
E957 Acs DY Ciiaeh ator. 0 xclas chopra OR ee ohetn ah ee probably 1609 
LOS TRC. BATHURST 5.7. . Ss seta ee te Te nh end te any time after 1603 
1859? H. StaunToN, Rev. Joun Hunter, G. G. GERVINUS................ 1609 
TQ62 REG. WHITE ig. dsc acta hee ek Oe 1609 or 1610 
1877) Pos PURNIVALL nections on Oe ce ere ee oe an 1610? 
1878) HP. STOKES 9.5 «cctensee cle esters inte sir tie eee ere ene eee 1610 
1881) HN. HODSON. tiesere cee Ger oe eee ee ee 1610 and 1611 
1885. B. LEoNHARDUS 5. cies ee oe ree re ee before 1608 
1886) CMa INGEEBY: Dai) Eis Vanit sine ne ee ee 1606 
thessiesthin (520A oe ee eee 1609 and 1610 
T89E° FAG WELEAY sence sree ciel Gs rea ree ee 1609 
root Ry GARNET Ys, 5 c.canc ee vee ase eee Ee 1610 
toon ASH. THORNDIKE? vir. cis cs eae ae ee within 1610 
1903 E. Downen, W. J. Rotre, K. Dricuton, C. Porter and H. Crarx, 
Wis J GRAIG: oradats cole tht ates eal ae ee oe 1609 and 1610 


n.d. A. J. W8ATR Sc .tcg5..0: tec ee between 1607 and 1611 


SOURCE Off THE «PLOT 455 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT 


In Gerard Langbaine’s An Account of the English Dramatick Poets, etc., 1691, p. 
456, there is the following account of Cymbeline: ‘This Play, tho’ the Title bears 
‘the Name of a King of Brute’s Lineage: yet I think ows [sic] little to the Chron- 
we of those times, as far as I can collect, from Grafton. Stow, Milton, etc. 

But the subject is rather built upon a Novel in Boccace, viz. Day 2. Nov. o. 
‘This play was reviv’d by Durfey about seven Years since, under the Title of The 
‘Injured Princefs, or The Fatal Wager.’ 

Of this information Pope availed himself, and below the list of Dramatis Persone, 
in his edition of 1723, he writes: ‘Story partly taken from Boccace’s Decameron, 
‘day 2. nov. 9, little besides the names being historical.’ 

The story by Boccaccio is the Ninth on Day the second. It is here given, admir- 
ably translated by JouHN Payne, esq’, and privately printed for the Villon Society, 
1886: ‘Filomena the queen, who was tall and goodly of person, and smiling and agree- 
able of aspect beyond any other of her sex, collecting herself, said, “Needs must the 
covenant with Dionco be observed, wherefore, there remaining none other to tell 
than he and I, I will tell my story first, and he, for that he asked it as a favour, shall 
be the last to speak.”” So saying, she began thus, “There is a proverb oftentimes 
cited among the common folk to the effect that the deceiver abideth at the feet 
of the deceived; the which meseemeth may by no reasoning be shown to be true, 
an it approve not itself by actual occurrences. Wherefore, whilst ensuing the ap- 
pointed theme, it hath occurred to me, dearest ladies, to show you at the same time, 
that this is true, even as it is said; nor should it mislike you to hear it, so you may 
know how to keep yourself from deceivers: There were once at Paris in an inn 
certain very considerable Italian merchants, who were come thither, according to 
their usance, some on one occasion and some on another, and having one evening 
among others supped all together merrily, they fell to devising of divers matters 
and passing from one discourse to another, they came at last to speak of their 
wives, whom they had left at home, and one said jestingly, ‘I know not how mine 
doth; but this I know well, that, whenas there cometh to my hand here any lass 
that pleaseth me, I leave on one side the love I bear my wife and take of the other 
such pleasure as I may.’ ‘And I,’ quoth another, ‘do likewise, for that if I believe 
that my wife pusheth her fortunes [in my absence,] she doth it; wherefore tit for 
tat be it; an ass still getteth as good as he giveth.’ A third, following on, came 
well nigh to the same conclusion, and in brief all seemed agreed upon this point, 
that the wives they left behind had no mind to lose time in their husbands’ absence. 
One only, who hight Bernabo Lomellini of Genoa, maintained the contrary, avouch- 
ing that he, by special grace of God, had a lady to wife who was belike the most 
accomplished woman of all Italy in all those qualities which a lady, nay, even (in 
great part) in those which a knight or an esquire, should have; for that she was 
fair of favour and yet in her first youth and adroit and robust of her person; nor 
was there aught that pertaineth unto a woman, such as works of broidery in silk 
and the like, but she did it better than any other of her sex. Moreover, said he, 
there was no sewer, or in other words, no serving-man alive who served better or 
more deftly at a noblemen’s table than did she, for that she was very well bred and 
exceeding wise and discreet. He after went to extol her a knowing better how to 
ride a horse and fly a hawk, to read and write and cast a reckoning than if she 
were a merchant; and thence, after many other commendations, coming to that 
whereof it had been discoursed among them, he avouched with an oath that there 


456 APPENDIX 


s could be found no honester nor chaster woman than she; wherefore, he firmly be- 
lieved that, should he abide half a score years, or even always, from home, she 
would never incline to the least levity with another man. Among the merchants 
who discoursed thus was a young man called Ambrogiuolo of Piacenza, who fell 
to making the greatest mock in the world of this last commendation bestowed by 
Bernabo upon his wife and asked him scoffingly if the emperor had granted him 
that privilege over and above all other men. Bernabo, some little nettled, replied 
that not the emperor, but God, who could somewhat more than the emperor, had 
vouchsafed him the favour in question. Whereupon quoth Ambrogiuolo, ‘Bernabo, 
T doubt not a whit but that thou thinkest to say sooth; but meseemeth thou hast 
paid little regard to the nature of things; for that, hadst thou taken heed thereunto, 
I deem thee not so dull of wit but thou wouldst have noted therein certain matters 
which had made thee speak more circumspectly on this subject. And that thou 
mayst not think that we, who have spoken much at large of our wives, believe 
that we have wives other or otherwise made than thine, but mayst see that we spoke 
thus, moved by natural perception, I will e’en reason with thee a little on this 
matter. I have always understood man to be the noblest animal created of God 
among mortals, and after him, woman; but man, as is commonly believed and as is 
seen by works, is the more perfect and having more perfection, must without fail 
have more of firmness and constancy, for that women universally are more change- 
able; the reason whereof might be shown by many natural arguments, which for the 
present I purpose to leave be. If then man be of more stability and yet cannot 
keep himself, let alone from complying with a woman who soliciteth him, but even 
from desiring one who pleaseth him, nay more, from doing what he can, so he may 
avail to be with her,—and if this betide him not once a month, but a thousand 
times a day,—what canst thou expect a woman, naturally unstable, to avail against 
the prayers, the blandishments, the gifts and a thousand other means which an 
adroit man, who loveth her, will use? Thinkest thou she can hold out? Certes, 
how much soever thou mayst affirm it, I believe not that thou believest it; and thou 
thyself sayst thy wife is a woman and that she is of flesh and blood, as are other 
women. If this be so, those same desires must be hers and the same powers that 
are in other women to resist these natural appetites; wherefore however honest 
she may be, it is possible she may do that which other women do; and nothing that 
is possible should be so peremptorily denied nor the contrary thereof affirmed with 
such rigour as thou dost.’ To which Bernabo made answer, saying, ‘I am a mer- 
chant, and not a philosopher, and as a merchant I will answer; and I say that I 
acknowledge that what thou sayst may happen to foolish women in whom there is 
no shame; but those who are discreet are so careful of their honour that for the 
guarding thereof they become stronger than men, who reck not of this; and of those 
thus fashioned is my wife.’ ‘Indeed,’ rejoined Ambrogiuolo, ‘if, for every time they 
occupy themselves with toys of this kind, there sprouted from their foreheads a horn 
to bear witness of that which they have done, there be few, I believe, who would 
incline thereto; but, far from the horn sprouting, there appeareth neither trace nor 
token thereof in those who are discreet, and shame and soil of honour consist not 
but in things discovered; wherefore, whenas they may secretly, they do it, or, if 
they forbear, it is for stupidity. And have thou this for certain that she alone is 
chaste, who hath either never been solicited of any or who, having herself solicited, 
hath not been hearkened. And though I know by natural and true reasons that it 
is e’en as I say, yet should I not speak thereof with so dull an assurance, had I not 
many a time with many women made essay thereof. And this I tell thee, that, were 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT 457 


T near this most sanctified wife of thine, I warrant me I would in brief space of time 
bring her to that which I have already gotten of other women.’ ‘Whereupon,’ 
quoth Bernabo, ‘disputing with words might be prolonged without end; thou 
wouldst say and I should say, and in the end it would all amount to nothing. 
But, since thou wilt have it that all women are so compliant and that thine address 
is such, I am content, so I may certify thee of my wife’s honesty, to have my head 
cut off, as thou canst anywise avail to bring her to do thy pleasure in aught of the 
kind; and if thou fail thereof, I will have thee lose no otherwhat than a thousand 
gold florins.’ ‘Bernabo,’ replied Ambrogiuolo, who was now grown heated over 
the dispute, ‘I know not what I should do with thy blood, if I won the wager; but, 
as thou have a mind to see proof of that which I have advanced, do thou stake five 
thousand gold florins of thy monies, which should be less dear to thee than thy 
head, against a thousand of mine, and whereas thou settest no limit [of time,] I 
will e’en bind myself to go to Genoa and within three months from the day of my 
departure hence to have done my will of thy wife and to bring back with me, in 
proof thereof, sundry of her most precious things and such and so many tokens 
that thou shalt confess it to be truth, so verily thou wilt pledge me thy faith not 
to come to Genoa within that term nor write her aught of the matter.’ Bernabo 
said that it liked him well and albeit the other merchants endeavoured to hinder 
the affair, foreseeing, that sore mischief might come thereof, the two merchants’ 
minds were so inflamed that, in despite of the rest, they bound themselves one to 
other by express writings under their hands. This done, Bernabo abode behind, 
whilst Ambrogiuolo, as quickliest he might, betook himself to Genoa. There he 
abode some days and informing himself with the utmost precaution of the name 
of the street where the lady dwelt and of her manner of life, understood of her that 
and more than that which he had heard of her from Bernabo, wherefore, him- 
seemed he was on a fool’s errand. However, he presently clapped up an acquain- 
tance with a poor woman, who was much about the house and whose great well- 
wisher the lady was, and availing not to induce her to aught else, he debauched her 
with money and prevailed with her to bring him, in a chest wroughten after a 
fashion of his own, not only into the house, but into the gentlewoman’s very bed 
chamber, where, according to the ordinance given her of him, the good woman 
commended it to her care for some days, as if she had a mind to go somewhither. 
The chest, then, being left in the chamber and the night come, Ambrogiuolo, what 
time he judged the lady to be asleep, opened the chest with certain engines of his 
and came softly out into the chamber, where there was a light burning, with 
whose aid he proceeded to observe the ordinance of the place, the paintings and 
every other notable thing that was therein and fixed them in his memory. Then, 
drawing near the bed and perceiving that the lady and a little girl, who was with 
her, were fast asleep, he softly uncovered the former and found that she was as 
fair naked as clad, but saw no sign about her that he might carry away, save 
one, to wit, a mole which she had under the left pap and about which were sundry 
little hairs as red as gold. This noted, he covered her softly up again, albeit, seeing 
her so fair, he was tempted to adventure his life and lay himself by her side; how- 
ever, for that he had heard her to be so obdurate and uncomplying in matters of 
this kind, he hazarded not himself, but abiding at his lesiure in the chamber the 
most part of the night, took from one of her coffers a purse and a night-rail, together 
with sundry rings and girdles, and laying them all in his chest, returned thither 
himself and shut himself up therein as before; and on this wise he did two nights, 
without the lady being ware of aught. On the third day the good woman came 


458 APPENDIX 

back for the chest, according to the given ordinance, and carried it off whence she 
had taken it, whereupon Ambrogiuolo came out and having rewarded her accord- 
ing to promise, returned, as quickliest he might, with the things aforesaid, to Paris, 
where he arrived before the term appointed. There he summoned the merchants 
who had been present at the dispute and the laying of the wager and declared, in 
Bernabo’s presence, that he had won the wager laid between them, for that he had 
accomplished that whereof he had vaunted himself; and to prove this to be true, 
he first described the fashion of the chamber and the paintings thereof and after 
showed the things he had brought with him thence, avouching that he had them 
of herself. Bernabo confessed the chamber to be as he had said and owned, more- 
over, that he recognized the things in question as being in truth his wife’s; but said 
that he might have learned from one of the servants of the house the fashion of the 
chamber and have gotten the things in like manner; wherefore, an he had nought 
else to say, himseemed not that this should suffice to prove him to have won. 
Whereupon, quoth Ambrogiuolo, ‘in sooth this should suffice; but since thou wilt 
have me say more, I will say it. I tell thee that Madam Ginevra thy wife hath 
under her left pap a pretty big mole, about which are maybe half a dozen little 
hairs as red as gold.” When Bernabo heard this, it was as if he had gotten a knife- 
thrust in the heart, such anguish did he feel, and though he had said not a word, his 
countenance, being all changed, gave very manifest token that what Ambrogiuolo 
said was true. Then, after a while, ‘Gentlemen,’ quoth he, ‘that which Am- 
brogiuolo saith is true; wherefore, he having won, let him come whenassoever it 
pleaseth him and he shall be paid.’ Accordingly, on the ensuing day Ambrogiuolo 
was paid in full, and Bernabo, departing Paris, betook himself to Genoa with fell 
intent against the lady. When he drew near the city, he would not enter therein, 
but lighted down a good score miles away. at a country house of his and despatched 
one of his servants, in whom he much trusted, to Genoa with two horses and letters 
under his hand, advising his wife that he had returned and bidding her come to him; 
and he privily charged the man, whenas he should be with the lady in such place as 
should seem best to him, to put her to death without pity and return to him. The 
servant accordingly repaired to Genoa and delivering the letters and doing his 
errand, was received with great rejoicing by the lady, who on the morrow took 
horse with him and set out for their country house. As they fared on together, 
discoursing of one thing and another, they came to a very deep and lonely valley, 
beset with high rocks and trees, which seeming to the servant a place wherein he 
might, with assurance for himself, do his lord’s commandment, he pulled out his 
knife and taking the lady by the arm, said, ‘Madam, commend your soul to God, 
for needs must you die, without faring further.’ The lady, seeing the knife, and 
hearing these words, was all dismayed and said, ‘Mercy, for God’s sake! Ere thou 
slay me, tell me wherein I have offended thee, that thou wouldst put me to death.’ 
‘Madam,’ answered the man, ‘me you have nowise offended; but wherein you have 
offended your husband I know not, save that he hath commanded me to slay you 
by the way, without having any pity upon you, threatening me, an I did it not, 
to have me hanged by the neck. You know well how much I am beholden to bim 
and how I may not gainsay him in aught that he may impose upon me; God know- 
eth it irketh me for you, but I can no otherwise.’ Whereupon quoth the lady, 
weeping, ‘Alack, for God’s sake, consent not to become the murderer of one who 
hath never wronged thee, to serve another! God who knoweth all knoweth that I 
never did aught for which I should receive such a recompense from my husband. 
But let that be; thou mayst, an thou wilt, at once content God and thy master and 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT 459 


give me but thy doublet and a hood and with the former return to my lord and thine 
and tell him that thou hast slain me; and I swear to thee, by that life which thou 
wilt have bestowed on me, that I will remove hence and get me gone into a country 
whence never shall any news of me win either to him or to thee or into these parts.’ 
The servant, who was loath to slay her, was lightly moved to compassion; where- 
fore he took her clothes, and gave her a sorry doublet of his and a hood, leaving her 
sundry monies she had with her. Then praying her depart the country, he left her 
in the valley and afoot and betook himself to his master, to whom he avouched that 
not only was his commandment accomplished, but that he had left the lady’s 
dead body among a pack of wolves, and Bernabo presently returned to Genoa, 
where, the thing becoming known, he was much blamed. As for the lady, she abode 
alone and disconsolate till nightfall, when she disguised herself as most she might 
and repaired to a village hard by, where, having gotten from an old woman that 
which she needed, she fitted the doublet to her shape and shortening it, made a pair 
of linen breeches of her shift; then, having cut her hair and altogether transformed 
herself in the guise of a sailor, she betook herself to the seashore, where, as chance 
would have it, she found a Catalan gentleman, by name, Senor Encararch, who had 
landed at Alba from a ship he had in the offing, to refresh himself at a spring there. 
With him she entered into parley and engaging with him as a servant, embarked on 
board the ship, under the name of Sicurano da Finale. There, being furnished by 
the gentleman with better clothes, she proceeded to serve him so well and so aptly 
that she became in the utmost favour with him. No great while after it befell 
that the Catalan made a voyage to Alexandria with a lading of his and carrying 
thither certain peregrine falcons for the Soldan, presented them to him. The 
Soldan, having once and again entertained him at meat and noting with approof 
the fashions of Sicurano, who still went serving him, begged him [From this point 
until the final discovery of her true sex, the heroine is spoken of in the masculine 
gender, as became her assumed name and habit] of his master, who yielded him to 
him, although it irked him to do it, and Sicurano, in a little while, by his good 
behaviour, gained the love and favour of the Soldan, even as he had gained that 
of the Catalan. Wherefore, in process of time, it befell that,—the time coming for 
a great assemblage, in the guise of a fair, of merchants, both Christian and Saracen, 
which was wont at a certain season of the year to be held in Acre, a town under the 
seignory of the Soldan, and to which, in order that the mercahnts and their mer- 
chandise might rest secure, the latter was still used to despatch, beside other his 
officers, some one of his chief men, with troops, to look to the guard,—he bethought 
himself to send Sicurano, who was by this well versed in the language of the country, 
on this service; and so he did. Sicurano accordingly came to Acre as governor and 
captain of the guard of the merchants and their merchandise and there well and 
diligently doing that which pertained to his office and going round looking about 
him, saw many merchants there, Sicilians and Pisans and Genoese and Venetians 
and other Italians, with whom he was fain to make acquaintance, in remembrance 
of his country. It befell, one time amongst others, that having lighted down at 
the shop of certain Venetian merchants, he espied, among other trinkets, a purse 
and a girdle, which he straightway knew for having been his and marvelled thereat; 
but, without making any sign, he carelessly asked to whom they pertained and if 
they were for sale. Now Ambrogiuolo of Piacenza was come thither with much 
merchandise on board a Venetian ship and hearing the captain of the guard ask 
whose the trinkets were, came forward and said, laughing, ‘Sir, the things are mine 
and I do not sell them; but if they please you, I will gladly give them to you.’ 


460 APPENDIX 

Sicurano, seeing him laugh, misdoubted he had recognized him by some gesture of 
his; but yet, keeping a steady countenance, he said, ‘ Belike thou laughest to see me, 
a soldier, go questioning of these women’s toys?’ ‘Sir,’ answered Ambrogiuolo, ‘T 
laugh not at that; nay, but at the way I came by them.’ ‘Marry, then,’ said 
Sicurano, ‘an it be not unspeakable, tell me how thou gottest them, so God give 
thee good luck.’ Quoth Ambrogiuolo, ‘Sir, a gentlewoman of Genoa, hight Madam 
Ginevra, wife of Bernabo Lomellini, gave me these things, with certain others, one 
night that I lay with her, and prayed me keep them for the love of her. Now I 
laugh for that I mind me of the simplicity of Bernabo, who was fool enough to lay 
five thousand florins to one that I would not bring his wife to do my pleasure; the 
which I did and won the wager; whereupon he, who should rather have punished 
himself for his stupidity than her for doing that which all women do, returned from 
Paris to Genoa and there, by what I have since heard, caused her to be put to death.’ 
Sicurano, hearing this, understood forthwith what was the cause of Bernabo’s anger 
against his wife [Here Boccaccio uses the feminine pronoun, immediately after- 
ward resuming the masculine form in speaking of Sicurano] and manifestly per- 
ceiving this fellow to have been the occasion of her ills, determined not to let him go 
unpunished therefor. Accordingly he feigned to be greatly diverted with the 
story and artfully clapped up a strait acquaintance with him, insomuch that, the 
fair being ended, Ambrogiuolo, at his instance, accompanied him with all his good, 
to Alexandria. Here Sicurano let build him a warehouse and lodged in his hands 
store of his own monies; and Ambrogiuolo, foreseeing great advantage to himself, 
willingly took up his abode there. Meanwhile, Sicurano, careful to make Bernabo 
clear of his (z. e. her) innocence, rested not till, by means of certain great Genoese 
merchants who were then in Alexandria, he had, on some plausible occasion of his 
(i. e. her) own devising, caused him come thither, where, finding him in poor enough 
case, he had him privily entertained by a friend of his (7. e. hers) against it should 
seem to him (7. e. her) time to do that which he purposed. Now he had already 
made Ambrogiuolo recount his story before the Soldan for the latter’s diversion; 
but, seeing Bernabo there and thinking there was no need to use further delay in the 
matter, he took occasion to procure the Soldan to have Ambrogiuolo and Bernabo 
brought before him and in the latter’s presence, to exhort from the former, by dint 
of severity, an it might not easily be done [by other means,] the truth of that whereof 
he vaunted himself concerning Bernabo’s wife. Accordingly, they both being come, 
the Soldan, in the presence of many, with a stern countenance commanded Ambro- 
giuolo to tell the truth how he had won of Bernabo the five thousand gold florins; 
and Sicurano himself, in whom he most trusted, with a yet angrier aspect, threat- 
ened him with most grievous torments, an he told it not; whereupon Ambrogiuolo, 
affrighted on one side and another and in a measure constrained, in the presence 
of Bernabo and many others, plainly related everything, even as it passed, expect- 
ing no worse punishment therefor than the restitution of the five thousand gold 
florins and of the stolen trinkets. He having spoken, Sicurano, as he were the 
Soldan’s minister in the matter, turned to Bernabo and said to him, ‘And thou, 
what didst thou to thy lady for this lie?? Whereto Bernabo replied, ‘Overcome with 
wrath for the loss of my money and with resentment for the shame which meseemed 
I had gotten from my wife, I caused a servant of mine put her to death, and ac- 
cording to that which he reported to me, she was straightway devoured by a mul- 
titude of wolves.’ These things said in the presence of the Soldan and all heard 
and apprehended of him, albeit he knew not yet to what end Sicurano, who had 
sought and ordered this, would fain come, the latter said to him, ‘My lord, you 


SCORCH OFTHE PLOT 461 


may very clearly see how much reason yonder poor lady had to vaunt herself 
of her gallant and her husband, for that the former at once bereaved her of honour, 
marring her fair fame with lies, and despoiled her husband, whilst the latter, more 
credulous of others’ falsehoods than of the truth which he might by long experience 
have known, caused her be slain and eaten of wolves; and moreover, such is the 
goodwill and the love borne her by the one and the other that, having long abidden 
with her, neither of them knoweth her. But, that you may the better apprehend 
that which each of these hath deserved, I will—so but you vouchsafe me, of special 
favour, to punish the deceiver and pardon the dupe,—e’en cause her come hither 
into your and their presence.’ The Soldan, disposed in the matter altogether to 
comply with Sicurano’s wishes, answered that he would well and bade him produce 
the lady; whereat Bernabo marvelled exceedingly, for that he firmly believed her 
to be dead, whilst Ambrogiuolo, now divining danger, began to be in fear of worse 
than paying of monies and knew not whether more to hope or to fear from the com- 
ing of the lady, but awaited her appearance with the utmost amazement. The 
Soldan, then, having accorded Sicurano his wish, the latter threw himself, weeping, 
on his knees before him and putting off, as it were at one and the same time, his 
manly voice and masculine demeanour, said, ‘My lord, I am the wretched mis- 
fortunate Ginevra, who have these six years gone wandering in man’s disguise 
about the world, having been foully and wickedly aspersed by this traitor Ambro- 
giuolo and given by yonder cruel and unjust man to one of his servants to be slain 
and eaten of wolves.’ Then, tearing open the fore part of her clothes and showing 
her breast, she discovered herself to the Soldan and all else who were present and 
after, turning to Ambrogiuolo, indignantly demanded of him when he had ever 
lain with her, according as he had aforetime boasted; but he, now knowing her and 
fallen well nigh dumb for shame, said nothing. The Soldan, who had always held 
her for a man, seeing and hearing this, fell into such a wonderment that he more 
than once misdoubted that which he saw and heard to be rather a dream than true. 
However, after his amazement had abated, apprehending the truth of the matter, he 
lauded to the utmost the life and fashions of Ginevra, till then called Sicurano, and 
extolled her constancy and virtue; and letting bring her very sumptuous woman’s 
apparel and women to attend her, he pardoned Bernabo, in accordance with her 
request, the death he had merited, whilst the latter, recognizing her, cast himself 
at her feet, weeping and craving forgiveness, which she, ill worthy as he was thereof, 
graciously accorded him and raising him to his feet, embraced him tenderly, as her 
husband. Then the Soldan commanded that Ambrogiuolo should incontinent be 
bound to a stake and smeared with honey and exposed to the sun in some high 
place of the city, nor should ever be loosed thence till such time as he should fall of 
himself; and so it was done. After this he commanded that all that had belonged to 
him should be given to the lady, the which was not so little but that it outvalued 
ten thousand doubloons. Moreover, he let make a very goodly banquet, wherein he 
entertained Bernabo with honour, as Madam Ginevra’s husband, and herself as a 
very valiant lady and gave her, in jewels and vessels of gold and silver and monies, 
that which amounted to better [sic (meglio)] than other ten thousand doubloons. 
Then, the banquet over, he caused equip them a ship and gave them leave to return 
at their pleasure to Genoa, whither accordingly they returned with great joyance 
and exceeding rich; and there they were received with the utmost honour, espe- 
cially Madam Ginevra, who was of all believed to be dead and who, while she lived, 
was still reputed of great worth and virtue. As for Ambrogiuolo, being that same 
day bounden to the stake and anointed with honey, he was, to his exceeding tor- 


462 APPENDIX 


ment, not only slain, but devoured, of the flies and wasps and gadflies, wherewith 
that country aboundeth, even to the bones, which latter waxed white and hanging 
by the sinews, being left unremoved, long bore witness of his villainy to all who 
saw them. And on this wise did the deceiver abide at the feet of the deceived.” 


The meagre statement by Langbaine and Pope, as to the source of the Fable 
sufficed inquiring minds for forty years until Capell, the earliest editor to attempt 
any real investigation of the subject, issued the first volume of his edition, probably 
in 1763. On page 52 of that volume the fact mentioned by Pope is repeated, as the 
general supposition of the source of the fable of Cymbeline. ‘But the embracers 
‘of this opinion,’ observes Capell, ‘seem not to have been aware that many of 
‘that author’s novels (translated, or imitated) are to be found in English books, 
‘prior to, or contemporary with, Shakespeare: and of this novel in particular, there 
‘is an imitation extant in a story book of that time, entitled—Westward for Smelts; 
‘it is the second tale in the book; the scene, and the actors of it, are different from 
‘Boccace, as Shakespeare’s are from both; but the main of the story is the same 
‘in all. We may venture to pronounce it a book of those times, and that early 
“enough to have been us’d by Shakespeare, as I am persuaded it was; though the 
‘Copy that I have of it is no older than 1620; it is a quarto pamphlet of only five 
‘sheets and a half, printed in a black letter; [reasons for my opinion are perhaps 
‘not necessary] as it may one day better be made appear a true one, by the dis- 
‘covery of some more ancient edition.’ STEEVENS (Var., 1773) asserts that this 
volume was published in 1603, and that he had seen a copy of that date. In the 
next Variorum (1778) he states correctly that it is entered in the Stationers’ Regis- 
ters in Jan. [15], 1619 [#. e., 1620], ‘where it is said to have been written by kinde 
‘Kitt of Kingston.’ MAatone (Var., 1821, ii, 453) repeats Steevens’s statement 
that an edition of this tract was published in 1603. ‘No copy of this date 
‘exists,’ says CoLLieR (Sh’s. Library, ii, xv.), ‘and the entry in the Stationers’ 
‘Registers seems to establish that it then was a new publication. The only 
‘known copy of the edition of 1620 is among Capell’s books in the library of 
‘Trinity College, Cambridge; and we feel confident that there was no earlier impres- 
‘sion, and that Malone had been misinformed when he spoke of the existence 
‘of a copy dated 1603. Had such an impression been issued, Shakespeare might 
‘have possibly availed himself of it, if, as Malone thought, Cymbeline was produced 
‘in 1609. [Collier reprints it] not because our great dramatist every saw it, since 
“it did not come out until four years after his death, but on account of its connection 
‘with Cymbeline, with the two French Romances, with the French Miracle-Play, 
‘and with the novel of Boccaccio. All the incidents are vulgarised in the English 
‘version of them, and it is pretty clear that the compiler could not have been 
‘aware that they had been previously employed on the stage.’ 

When Halliwell translated Simrock for the Shakespeare Society he referred to 
the assertion by Collier that the only known copy of Westward for Smelts is in the 
Capell Collection, and said he had himself ‘recently purchased a fine copy of the 
‘work which certainly has no indication of having been a republication. . . . Iam 
‘inclined to believe Steevens’s assertion, because he refers to the entry in the 
‘Stationers’ Registers as containing information not found in the edition he used.’ 


The story is here reprinted as given by Malone: 
“Westward for Smelts, or the Waterman’s Fare of mad Merry Western Wenches, 
whose Tongues albeit, like Bell-clappers, they never leave ringing, yet their Tales 


SOURCE OF SHE PLOT 463 


are sweet, and will much content you: Written by kinde Kitt of Kingstone,—was 
published at London in 1603; and again, in 1620. To the second tale in that 
volume Shakespeare seems to have been indebted for two or three of the circum- 
stances of Cymbeline. It is told by the Fishwife of Stand on the Green, and is as 
follows: 

“In the troublesome raigne of king Henry the Sixt, there dwelt in Waltam 
(not farre from London) a gentleman, which had to wife a creature most beautifull, 
so that in her time there were few found that matched her, none at all that ex- 
celled her; so excellent were the gifts that nature had bestowed on her. In body 
was she not onely so rare and unparaleled, but also in her gifts of minde, so that 
in this creature it seemed that Grace and Nature strove who should excell each 
other in their gifts toward her. The gentleman, her husband, thought himself so 
happy in his choise, that he believed in choosing her, he had tooke hold of that 
blessing which Heaven proffereth every man once in his life. Long did not this 
opinion hold for currant; for in his height of love he began so to hate her, that he 
sought her death; the cause I will tell you. 

“Having businesse one day to London, he tooke his leave very kindly of his wife, 
and, accompanied with one man, he rode to London: being toward night, he tooke 
up his inne, and to be briefe, he went to supper amongst other gentlemen. Amongst 
other talke at table, one tooke occasion to speake of women, and what excellent 
creatures they were, so long as they continued loyal to man. To whom answered 
one, saying, This is truth, sir; so is the divell good so long as he doth no harme, 
which is meaner: his goodness and women’s loyaltie will come both in one yeere; 
but it is so farre off, that none in this age shall live to see it. 

“This gentleman loving his wife dearely, and knowing her to be free from this 
uncivill general taxation of women, in her behalf, said, Sir, you are too bitter 
against the sexe of women, and doe ill, for some one’s sake that hath proved false 
to you, to taxe the generalitie of women-kinde with lightnesse; and but I would 
not be counted uncivill amongst these gentlemen, I would give you the reply that 
approved untruth deserveth: you know my meaning, sir; construe my words as 
you please. Excuse me, gentlemen, if I be uncivil; I answere in the behalfe of one 
who is as free from disloyaltie as is the sunne from darknes, or the fire from cold. 
Pray, sir, said the other, since wee are opposite in opinions, let us rather talke like 
lawyers, that wee may be quickly friends againe, than like souldiers, which end 
their words with blowes. Perhaps this woman that you answere for, is chaste, but 
yet against her will; for many women are honest, ’cause they have not the meanes 
and opportunitie to be dishonest; so is a thief true in prison, because he hath noth- 
ing to steale. Had I but opportunitie and knew this same saint you so adore, I 
would pawne my life and whole estate, in a short while to bring you some manifest 
token of her disloyaltie. Sir, you are yong in the knowledge of women’s slights; 
your want of experience makes you too credulous: therefore be not abused. This 
speech of his made the gentleman more out of patience than before, so that with 
much adoe he held himselfe from offering violence; but his anger being a little 
over, he said,—Sir, I doe verily believe that this vaine speech of yours proceedeth 
rather from a loose and ill-manner’d minde, than of any experience you have had 
of women’s looseness: and since you think yourselfe so cunning in that divelish art 
of corrupting women’s chastitie, I will lay down heere a hundred pounds, against 
which you shall lay fifty pounds, and before these gentlemen I promise you, if that 
within a month’s space you bring me any token of this gentlewoman’s disloyaltie, 
(for whose sake I have spoken in the behalfe of all women,) I doe freely give you 


404 APPENDIX 

leave to injoy the same; conditionally, you not performing it, I may enjoy your 
money. If that it be a match, speake, and I will acquaint you where she dwelleth: 
and besides I vow, as I am a gentleman, not to give her notice of any such intent 
that is toward her. Sir, quoth the man, your proffer is faire, and I accept the same. 
So the money was delivered in the oast of the house his hands, and the sitters by 
were witnesses; so drinking together like friends, they went every man to his 
chamber. The next day this man, having knowledge of the place, rid thither, 
leaving the gentleman at the inne, who being assured of his wife’s chastitie, made 
no other account but to winne the wager; but it fell out otherwise: for the other 
vowed either by force, policie, or free will, to get some jewell or other toy from 
her, which was enough to persuade the gentleman that he was a cuckold, and win 
the wager he had laid. This villaine (for he deserved no better stile) lay at 
Waltam a whole day before he came at the sight of her; at last he espied her in 
the fields, to whom he went, and kissed her (a thing no modest woman can deny); 
after his salutation, he said, Gentlewoman, I pray, pardon me, if I have beene 
too bold: I was intreated by your husband, which is at London, (I riding this 
way) to come and see you; by me he hath sent his commends to you, with a kind 
intreat that you would not be discontented for his long absence, it being serious 
business that keepes him from your sight. The gentlewoman very modestlie 
bade him welcome, thanking him for his kindnes; withall telling him that her 
husband might command her patience so long as he pleased. Then intreated shee 
him to walke homeward, where she gave him such entertainment as was fit for a 
gentleman, and her husband’s friend. 

“Tn the time of his abiding at her house, he oft would have singled her in private 
talke, but she perceiving the same, (knowing it to be a thing not fitting a modest 
woman,) would never come to his sight but at meales, and then were there so many 
at boord, that it was no time for to talke at love-matters: therefore he saw he 
must accomplish his desire some other way; which he did in this manner. He 
having laine two nights at her house, and perceiving her to be free from lustful 
desires, the third night he fained himself to bee something ill, and so went to bed 
timelier than he was wont. When he was alone in his chamber, he began to thinke 
with himselfe that it was now time to do that which he determined: for if he tarried 
any longer, they might have cause to think that he came for some ill intent, and 
waited opportunity to execute the same. With this resolution he went to her 
chambre, which was but a paire of staires from his, and finding the doore open, he 
went in, placing himselfe under the bed. Long had he not lyne there, but in came 
the gentlewoman with her maiden; who, having been at prayers with her house- 
hold, was going to bed. She preparing herself to bedward, laid her head-tyre 
and those jewels she wore, on a little table thereby: at length he perceived her to 
put off a little crucifix of gold, which daily she wore next to her heart; this jewell 
he thought fittest for his turne, and therefore observed where she did lay the same. 

“At length the gentlewoman, being untyred her selfe, went to bed; her maid 
then bolting of the doore, took the candle, and went to bed in a withdrawing 
roome, onely separated with arras. This villaine lay still under the bed, listening 
if hee could heare that the gentlewoman slept: at length he might hear her draw 
her breath long; then thought he all sure, and like a cunning villaine rose without 
noise, going straight to the table, where finding of the crucifix, he lightly went to 
the doore, which he cunningly unbolted; all this performed with so little noise, 
that neither the mistress nor the maid heard him. Having gotten into his chamber, 
he wished for day that he might carry this jewell to her husband, as signe of his 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT 465 


wife’s disloyalite; but seeing his wishes but in vaine, he laide him downe to sleepe: 
happy had she beene, had his bed proved his grave. 

“In the morning so soon as the folkes were stirring, he rose and went to the 
horse-keeper, praying him to helpe him to his horse, telling him that he had tooke 
his leave of his mistris the last night. Mounting his horse, away he rode to London, 
leaving the gentlewoman in bed; who, when she rose, attiring herself hastily, 
(cause one tarried to speak with her,) missed not her crucifix. So passed she the 
time away, as she was wont other dayes to doe, no whit troubled in minde, though 
much sorrow was toward her; onely she seemed a little discontented that her ghest 
went away so unmannerly, she using him so kindely. So leaving her, I will speake 
of him, who the next morning was betimes at London; and coming to the inne, he 
asked for the gentleman who was then in bed, but he quickly came downe to him; 
who seeing him returned so suddenly, hee thought hee came to have leave to release 
himselfe of his wager; but this chanced otherwise, for having saluted him, he said 
in this manner: Sir, did not I tell you that you were too young in experience of 
woman’s subtilties, and that no woman was longer good than till she had cause, or 
time to do ill? This you believed not; and thought it a thing so unlikely, that you 
have given me a hundred pounds for the knowledge of it. In brief, know, your wife 
is a woman, and therefore a wanton, a changeling: to confirm that I speake, see 
heere (shewing him the crucifix;) know you this? If this be not sufficient proofe, I 
will fetch you more. 

“At the sight of this, his bloud left his face, running to comfort his faint heart, 
which was ready to breake at the sight of this crucifix, which he knew she alwayes 
wore next her heart; and therefore he must (as he thought) goe something neere, 
which stole so private a jewell. But remembering himselfe, he cheeres his spirits, 
seeing that was sufficient proofe, and he had won the wager, which he commanded 
should be given to him. Thus was the poore gentleman abused, who went into his 
chamber and being weary of this world, (seeing where he had put his only trust he 
was deceived,) he was minded to fall upon his sword, and so end all his miseries at 
once: but his better genius persuaded him contrary, and not so, by laying violent 
hand on himselfe, to leap into the divel’s mouth. Thus being in many mindes, 
but resolving no one thing, at last he concluded to punish her with death, which 
had deceived his trust, and himselfe utterly to forsake his house and lands, and 
follow the fortunes of king Henry. To this intent, he called his man, to whom he 
said,—George, thou knowest I have ever held thee deare, making more account of 
thee than thy other fellowes; and thou hast often told me that thou didest owe thy 
life to me, which at any time thou wouldest be ready to render up to doe me good. 
True, sir, answered his man, I said no more then, than I will now at any time, 
whensoever you please, performe. I believe thee, George, replyed he; but there 
is no such need: I onely would have thee do a thing for me, in which is no great 
danger; yet the profit which thou shalt have thereby shall amount to my wealth. 
For the love that thou bearest to me, and for thy own good, wilt thou do this? 
Sir, answered George, more for your love than any reward, I will doe it, (and yet 
money makes men valiant,) pray tell mee what it is? George, said his master, 
this it is; thou must goe home, praying thy mistress to meet me halfe the way to 
London; but having her by the way, in some private place kill her; I mean as I 
speake, kill her, I say: this is my command, which thou hast promised to performe; 
which if thou performest not, I vow to kill thee the next time thou comest in my 
sight. Now for thy reward, it shall be this——Take my ring, and when thou hast 
done my command, by virtue of it, doe thou assume my place till my returne, at 


3° 


466 APPENDIX 


which time thou shalt know what my reward is; till then govern my whole estate, 
and for thy mistress’ absence and my own, make what excuse thou please; so be 
gone. Well, sir, said George, since it is your will, though unwilling I am to do it, 
yet I will perform it. So he went his way toward Waltam; and his master presently 
rid to the court, where hee abode with king Henry, who a little before was inlarged 
by the earl of Warwicke, and placed in the throne again. 

“George being come to Waltam, did his duty to his mistris, who wondered to see 
him, and not her husband, for whom she demanded of George; he answered her, 
that he was at Enfield, and did request her to meet him there. To which shee 
willingly agreed, and presently rode with him toward Enfield. At length, they 
being come into a by-way, George began to speake to her in this manner: Mistris, 
I pray you tell me, what that wife deserves, who through some lewd behaviour of 
hers hath made her husband to neglect his estates, and meanes of life, seeking 
by all meanes to dye, that he might be free from the shame which her wickednesse 
hath purchased him? Why George, quoth shee, hast thou met with some such 
creature? Be it whomsoever, might I be her judge, I thinke her worthy of death. 
How thinkest thou? Faith mistris, said he, I think so to, and am so fully per- 
suaded that the offence deserves that punishment, that I purpose to be executioner 
to such a one myselfe: Mistris, you are this woman; you have so offended my 
master, (you know best, how, yourselfe,) that he hath left his house, vowing never 
to see the same till you be dead, and I am the man appointed by him to kill you. 
Therefore those words which you mean to utter, speake them presently, for I 
cannot stay. Poor gentlewoman, at the report of these unkinde words (ill deserved 
at her hands) she looked as one dead, and uttering aboundance of tears, she at 
last spake these words: And can it be that my kindness and loving obedience 
hath merited no other reward at his hands than death? It cannot be. I know 
thou only tryest me, how patiently I would endure such an unjust command. Tle 
tell thee heere, thus with body prostrate on the earth, and hands lift up to heaven, 
I would pray for his preservation; those should be my worst words: for death’s 
fearful visage shewes pleasant to the soul that is innocent. Why then prepare 
youselfe, said George, for by heaven I doe not jest. With that she prayed him stay, 
saying,—And is it so? Then what should I desire to live, having lost his favour 
(and without offence) whom I so dearly loved, and in whose sight my happiness did 
consist? Come, let me die. Yet Geroge, let me have so much favour at thy hands, 
as to commend me in these few words to him: Tell him, my death I willingly 
embrace, for I have owed him my life (yet no otherwise but by a wife’s obedience) 
ever since I called him husband; but that I am guilty of the least fault toward him, 
I utterly deny; and doe at this hour of my death, desire that Heaven would pour 
down vengeance upon me, if ever I offended him in thought. Intreat him that he 
would not speake aught that were ill on mee, when I am dead, for in good troth I 
have deserved none. Pray Heaven blesse him; I am prepared now, strike pr’ythee 
home, and kill me and my griefes at once. 

“George, seeing this, could not with-hold himselfe from shedding teares, and with 
pitie he let fall his sword, saying,—Mistris, that I have used you so roughly, pray par- 
don me, for I was commanded so by my master, who hath vowed, if I let you live, to 
kill me. But I being perswaded that you are innocent, I will rather undergoe the 
danger of his wrath than to staine my hands with the bloud of your cleere and spot- 
Jesse brest: yet let me intreat you so much, that you would not come in his sight, lest 
in his rage he turne your butcher, but live in some disguise, till time have opened 
the cause of his mistrust, and shewed you guiltless ; which I hope, will not be long. 


SORE GE (QUE INCU JEILOTE 4607 


“To this she willingly granted, being loth to die causelesse, and thanked him for 
his kindnesse; so parted they both, having teares in their eyes. George went 
home, where he shewed his master’s ring, for the government of the house till his 
master and mistris returne, which he said lived a while at London, ’cause the time 
was so troublesome, and that was a place where they were more secure than in the 
country. This his fellowes believed, and were obedient to his will; amongst whom 
he used himselfe so kindely that he had all their loves. This poore gentlewoman 
(mistris of the house) in short time got man’s apparell for her disguise; so wandered 
she up and down the countrey, for she could get no service, because the time was 
so dangerous that no man knew whom he might trust; onely she maintained her- 
selfe with the price of those jewels which she had, all which she sold. At the last, 
being quite out of money, and having nothing left (which she could well spare) to 
make money of, she resolved rather to starve than so much debase herselfe to be- 
come a beggar. With this resolution she went to a solitary place beside Yorke, 
where she lived the space of two dayes on hearbes, and such things as she could 
there finde. 

“Tn this time, it chanced that king Edward, being come out of France, and 
lying thereabout with the small forces hee had, came that way with some two or 
three noblemen, with an intent to discover if any ambushes were laid to take 
them at an advantage. He seeing there this gentlewoman, whom he supposed to 
be a boy, asked her what she was, and what she made there in that private place? 
To whom she very wisely and modestly withall, answered, that she was a poore boy, 
whose bringing up had bin better than her outward parts then shewed, but at that 
time she was both friendlesse and comfortlesse, and by reason of the late warre. 
He beeing moved to see one so well featyred as she was, to want, entertained her 
for one of his pages; to whom she shewed herself so dutifull and loving, that in 
short time she had his love above all her fellows. Still followed she the fortunes of 
K. Edward, hoping at last (as not long after it did fall out) to be reconciled to her 
husband. 

“After the battell at Barnet, where K. Edward got the best, she going up and 
downe amongst the slaine men, to know whether her husband, which was on K. 
Henrie’s side, was dead or escaped, happened to see the other who had been her 
ghest, lying there for dead. She remembering him, and thinking him to be the one 
whom her husband loved, went to him, and finding him not dead, she caused one to 
helpe her with him to a house there-by; where opening his brest to dresse his 
wounds, she espied her crucifix, at sight of which her heart was joyfull, hoping by 
this to find him that was originall of her disgrace: for she remembering herselfe, 
found that she had lost that crucifix ever since that morning he departed from her 
house so suddenly. But saying nothing of it at that time, she caused him to be 
carefully looked into, and brought up to London after her, whither she went with 
the king, carrying the crucifix with her. 

“On a time, when he was a little recovered, she went to him, giving him the 
crucifix, which she had taken from about his necke; to whom he said, ‘Good gentle 
youth, keep the same; for now in my misery of sickness, when the sight of that 
picture should be most comfortable, it is to me most uncomfortable; and breedeth 
such horror in my conscience, when I think how wrongfully I got the same, that 
long as I see it I shall never be at rest.’ Now knew she that he was the man that 
caused the separation ’twixt her husband and her selfe; yet said she nothing, using 
him as respectively as she had before; onely she caused the man in whose house he 
lay, to remember the words he had spoken concerning the crucifix. Not long after, 


468 APPENDIX 


she being alone, attending on the king, beseeched his grace to do her justice on a 
villain that had bin the cause of all the misery she had suffered. He loving her 
above all his other pages, most dearly, said, ‘Edmond (for so had she named her- 
self,) thou shalt have what right thou wilt on thy enemy; cause him to be sent for, 
and I will be thy judge my selfe.’ She being glad of this, with the king’s authority 
sent for her husband, whom she heard was one of the prisoners that was taken at 
the battel of Barnet; she appointing the other, now recovered, to be at the court 
at the same time. They being both come, but not one seeing of the other, the king 
sent for the wounded man into the presence, before whom the page asked how he 
came by the crucifix. He fearing that his villainy would come forth, denyed the 
words he had said before his oast, affirming he bought it. With that she called 
in the oast of the house where he lay, bidding him boldly speake what he had 
heard this man say concerning the crucifix. The oast then told the king, that in 
the presence of this page he heard him intreat that the crucifix might be taken from 
his sight, for it did wound his conscience, to thinke how wrongfully he had gotten 
the same. These words did the page averre; yet he utterly denyed the same, 
affirming that he bought it, and if that he did speake such words in his sicknesse, 
they proceeded from the lightnesse of his braine, and were untruthes. 

“She seeing this villain’s impudency, sent for her husband in, to whom she 
shewed the crucifix, saying, Sir, do you know this? Yes, answered hee, but would 
God I ne’er had known the owner of it! It was my wife’s, a woman virtuous till 
the divell (speaking to the other) did corrupt her purity,—who brought me this 
crucifix as a token of her inconstancie. 

“With that the king said, Sirra, now are you found to bea knave. Did you not, 
even now, affirme you bought it? To whom he answered with fearfull countenance, 
And it like your grace, I said so to preserve this gentleman’s honour, and his wife’s, 
which by my telling of the truth would have been much indamaged; for indeed she, 
being a secret friend of mine, gave me this as a testimony of her love. 

“The gentlewoman, not being able longer to cover her selfe in that disguise, said, 
‘And it like your majesty, give mee leave to speake, and you shall see me make 
this villain confesse how he hath abused that good gentleman!’ The king having 
given her leave, she said, ‘First, sir, you confessed before yon oast and my selfe, 
that you had wrongfully got this jewell; then before his majestie you affirmed you 
bought it; so denying your former words; Now you have denyed that which you so 
boldly affirmed before, and said it was this gentleman’s wife’s gift. With his 
majestie’s leave, I say, thou art a villaine, and this is likewise false.’ With that she 
discovered herself to be a woman, saying—‘ Hadst thou villain, ever any strumpet’s 
favour at my hands? Did I, for any sinfull pleasure I received from thee, bestow 
this on thee? Speake, and if thou have any goodness left in thee, speak the truth.’ 

“With that, he being daunted at her sudden sight, fell on his knees before the 
king, beseeching his grace to be mercifull unto him for he had wronged that gentle- 
woman. Therewith told he the king of the match betweene the gentleman and 
him selfe, and how he stole the crucifix from her, and by that meanes persuaded her 
husband that she was a whore. The king wondered how he durst, knowing God to 
be just, commit so great a villainy; how much more admired he to see his page turn 
a gentlewoman. But ceasing to admire, he said—‘Sir, (speaking to her husband,) 
you did the part of an unwise man to lay so foolish a wager, for which offence the 
remembrance of your folly is punishment enough; but seeing it concerns me not, 
your wife shall be your judge.’ With that Mrs Dorrill, thanking his majestie, 
went to her husband, saying, ‘Sir, all my anger to you I lay down with this kisse.’ 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—DOUCE—SIMROCK 469 
He wondering all this while to see this strange and un-looked-for change, wept for 
joy, desiring her to tell him how she was preserved; wherein she satisfied him at full. 
The king was likewise glad that he had preserved this gentlewoman from wilfull 
famine, and gave judgement on the other in this manner: That he should restore 
the money treble which he had wrongfully got from him; and so was to have a 
yeere’s imprisonment. So this gentleman and his wife went, with the king’s 
leave, lovingly home, where they were kindly welcomed by George, to whom 
for recompence he gave the money which he received: so lived they ever after 
in great content.’’’ 


The following extracts are given more or less chronologically: 

Francis Douce (ii, 199), in his comments on Rom. & Jul., remarks that some 
of the incidents in that play and also in Cymbeline are to be found in The love 
adventures of Abrocomas and Anthia, by Xenophon of Ephesus. Thus: Anthia 
having become the slave of Manto and her husband, he is captivated with her 
beauty; when this comes to the knowledge of the jealous Manto, she orders a trusty 
servant to take Anthia into a wood and put her to death. This man, like the 
servant in Boccaccio, and Pisanio in Shakespeare, commiserates the situation of 
Anthia, spares her life, and provides the means for her future safety. Another 
incident common to Anthia and Imogen is the draught of poison which Anthia 
swallows to evade a marriage, but which proves to be merely a sleeping potion. 
I doubt that Douce ever placed any credence in his own suggestion of a connection 
between Xenophon of Ephesus and Shakespeare of Stratford. It gave him, 
however, a chance to say that ‘one might suspect that some novel, imitated from 
‘the Ephisiacs, was existing in the time of Shakespeare, though now unknown.’ 


Kart Smrrock (Die Quellen des Shakespeare, 2te Auflage, p. 276. The First 
Ed., 1831, was translated by J. O. Halliwell for the Shakespeare Society): The 
story of Boccaccio has probably arisen from a Latin original, to which also the 
German Folkbuch may be due, which appeared at first without date or place under 
the title: ‘Ein liepliche history und Warheit von vier Kaufmendern. 4’; then later at 
Nuremburg, under the title: ‘Ain lipliche historie von vier Kaufleuten. In Sweden 
and Denmark this book is still popular; in Germany it has gone out of use, but has 
lately been replaced by an entirely modern work, which has arisen out of Boccaccio’s 
novel. It bears the title: ‘The fair Caroline, as a Colonel of Hussars, or the Mag- 
‘nanimous Wife of a merchant,’ 1826. Upon the earlier work, compare Grimm, 
Alideutsche Walder, i, 68, . . . [p. 280]. A. W. v. Schlegel gives as the plot of 
All’s Well that woman’s fidelity and resignation conquer the misuse of man’s suprem- 
acy. Thus generally expressed, the same thought is the foundation of the present 
play, and of several others of Shakespeare; among them we count Lear; The Wint. 
Tale; Two Gentlemen; Much Ado; Pericles, and Othello; albeit, in this last, the 
triumph of pure womanhood takes a tragic turn. In Meas. for Meas. Shakespeare 
hardly found this idea at hand; but, by certain alterations, he contrived to draw his 
material into the same circle, nay, even to bring it forward a second time in Isabella 
and Mariana. In The London Prodigal, erroneously attributed to Shakespeare, 
it is the wonderful fidelity and devotion of the woman which reforms the villain. 
We should never have done, if we were to enumerate all the legends and stories of the 
subject; we restrict ourselves, therefore, to the most important. Schlegel has 
brought forward as an example the account of Griselda, which, as The Markgrave 
Walther, is become popular in Germany; with equal propriety we may include the 


470 APPENDIX 


legend of Lucreece, in Livy; of Bertha of the Broad Foot, the wife of Pepin (see 
Valentin Schmidt, on Italian Heroic Poems, pp. 1-42; Grimm, Altdeutsche Walder, 
iii, 43; and my Bertha the Spinster, 1853); of Hildegard, the spouse of Charlemagne 
(Schreiber’s Legends of the Rhine, p. 63). [Although Simrock’s treatise is ‘The 
Sources of Shakespeare in Novel, Story, and Legend,’ his zeal leads him, at times, 
very far a-field. I have, therefore, here omitted many references to tales, historic 
and legendary, which cannot by any possibility have served as a source of any of 
Shakespeare’s plots. Simrock well describes the frame on which all these stories 
are built.] In this great family of stories, a narrower circle is formed of those which, 
like the present, begin with a husband, honest-minded at first and firmly grounded 
in a belief of his wife’s fidelity, who wagers with a calumniator of the whole sex 
that the latter cannot succeed in vanquishing the lady’s virtue. This introduction 
has decided advantages; for, besides at once establishing the theme in question, it 
also greatly serves to develop the main idea, when the husband, at first so confident 
that he wagers his whole fortune upon his wife’s virtue, is yet not proved sufficiently 
firm in his faith and trust in it, inasmuch as he suffers himself to be deceived by 
proofs and tokens surreptitiously obtained, and to be hurried with cruelties which 
bring about the triumph of woman’s fidelity and long-suffering. The apparent 
victory which that degrading opinion of the female sex temporarily gains serves 
at last only to show the purity and height of woman all the more brilliantly, wherein 
the best of husbands has shown too little confidence. This may be the reason why 
this introduction is become so great a favourite. 

The discovery that there existed a French Poem of the thirteenth century 
whereof the subject has scenes in common with Cymbeline is probably due to 
FRANCISQUE MICHEL, who in 1834 published in Paris, from a MS., a Poem, prob- 
ably composed after 1225, called Roman de La Violette ou de Gérard de Nevers, par 
Gibert de Montreuil. ‘The subject of this romance,’ says Michel in his preliminary 
‘Notice,’ ‘is, in no respect, historic. Never did a Count of Nevers live, of the name 
‘of Gérard or of any other name, to whom we can attribute such adventures as are 
‘recounted by Gibert. . . . There remains, however, a question to be answered 
‘of a more serious nature. Is Gibert the original inventor of the drama which he 
‘unfolds in his romance? In this respect we can offer only facts wherefrom the 
‘reader can form what conclusion he pleases.’ Hereupon Michel gives excellent 
abridgements of two or three romances closely resembling La Violette, that is to say, 
they have three chronic symptoms in common,—a braggart husband, an over- 
confident villain, and an unassailable wife,—given these three and the literatures 
of all lands from Lapland to Japan are snowed under with the versions. In a 
certain MS. in the ‘Bibliothéque Royale’ there is a prose romance, dou roi Flore 
et de la bielle Jehane, which has really the same theme as La Violette, and appears 
to be somewhat later in date than the early years of the XIII.th Century. It 
is one of the best of the old French romances and interludes, but of a length,— 
eleven octavo, double-column pages,—too great to be translated here. The 
zealous reader will find it in William Morris’s Old French Romances, 18096, pp. 61- 
115. The heroes of the story are Robert and Raoul. Robert was the esquire of a 
Knight in Flanders, who gave him his daughter with four hundred livrées of land 
[a. measure of land which brings in a livre of rent]. No sooner was the marriage 
ceremony over than Robert had to fulfill a pilgrimage to the shrine of Saint Tago 
of Compostella. One of his friends rallied him on this project and laid a wager that 
he would usurp his matrimonial rights during his absence. The prize of him who 
won was to be the seignory of him who lost. Robert went his ways. Raoul paid 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—SIMROCK 47t 


most assiduous court to Jehanne, but all in vain; one day, however, the maid servant 
of the lady admitted him to her room when she was taking a bath; he thereupon 
seized her, unclad as she was, and carried her in his arms to a bed, but she struggled 
so valiantly that he was forced to let go his hold, and she thereupon so grievously 
wounded him by a blow in the face with a club that he was glad to escape, but not, 
however, before he had seen a black mole on the inside of her thigh and a wart 
on her groin. The proof of his knowledge of these secret signs gained him his 
wager. After innumerable adventures, which have no similarity to those of Gerard 
and Euriaut in La Violette, the cheat is discovered, a duel follows between Robert 
and Raoul, who is wounded to the death and confesses his guilt. Robert eventu- 
ally dies, and Jehanne, his widow, marries Florus the king of Alsace, and bears him 
a son, Florens, who becomes the emperor of Constantinople, and a daughter, 
Florie, who marries the son of the King of Hungary. Was virtue ever better 
rewarded? 

There is another Roman du Compte de Poitiers, whereof the First Part is a parallel 
to La Violette, as follows: Pépin was holding his court at Paris, and there sat 
with him at table dukes, chevaliers, and counts, and among them the gayest of all 
was Gerard the Count of Poitiers, who vaunted that his wife was the fairest and 
most faithful of women. Piqued’ by these boasts, the Duke of Normandy offered 
to wager his duchy against Poitou that he would gain the good will of the lady. 
The wager was accepted. The Duke goes to Poitiers, presents himself to the 
Countess, begs hospitality, which she gives him. During the dinner he indulges 
in a familiarity which sufficiently intimates his designs. After dinner he makes an 
open declaration of love, which the lady repels, and retires, leaving the Duke 
abashed and irritated. The Countess rehearses to her nurse the Duke’s insolent 
proposals. The nurse goes to find the Duke, and, false to her mistress, offers so to 
aid him that he will be able to win his bet. The Duke promises a large recom- 
pense. Thereupon the false woman steals her mistress’s finger ring; and also some 
of her mistress’s hair while she was combing it; and then cuts out a little piece of 
the fine velvet of her robe. The perfidious woman carried these three things to the 
Duke to be used against the Countess. Accordingly he presented himself before 
Pépin, and thus addressed the Count: 


‘Fraus quens, c’est péchiés de mescroire, 
Ensagnes ai qui font acroire; 

Vés chi .x. de ses cevex sors, 

Quiplus reluisent que fins ors; 

Vés chi l’anel que li donastes 

A icel jor que lespousastes; 

Et ceste ensagne de condal 

Fu pris au bon samit roial 

Que vostre ferme avoit vestu: 

J'ai gaagnié et vous perdu.’ 


‘False Count, it would be a sin to disbelieve me, I have proofs which compel 
belief; Lo, here are ten of her yellow hairs, which glow brighter than fine gold; Lo, 
here is the ring you gave her on the very day you married her; and this proof is a 
piece of taffeta (?) which was taken from the royal velvet wherein your wife was 
clad; I have won and you have lost.’—(My having in Thirteenth Century French 
is a younger brother’s revenue, but, I think, the foregoing translation is adequately 


472 APPENDIX 


exact.)—Pépin ordered the Countess to be brought to Paris; when she arrived 
she denied that she had in any way yielded. Nevertheless Pépin decided against 
her. The rest of the story has no relation to our present purpose, and need not be 
detailed. It is sufficient to know that after separation and innumerable adven- 
tures by both, virtue is triumphant, the villain vanquished in a duel, and restitu- 
tion of estate followed. As for priority in the composition of these versions,—it 
is almost impossible of proof, before the age of printing, and of no importance after 
it, in connection with Shakespeare. It is necessary to rehearse the substance of 
these versions, however, because some German students of Shakespeare have 
apparently considered them of prime importance. There still remain two which 
deserve attention, La Violette and A Miracle of Notre Dame. It is in the preface 
of the former that its editor, Mons. Michel, makes the earliest reference, that I can 
find, to the similarity of its plot to that of Iachimo’s treachery. The two stories 
touch each other on only one point, but this is noteworthy. The proof of guilt 
produced by the villain does not rest on rings or crucifixes, nor even on disfiguring 
moles, but on a mole or birthmark resembling a flower. The story of La Violette, 
as much of it as relates to our present purpose, is as follows (let me premise 
that, as far as I know, there is no translation of this story, even into modern French, 
and the Lexicon of La Curne de Sainte-Palaye does not include this MS. in his 
list of books. If my translation is wrong, I shall merely quote Dr Johnson and 
ejaculate ‘Ignorance, pure ignorance!’): 

Once on a time there was a King of France who was fair in person, valiant in arms, 
wise in councils, and of great renown. One day in April at Easter he held a fair 
and gentle court, and invited Dukes and Counts, and Countesses and Chatilaines 
and duchesses, and all of immense wealth, and they all gathered at Pont-de- 
VArche. After feasting, the King invited them all to dance a round, and many 
of the ladies sang lovely songs; when all had sung of love and happiness, the 
King called up a knight whose beauty stirred the ladies’ hearts: ‘For as I have 
learned, his face was more blushing than the rose in May. One thing, however, 
pleases me much: that he would never listen to flattery; for he really could not 
bear to hear mention made of his beauty nor of his prowess. And I can therefore 
say to you most emphatically that his were the best songs that were ever made in 
his day. Much land he had and a fair lady love; but she was not of the court. 
Gérars was his name to all his vassals—a name of great renown. And for that he 
sang so well, the Chatilaine of Dijon begged him of all loves to sing her a couplet 
of a song.’ ‘Willingly, Dame,’ he replied, ‘I am not disposed to deny you the 
pleasure.’ Then he sang in clear tones a sweet song of love; and afterwards a 
cangonnete & Karole, which is a song that they sang as they danced, and it said: 
‘Love sick am I from morn till night, Yet this alone makes life more bright.’ ‘In 
very truth,’ he said, ‘it makes life brighter. For I dare maintain that I have a Lady 
love, fairer than any dame or damoiselle in the world, the most discreet and cour- 
teous of all between Metz and Pentoise; and I would dare to prove that a woman 
better than my love is no where to be found. And because I am talking of her I 
will sing this song: ‘Dont n’ai-jou droit ki m’envoise, Quant la plus biele amie ai? 
Am I not right to be merry, since the fairest of dears is my own?’ But the cava- 
liers were not pleased, and there were more than eight of them who were so vexed 
that their hearts almost cried out. But Lisiart, who was perfidious and malicious, 
was the worst of all. A greater felon than he had not lived since Gandon [the be- 
trayer of Roland]. He was long and hard and dry and lean; and he was fiery and 
hardy; and the Count and Seigneur of Forez; and he said to the other knights: 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—SIMROCK 473 


“You have heard how this braggart [vassal] makes merry. A great noise he has 
made to-day, and has much praised his mistress; but I dare to deny that she loves 
him as he says; and if the king will take note I will wager all my lands against his, 
if within eight days, for so long must be my sojourn there, his mistress does not 
give me recompense.’ 

The King warned Lisiars, ‘Que cil ki velt hounir autrui Que li mans revertist sour 
lui,—That the evils return on him who wishes to disgrace another,’ and, having 
taken note of the wager, he suffered Lisiars to depart. The story then turns to 
the damoiselle, Oriaus (the Euryanthe of Spohr’s Opera), the Ladylove of Gérars, 
and a really charming picture is given of her, sitting at the window of a high tower 
listening to ‘les cans dous, et plaisans, et biaus des oysiaus’; her thoughts fly to her 
lover, she sighs and love prompts her to sing a song wherein Love brings joy—at 
the season when the woods and meades and flowers are expanding, and sights and 
sounds awaken emotions deeper than the heart can think or lips utter. When the 
song was finished she leaned her cheek upon her hand. _Lisiars had heard the song 
as he approached the castle; when he arrived, he sent his head-servant to ask for 
hospitality, which was accorded by the Chatilain. Oriaus heard the news, and in 
due time descended from the tower and entered the hall, attended by her ‘mais- 
tresse,’ who was very false and treacherous. (In a foot-note Mons. Michel says 
that by this term, maistresse or even maistre, those elderly women are designated 
who act as duennas in superintending the young ladies.) Oriaus welcomed the 
Count courteously; but when they were seated the Count became very thoughtful, 
and at last he addressed Oriaus, telling her what reports he had heard of her wonder- 
’ ful beauty and virtue, and how his heart would give him no rest until he had come 
hither; that her image was ever before him whithersoever he went; he prayed her, 
therefore, to have mercy and compassion on him. ‘Ha, Sire,’ she cried, ‘mercy for 
pity’s sake!’ If I tolerate what you have just said, and do not respond with rude- 
ness, be assured that it is through my courtesy; you may as well try to scratch the 
moon which is in the heavens above as to attain to what you have asked of me. I 
will never so outrage my love as to yield to what you ask of me, which you can 
obtain much more conveniently at your inn.’ Thus they argue through fifty lines 
of the poem, until Lisiart, seeing the hopelessness of his appeal, becomes very down- 
hearted at the prospect of losing all his estates. As he sits alone after dinner, 
plunged in gloomy reflection, the old mazsteresse, who is as bad as bad can be, a 
descendant of robbers, Gondrée by name, and a sorceress to boot, who had murdered 
two of her illgotten children, noting the melancholy of the Count, she approached 
him, and to her he unburdened his heart, promising to her robes and horses and 
possessions if she would only help him to retain his estates. Then the old bug 
[pugnaise] promised to supply him with such proofs that he would be believed on 
his return to Court, and that he had nothing to fear. Two servants with candles 
then escorted Lisiart to his chamber. And Gondrée conducted the lady to her 
chamber, and when she had made the bed ready, she asked her lady if she would 
lie naked or in her chemise in the bed; for throughout her life the fair one had 
evaded showing her naked flesh. Then the old one came to the bedside and said: 
‘My lady, I have marvelled at one thing; these seven years that I have waited on 
you, never have I seen you unclothed, and I have often wondered whether or not 
your chemise concealed anything.’ ‘Maistre’ [see note above by Mons. Michel], she 
replied, ‘for the last seven years and a half, as a guarantee for my ami, I have done 
this thing; I have a birthmark on my body which I reveal to no man whatsoever, 
except to my friend, who has often said to me if other people know it, then they 


A74 APPENDIX 


have half my good fortune. So I made a contract with him.’ Then the Old One 
took counsel with herself, and the next morning prepared a bath for her lady, and 
when the lady was in the bath she looked through a hole in the door, and behold 
on her right breast there was a purple violet on the snowwhite bosom. No sooner 
had she seen it than she ran to Lisiart and bade him dress himself quickly and come 
see that which would gain his wager. He came immediately, and, on looking through 
the hole in the door, saw on the lady’s right breast a violet as though dyed in purple 
there. ‘By Saint Thomas!’ said he to the Old One, ‘thou hast saved me!’ So he 
set about returning to his Court at once. For our present purpose it is hardly 
worth while to follow him thither or to continue the story. It suffices to say that at 
a magnificent court held by the King at which Euriaus (as she is now called) is 
present, out-rivaling in beauty every goddess of heathendom, and enthroned by 
the King’s side, Lisiart produces his proof and Gérars loses his land and estates. 
He bids Euriaus to accompany him, and ina forest, where he intends to kill her, she 
saves his life by warning him of a monstrous serpent which is about to devour him. 
For this act of mercy he spares her life, but deserts her. After innumerable ad- 
ventures both are reunited. Lisiart is vanquished in a duel, confesses his treachery, 
and Gérar’s lands are restored to him. As I have said, what is noteworthy is that 
the birthmark is a flower. 

We now come to Un Miracle de Nostre-Dame, reprinted and translated into 
modern French by M. FRANCISQUE MICHEL. (It is to be found in Théatre Frangais 
au Moyen-Age, par M. M. MonmerQusé et MicuHEL, Paris, 1839, p. 417.) It is 
this ancient drama which, through J. P. CoLtrer, gave the earliest intimation in 
England that there existed in French a plot so similar to that of Cymbeline that it 
may possibly share with Boccaccio the honour of having furnished suggestions to 
Shakespeare. . 


Cotter (Farther Particulars, etc., 1839, p. 25) gives an excellent abstract of the 
story, which is here repeated, and afterwards I will add the passages from the 
original which seem parallel to Cymbeline: 

‘Lotaire, the Emperor, makes war on Alfons, King of Spain: the latter flies to 
his brother, the King of Granada, for assistance. During his absence, Lotaire and 
his nephew, Ostes, lay siege to Burgos, and there capture Denise, the daughter of 
Alfons. Lotaire procures Ostes to be married to Denise, and makes them King and 
Queen of Spain. Lotaire and Ostes for a time quit Spain for Rome, leaving Denise 
behind in Burgos. At Rome, Ostes meets Count Berengier, and the latter wagers 
his possessions with the former, who gages his kingdom of Spain, on the chastity 
of Denise during her husband’s absence. Berengier proceeds to Burgos to make 
the attempt, and concerts with Eglantine, the female attendant of Denise, in order 
to accomplish his purpose. She gives her mistress a sleeping draught and then 
steals what Denise most valued (un os d’un doigts du pied de son mari, which he had 
given her just before his departure for Rome), and informs Berengier of some secret 
mark she carried on her person. Berengier returns to Rome, shows the os in 
triumph, and discloses the secret mark he pretends to have seen. Ostes determines 
to kill Denise, but she is pre-informed of his intention, and by advice of the Virgin 
flies from Burgos to her father and uncle, at Granada, in male attire. She is taken 
into the service of the latter, and, unknown to be a woman, is made his standard- 
bearer. Ostes, unable to find her and to wreak his vengeance upon her, turns 
renegade, blasphemes his Creator, and serves the Saracens. In the meanwhile, the 
King of Granada and Alfons collect their forces and are about to march against 


SOCK CE Oh STAR WELOT—COLLIER 475 


Lotaire, when Denise (who now calls herself Denis) entreats that she may proceed 
to Rome, to have an interview with Lotaire, promising to do her best to render 
bloodshed unnecessary. She goes to Rome, and, proclaiming Berengier a traitor 
to Denise, challenges him to single combat. Ostes by this time has repented his 
denial of Christianity, and warned from heaven, proceeds to Rome to do penance 
for his sin. He arrives when the combat between Denise and Berengier is about 
to take place. Ostes, too, challenges the traitor, and is adjudged to enter the lists 
against him in preference to Denise. Berengier is overcome, confesses his crime, 
Denise discloses her sex, and the war is at an end. Alfons is not restored to his 
kingdom, which continues in the hands of Ostes and Denise, but Lotaire gives him 
the kingdom of Mirabel and the Comté of Vaux-Plaissiez, while the King of Gra- 
nada bestows upon him land which will yield him 3000 livres per annum.’ The 
above is a bare outline of the chief incidents, and there can be little doubt that the 
performance was popular from’the romantic nature of the story, the rapid changes 
of the place of action, and the number and variety of the characters, including the 
Creator, the Virgin, the Archangels Gabriel and Michael, and St. John. That it 
originally came into England in a dramatic shape nobody will pretend to assert; 
but, recollecting the intimate connection between the religious bodies of this 
country and of the continent (often the principal performers in such representa- 
tions), it is not unlikely, and it may have been the subject of an old Miracle-play 
long before the time of Shakespeare. On the other hand, some novel may have been 
formed upon the same foundation as Boccaccio’s story, both of which perhaps 
had the same origin as the French Miracle-play, and to this our great Poet may 
have been indebted. 

After the fall of Granada the Emperor wishes his nephew, Ostes (or Otho), 
immediately to marry Denise, the daughter of the defeated King Alfonso, and 
then accompany him to Rome. Otho answers the King, ‘Sire, just wait for me a 
minute,’ and then to his wife, ‘Come hither, lady, I pray. Here, if you hold my 
love dear, take this bone; guard it well. It is the bone of one of the fingers of my 
foot [c’est de l’un des doigts de mon pied]. And take care that in no possible circum- 
stances it is either seen or recognised by any man; it must be the secret sign of our 
mutual love-——Now we can depart, sire, I am ready.’ After they are all gone, 
Denise, who is now Queen of Spain, says to her maid: ‘Eglantine, I have always 
confided my secrets to you, even before I became queen, you know. Lglantine. 
Dear lady, you say true; and, thank God! I have never been so foolish as to dis- 
close a single one, no matter what it was, to a single man or woman. Why do 
you thus speak, madame? Tell me. Denise. My friend, I trust you; and, 
therefore, I am about to tell you another. What is thisin my hand? Give me your 
opinion. Eglantine. I think it is a bone; but cannot tell whether it is man’s or 
beast’s. Denise. V’ll tell you in secret that it is a bone of one of the fingers of my 
husband’s foot, which, out of love, he has charged me to guard carefully; this is the 
reason, in very truth, why for the love of him I wish to carry it with my jewels. 
Let us place it there.’ - 

The scene here shifts to Rome. Berengier (the Iachimo of Cymbeline) welcomes 
the emperor to his native land. ‘Emperor. Berengier, I believe you gave me no 
help in my war; as it seems to me you were afraid of blows. Beren. No, by my 
faith! very dear sire; but illness kept me long in bed. Ostes. Very dear uncle, with 
your permission I will now take my leave of you and depart for Spain to see my 
wife. Beren. King Ostes, I swear to you upon my soul that whoever thinks he 
has a wife all to himself, he shares her with two or three; and he who in such a case 


7, 

476 APPENDIX 

has faith in a woman is full of ignorance. I tell you true, I make the boast that 
I do not know the woman living from whom, if I can speak with her two times, 
I do not hope to obtain at the third time all that I can desire. Ostes. I’faith! 
Berengier, it is accursed to speak such abominable things of women, And, certes, 
I don’t believe you; I know that there are many good wives, both lovely in person 
and gracious in soul. Beren. Certes, it is very easy for you to say so. I'll tell you 
what I’ll do: I'll go and have an interview with your wife, and I wager that from 
the first téte-a-téte I can have with her, I’ll have her consent. Come on, wager or 
shut up. Bet with me! Ostes. Yes, by the soul of my father! and, my royal 
father-in-law, I consent to forfeit the crown of Spain, if she is so abandoned as 
to let you touch her; with this condition that, if you do not accomplish your pur- 
pose you will give me your land and property; this is my wager. Beren. For my 
part, I’d consent at once, if I knew how I could prove it, which I don’t. Ostes. 
You can easily attain a proof, I’ll tell you how: if you are clever enough to describe 
to me a mark she bears and to tell me where it is (note this well!), and also to 
bring me that which she guards for my sake, I swear I will instantly let you freely 
have all Spain. Beren. Ostes, I willingly assent, and I swear to you that if I mis- 
carry, you may be very sure that I’ll not keep back the value of a clove of garlic; 
T'll hand over every bit of it; and this on the condition that you will sojourn here 
until I return. Ostes. All right; now dispatch. I'll abide here.’ There is no 
intimation of a change of scene, the next person that speaks, however, is ‘ Denise. 
Eglantine, we must start for church; I wish to attend divine service and pray for 
my husband. Eglantine. I am ready, madame, to obey your will in all places. 
Beren. I must think over my plan, how best to attain success. I see the queen 
yonder, coming hither, how lucky! Ill speak to her.—Dear lady, God grant you 
long life, and salvation to your soul! Denise. What brought you here, Berengier? 
be welcome. If you'll tell me ll listen. Beren. Madame, I'll tell you. I came 
hither on purpose. I came from Rome, where I left your seigneur, who cares for 
you no more than for the stem of a cherry; he has a liaison with a girl that he loves 
so that he can’t be separated from her. This made me leave Rome to come and 
tell you; for it gives me great distress and rage; and since he is behaving so badly 
I am fallen so deeply in love with you that neither by day nor by night can I endure 
it; this passion, madame, makes me suffer cruel woes. Denise. What, Berengier! 
On your soul! are you so valliant that you come from Rome to this place to utter 
such language to me! Certes, neither you nor your race can speak a word of what 
is good, unless for baseness and treachery; therefore it is that I do not believe a 
word you say. Away! away! leave my presence, instantly! Beren. Lady, for the 
love of God! do not scorn me, if I utter my plaints to you; it all comes from the 
love with which you have inspired me; my colour comes and goes and my heart 
is so distracted with love that I have utterly abandoned eating and drinking. 
Denise. Leave here at once, flattering liar! Beren. Dame, I’ll leave without an- 
other word, since what I say to you here in secret displeases you. Denise. It 
pleases me to return home; I’ll walk no further to-day. Return at once with me, 
Eglantine.’ 

Berengier sees that he has made a false start, and in desperation determines to 
bribe Eglantine, and is successful. She promises to obtain the jewel which Denise 
so prizes, and to discover what the birthmark is and where it is. To this end, 
Eglantine in a soliloquy decides to give Denise wine enough to make her sleep so 
soundly that she ‘can examine her body all over and find out the birthmark.’ 
Herein she succeeds, steals the toe-bone, meets Berengier by stealth, gives him the 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—SCHENKL—HALLIWELL 477 


bone, and whispers in his ear the place where the birthmark lies. Berengier at 
once hastens to Rome and obtains an instant audience of the Emperor and of 
Ostes, and boasts that he is King of Spain if the latter keep his word. ‘Speak!’ he 
exclaims, ‘do you recognise this bone? In very truth, I dare to tell you (sire, be 
not irritated!) that I have seen the woman from head to foot. I can speak to you 
of her birthmark; I’ll tell it in your ear, if you wish. Ostes. Eh, Diex! how afflicted 
Tam! Isee clearly that I have lost my country. Rage splits my heart in twain.— 
False and disloyal woman! Why hast thou done me such shame! I so trusted in 
thine honour that I held thee for the best of women; but never shall I find repose 
until I have put thee to a shameful death.’ 

Ostes leaves Rome for Spain, where he intends to put Denise to death. Some 
of her faithful Spanish subjects hear of his design and travel day and night to fore- 
warn her. Her distress is naturally profound, and she turns to her only source of 
comfort; so earnestly and fervently does she pray for divine succour that God 
hears her and says to Mary, ‘ Mother, I see down there the Queen of Spain in despair, 
for it is not without cause that she is in a bad way; therefore she never ceases to 
pray to you. Get ready and go to her promptly. Nostre-Dame. Son, I will obey 
your command: it is right. Let us go, without stop, angels, to where I am so 
prayed to. Accompany me both of you, singing with gladness.’ 

Nostre-Dame comforts Denise and tells her to don secretly the costume of a squire 
and go to her uncle in Grenada. It is on this journey to Grenada that Denise utters 
the last words wherein any semblance to Imogen has been found. Imogen in 
man’s clothes says, ‘I see a man’s life is a tedious one’; Denise in a squire’s livery 
sighs forth: ‘E Diex! j’ay touz les membres roupz De ceste erre que j’ay empris,— 
Eh, Dieu! every limb is broken by this journey I have undertaken.’ And here we 
leave her. Of course, being in Heavenly hands, her future is secure. In the 
inevitable and chronic duel which has to take place between Ostes and Berengier, 
the latter at the sword’s point confesses all his lies. 


In Germania (Wien, ix. Jahrgang, p. 458, 1864) Kart SCHENKL, supposing that 
Holinshed and Boccaccio were the only sources of the Plot of Cymbeline, offers a 
third in the fairy-tale Sneewitchen, wherein there is a bad Queen who hates her 
stepdaughter and tries to remove her by poison. To be sure, this unfortunate state of 
affairs is not strikingly distinctive, and Schenkl admits it, but what is ‘irrefragable’ 
is the similarity of the scenes where Imogen lives in the cave with that noble pair 
of brothers and that portion of the fairy-story where Sneewitchen finds refuge and 
protection in the house of the dwarfs. Both Sneewitchen and Imogen are dead- 
tired when they enter the cave and are refreshed by the food they find there; and 
just as the dwarfs regard the fair child as a being of a higher realm, so Belarius 
thinks Imogen to be, were it not that she was eating food like a mortal. As Snee- 
witchen keeps house for the dwarfs, so also Imogen cooks and even cuts roots in 
characters. When Sneewitchen, by the cunning of her step-mother, falls into a 
deathlike trance, the dwarfs cry for three days and then carry her in a crystal 
coffin to a mountain where the King’s son finds her and restores her to life. Imogen 
is bewept and bewailed by the two mountain youths, and, strewed with flowers, is 
not buried, but laid on the surface of the ground. Assuredly, in Shakespeare’s play, 
this episode is the most charming Idyl poet ever wrote. It would be interesting 
to know whether or not this fairy-story still survives in England, and in what guise. 


HALuiweEtt (Introduction, p. 14) refers to The Lady of Boeme, a translation from 
Bandello, [the Nineteenth Story] in Painter’s Palace of Pleasure, [The Twenty- 


478 APPENDIX 

eighth Novel], 1567. Beyond a wager on a wife’s chastity, The Lady of Boeme has 
nothing whatsoever in common with the Cymbeline story. Two knights undertake 
to win the love of the wife, who manages to imprison each in turn in her castle and 
makes the quality and daintiness of their food depend on their industry and pro- 
ficiency in spinning flax. 


R. GENEE (vol. x, p. 334, Hildburghausen) states that the same plot had been 
dramatically treated before Shakespeare’s day, in 1596, by a German author under 
the title: ‘The beautiful Story of a God-fearing Merchant of Padua,’ whereof the 
composer was Zachariah Lubhold von Solbergk, who in the Dedication describes 
himself as ‘School master and Townclerk of Silberberg.’ The ‘pious’ merchant 
is named Veridicus; his opponent Falsarius, and the conductor of the intrigue is an 
allegorical character named ‘Marriage fiend’ (Eheteufel). In construction and 
exposition this drama, written throughout in rhymed couplets, is extremely naive. 
In its main features it agrees with Boccaccio; where he diverges, there is not a soli- 
tary passage which recalls either Shakespeare or the English version. 


B. Leonnarnpt (Anglia, vi. Band, 1 Heft, p. 1, 1883) analyses Boccaccio’s Novel, 
Westward for Smelts, Le Roman de la Violette, Le Roman du comte de Poitiers, and 
Sneewitchen (of the last he says there are doubts that this story, which is believed 
to have originated in Hesse, was known in England in Shakespeare’s day), and the 
conclusion to which he comes is that Shakespeare took the plot of Cymbeline solely 
from the Ninth Novel of the Second Day of Boccaccio and from Holinshed’s 
Chronicles; that the welding of the two was his own creation, and that he neither 
knew nor used the other stories just mentioned. 


S. Levy (Anglia, Band vii, Heft i, p. 120, 1884) urged the claims of the Eighth 
Story of the Second Day of Boccaccio to the honourable position of being the source 
whence Shakespeare derived his plot. This may have been a jest on Levy’s part, 
and a poor one. The only ground common to this Highth Story and to Cymbeline 
is that the incidents relate to human beings. 


R. W. Boonie (N. & Qu., VII, iv, 405, 1887) finds the similarity between Cym- 
beline and The Rare Triumphs of Love and Fortune (Hazlitt’s Dodsley, vi.) ‘so strik- 
ing’ that he was ‘astonished to find that it had escaped the notice of Collier’ 
(its original editor). Inasmuch as the best way to repeal a bad law is to enforce it, 
so, I suppose, the best way to disprove an erroneous theory is to print it. Accord- 
ingly, from the following sketch we may discern the parallelism which is so close as 
to remove, so Boodle thinks, ‘all doubt as to the fact that Shakespeare must 
have read the old anonymous play,’—and, may I add, we cannot but marvel at 
the depth of the impression which it made in Shakespeare’s mind, having been 
stored in his memory from 1589 (the date of the only copy now in existence) until it 
leaped to light to help him, poor fellow, when he was floundering in the plot of 
Cymbeline: ‘A noble lord, Bomelio (Shakespeare’s Belarius), after serving his 
king, Phizanies (Shakespeare’s Cymbeline), in war, is banished from the court 
owing to some slander. In this strait he takes up his abode in a cave not far off, 
and is known as the “old hermit.” Here he, like Prospero, studies magic, and 
some time before the commencement of the play he had given his son Hermione 
(Shakespeare’s Posthumus) to the king “for a jewel of some price.” Since this 
transaction Hermione, like Posthumus, has lived in court, enjoying ‘the king’s 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT—VARDLEY—OHLE 479 


gracious countenance,” and what more natural than that he should attract the 
affections of the king’s daughter, Fidelia (Shakespeare’s Imogen)? The play 
begins with Fidelia’s brother, Armenio (Shakespeare’s Cloten), discovering the 
loves of Hermione and Fidelia, whereupon a quarrel takes place, ending in a pass- 
age of arms between Hermione and Armenio (as in Shakespeare), in which Armenio 
is wounded. Hermione is promptly banished from the court, but before leaving 
secures, as he thinks, a faithful go-between for himself and Fidelia in the person 
of Penulo, a courtier and parasite. Hermione hies off to the old hermit’s cave, 
where he is recognised by Bomelio as his son. Hermione accordingly sends through 
Penulo to ask Fidelia to join her lover in the hermit’s cave; but, unlike Posthumus’s 
Pisanio, Penulo proves false, and dispatches Armenio after his sister. She is ac- 
cordingly dragged back to court, but Armenio is struck dumb by Bomelio’s sorcery. 
The sequel of the play is not much to our purpose. Bomelio, in the disguise of an 
“uplandish” physician, visits the court, and offers to cure Armenio of his dumbness, 
managing meanwhile to abduct Fidelia for his son. The dénodment takes place in 
the cave, whither the king and courtiers resort. As in “Cymbeline,” we have a 
theophany (Mercury, Venus, and Fortune) taking part with the mortals in the 
action of the play. It ends with the restoration of Bomelio to court and of Armenio 
to speech, while Fidelia gets her Hermione.’ 


E. YARDLEY (NV. & Qu., VII, viii, 26, 1889) notes that some likeness appears to 
exist between the Belarius portion of Cymbeline and a play of Calderon, ‘abridged 
by Voltaire and called by him Tout est Verité et tout Mensonge, wherein Astolpho, 
who had been ambassador to the Emperor Maurice, lives in disguise as a moun- 
taineer in Sicily, bringing up savagely and in ignorance of their origin, Heraclius, 
son of the murdered Emperor Maurice, and Leonidas, son of the usurping Emperor 
Phocas. The origin of these youths is afterwards revealed to the Emperor Phocas.’ 


It is evident that Boccaccio is a source of the Plot, as far as Imogen is concerned, 
and it is equally evident that he is not the only source. What other sources there 
may be is still a debatable question. Dr R. OHLE has searchingly investigated 
the French versions of this story—those versions, namely, from which Boccaccio 
drew his materials. He assumes that there was a primeval, original story; in this 
story there is no reference to a mole or birthmark. From this original there fol- 
lowed three versions: First, an imaginary old English version; Second, The Count 
of Poitiers (in neither of these two versions is there any birthmark), and Thirdly, 
an imaginary epic text of the Miracle of Nétre Dame, concerning Otho, King of 
Spain, wherein the birthmark is introduced. The First (no birthmark) had two 
descendants: the story in Westward for Smelts (no birthmark) and an imaginary 
Renaissance Drama. From the Second (no birthmark) descended La Violeite 
(with birthmark, but perhaps borrowed from the imaginary Third). From the 
imaginary Third (with birthmark) there descended an Anonymous Novel, King 
Florus and Jehane, and the extant Miracle of Nétre Dame (to which Ohle had given 
a putative epic ancestor). All these three give a birthmark. From the Anonymous 
Novel Boccaccio derived his materials. And finally Cymbeline combines Boccac- 
cio and the imaginary Renaissance Drama, the twin brother of Westward for Smelts. 

In order to show the connection between The Miracle and Cymbeline, Ohle indi- 
cates the following passages, with the understanding that these passages are to be 
found only in the former play: ‘Dame, venez ici, [I give the modern French.—Eb.] 
je vous en prie. Gardez-moi cet os-ci, tenez, si mon amitié vous est quelque peu 


480 APPENDIX 


chére; car c’est de l’un des doigts de mon pied.’ With this passage Ohle regards as 
‘identicall’—Heaven save the mark!—the beautiful and touching words of Post- 
humus when he places (I, ii, 62) a ‘manacle of Love upon the fairest prisoner.’ 
‘In both pieces,’ continues Ohle, ‘the seducer endeavours to awaken the jealousy 
of the victim.’ Wolff was the first, as far as I know, to call attention to this corre- 
spondence, which is, in sooth, noteworthy inasmuch as Boccaccio, whom Shake- 
speare follows in other details of the wager, gives us no interview between the 
beguiler and the woman. Iachimo’s fluent speech means no more than these direct 
words of Berengier in The Miracle: ‘Je viens de Rome, oi j’ai laissé votre seigneur, 
qui ne fait pas plus de cas de vous que de la queue d’une cerise; il a formé une 
liaison avec une fille qu’il aime tant qu’il ne peut s’en séparer.’ The German 
critic was evidently unaware that more than fifty years before he wrote, COLLIER 
(Farther Particulars, p. 28) had called attention to the similarity between the 
French Miracle-Play and Cymbeline in this identical passage, and, what is more, 
had called attention to a striking passage which Ohle failed to notice. (See COLLIER, 
above.) Denise, or La Fille, in The Miracle repels Berengier as Imogen repels 
Iachimo: ‘Comment, Berengier? Par votre ame! étes-vous un vaillant homme 
au point de venir de Rome jusqu’ ici pour me tenir un pareil langage?’ Both 
heroines don man’s apparel, and both complain of the unaccustomed disguise. 
Imogen says, ‘I see a man’s life is a tedious one,’ etc., III, vi, 3, etc. Denise, 
‘Eh Dieu! j’ai tous les membres rompus de ci voyage que j’ai entrepris.’ Finally, 
Ohle regards the vision, which appears to Posthumus in the Fifth Act, as the chief 
point of resemblance with The Miracle, wherein God, at the entreaty of the Holy 
Virgin, personally appears to Otho (Posthumus) and rebukes him for seeking re- 
venge on his wife (Imogen): Otho says, ‘Dieu, en outre, tu as commes unc 
grande faute, en haissant 4 tort ta femme et en la poursuivant jusqu ’A las mort.’ 


A. BRANDL (Shakspere, p. 204): The source of the plot of this play is unusually 
obscure. The love story is derived from Boccaccio, not directly, however, but 
through a recast French Version, now lost. . . . Possibly Shakespeare rewrote an 
older drama. So closely, however, does the rearing of the two young princes in 
the wilderness approach to a chapter in Lily’s Euphues [Qu. ‘How the lyfe of a 
young man should be ledde’?—Ep.], that an intermediate step is not probable; 
this portion may be regarded as most assuredly Shakespeare’s own contribution, 
and the conclusions to which it leads seem all the more likely to be his own personal 
convictions. 


H. Reicu (Jéhrbuch, vol. xli, p. 177, 1905) has given the latest suggestion of a 
source of a portion of the plot. It is to be found in the Ninth Episode of The 
Golden Ass. If any parallel can be discerned between a handsome wicked step- 
mother, who endeavours to poison her step-son because he had rejected her un- 
bridled love, and any character in Cymbeline, then Reich’s suggestion is well 
taken. His case is not much improved that the step-mother’s own son drinks the 
poison by mistake, dies, is buried, but is afterwards discovered alive in the tomb, 


owing to the fact that the physician gave the step-mother not a deadly poison, but 
a sleeping draught. 


On p. 293 of The Merchant of Venice, in this edition, there is an account of a 
ballad, called The Northern Lord, wherein a wager is laid on a wife’s fidelity, and a 
ting, obtained by bribing a servant, is produced in proof. The deceived husband 


DURFEY’S VERSION 481 


in rage and despair drowns the wife,—that is, he only thinks he has drowned her; 
he certainly threw her into the moat, but that she should actually drown would 
be against the canon. Of course, at last she vindicates her honour and is avenged 
on the traducing villain. The ballad is of unknown date and may be long posterior 
to Shakespeare’s play. 

Finally, some idea of the geographical or ethnographical distribution of this 
Iachimo story may be gained by turning to that monumental work, Child’s English 
and Scottish Ballads, where (vol. v, p. 23, foot-note to The Two Knights) references 
may be found to popular tales and ballads about similar wagers in German, Rou- 
manian, Gipsy, Venetian, Sicilian, Florentine, and Danish Folklore. Such a 
wager is also to be found in the ballad of ‘Redesdale and Wise William,’ vol. iv, 
p. 383. Again, Child refers to a Comedia by Jakobus Ayrer (p. 452 verso): Von 
zweyen Fiirstlichen Rathen die alle beede vmb eines gewetts willen vmb ein Weib Bulten 

| wand aber an derselben statt mit szweyen vnterschiedlichen Mdagden betrogen 
worden | Mit 13. Personen | und hat 6. Actus. 1618. 


DURFEY’S VERSION 


Tue InjureED Princess, | or the | Fatat Wacker: | As it was Acted at the | 
TuHEATER-RoyaL, | By His Majesties Servants. | By Tho. Durfey Gent. | London: 
Printed for R. BENTLEY and M. Macnes in Russel-street in Covent-Garden, near 
the Piazza. 1682. 

[On the verso:] Drammatis. Scene. Luds-Town, alias London. 

Cymbeline, King of Britain. 

Ursaces, [Posthumus], A noble Gentleman married to the Princess Eugenia. 

Pisanio, Confident and Friend to Ursaces. 

Cloten, A Fool, son to the Queen by a former Husband. 

Shatillon, [[achimo], An opinionated Frenchman. 

Beaupre, ; : 

Don 7 ichael, } Hie Eriends. 

Bellarius, An old Courtier banish’d by Cymbeline. 

Palladour, \ Two young Princes, sons to Cymbeline, bred up by Bellarius in a 

Arviragus, Cave as his own. 

Lucius, General to Augustus Cesar. 


Women. 

The Queen. 

Eugenia, [Imogen], The Princess. 

Clarina, Her Confident. 

Sophronia, 

Aurelia, 

The Play opens with a conversation between Ursaces, Eugenia and Pisanio, 
Clarina and Lilia (whose name is not in the foregoing list); Pisanio appears to be in 
a towering rage; he observes that ‘Hell has now done its worst; the meagre Furies 
have opened all their Viols of black malice, and shed the utmost drop’ because the 
king has banished his ‘dearest friend’ Ursaces. 

Eugenia gives Ursaces a ring, and Ursaces gives Eugenia a bracelet. Cymbeline 
enters, orders Ursaces from his sight and his Court, and the conversation which 
follows between the father and daughter substantially follows the original. Pisanio, 
who, it seems, is the father of Clarina, describes Ursace’s departure. A scene 


31 


} Women, one to the Queen, the other to the Princess. 


482 APPENDIX 

between Cloten and Iachimo reveals the vulgarity of the former and the dissolute 
character of the latter. At one time Cloten boasts that any one who frowns on him 
his mother ‘shall get him poisoned,’ whereby his mother’s reputation is clearly 
revealed, and is further confirmed by her own words shortly after, when she resolves 
to poison Pisanio and anyone who opposes her. For Cloten, she says— 

‘T’ll cut through all opposers, 

King, Husband, Daughter, Friend, I’ll stop at none, 
But on their bloody ruins build my Throne.’ [Exit.] 

The wager between Ursaces and Shatillon does not very greatly desert the 
original, where it does do so, it descends to a low level; Ursaces says that Shatillon’s 
failure would, for his offensive attempt, deserve to be punished by having his 

‘nose slit across, your slanderous tongue pulled out by ve roots, torn, mangled, 
cut to atoms, and blown like common filth into the air.’ 

The Second Act thus opens: ‘Enter behind Cymbeline, Queen, a Purse, Peas 
Doctor and Guards, a Viol, Mrs. Holten, Sue.’ 

The hostility of the Queen (whether ‘Mrs Holten’ or ‘Sue’ we are not advised) 
to Pisanio is revealed by inciting Cymbeline against him, on account of his love for 
Ursaces. At the close of the scene she appears to relent and gives Pisanio the viol 
of poison as a most precious medicine. The next scene is Shatillon’s attempt to 
entrap Eugenia, who at first seems to believe his degrading charges against Ursaces, 
whereby, grown bolder, Shatillon at last says: 

Shatillon. Let me seal my passion 
Upon thy snowy hands transported, theri rove higher 
And ransack this white magazine of beauty 
Here I shall find— 

Eugenia. That which thou merit’est—death! [Offers a daggar at him. 

Shat. then says that this temptation was the command of Ursaces to try Eugenia’s 
fidelity, which satisfies the latter. 

The scene of Shatillon’s triumph over the credulity of Ursaces follows the original 
with tolerable fidelity. When Ursaces enters in the next scene he has the letter 
already written to Pisanio commanding Eugenia’s death. To insure timely de- 
livery, he says to a servant, ‘Fly, Sirrah, with this to the Packet-Boat.’ 

No explanation given of the journey to Milford, other than Eugenia’s deter- 
mination to leave her father’s palace and travel, in man’s clothes, in search of 
Orsaces. Pisanio, an old noble of the Court and devoted to Ursaces, accompanies 
her. He had seen Shatillon ‘strutting from Eugenia’s apartment And as he 
went, the perfum’d Pulvillio left a scent behind him, Enough to choke a civet-cat; 
I always thought her innocent, Pray Heaven she prove so.’ His suspicions of 
Eugenia’s guilt are confirmed by a letter from Ursaces, and he decides to kill her 
on this journey. He is, however, so far moved by her tears, and by her eagerness 
to die since Ursaces suspects her, that he puts up his sword and, after giving her 
out of charity, the Queen’s drug for sickness, leaves her to her fate. 

The Fourth Act opens with a most brutal scene. Clarina, Eugenia’s dear friend, 
is suspected of knowing the latter’s hiding place. The Queen vows her death, 
but relents and gives her to the drunken lord, Iachimo, to ‘use her as she deserves.’ 
He thereupon drags her off, while she screams for hee Just as the scene closes 
word is brought to Cymbeline that the Romans, led by Caius Lucius, are landed 
at Milford Haven. 

Cymbeline orders instant preparation for war and will head his army in person. 

In the next Scene Eugenia approaches the Cave with, 


DURFEY’ S VERSION 483 


“Good Heaven! 
No succour yet: I’me tired with wandering, 
And faint with hunger. Ah some kind Silvian God, 
That rul’st these Groves, rise from thy mossie Couch, 
And with thy hoord of Summer wholesom Fruits, 
Preserve an innocent Lady from sharp Famine! 
I saw an Apple-tree in yonder Thicket, 
On which eager to feed, as I drew near it, 
A large grown Serpent from the hollow Root, 
Oppos’d my raging hunger, and instead of pitying 
My pale and pining Looks, with flaming Eyes, 
And dreadful Hisses, like the Hesperian Dragon, 
Frighted me from the place; the very Trees, I think, 
Take part with cruel man. Ha! what gloomy Place is this? 
Here is a path to’t; sure ’tis some savage hold. 
Hoa, who’s there? 
If anything that’s civil, speak and help 
A wretched creature; but if savage, 
Be speedy in my death. No answer; then I’le enter. 
Now Mercy, Heaven. [Exit 


Enter Bellarius and Paladour. 


Bellar. Wve haunch’d the Stag, and hung his Quarters up 
The backside of the Cave, and when your Brother comes, 
We'le make our feast. [Horn within. 
Palla. Wark, I think I hear his Horn; let’s go and 
Meet him, he has ventur’d hard today, it may 
Be the wild Boar has hurt him too. 
Bellar. Heaven forbid, my Boy. [Exeunt. 


Enter Eugenia with Meat, eating and lifting up her hands. 


Eugen. Bless’d be this poor Retreat; for ever bless’d 
The Steward of this Feast, that brings me comfort, 
And saves me from a miserable Fate. Oh Heaven! 
How sweet is this coarse Fare, this little morsel, 

Which in prosperity my lavish hand 

Wou’d have profusely thrown away to Dogs? 

How dearly does it relish now? How covetous am I 

Of each least Bit? Pardon great Providence: 

We are ignorant of ourselves, till Miseries 

Purge our corrupted Natures, and Want, rare Artists, 

Moulds us to sense of our Mortality. [Eats and drinks. 


Enter Bellarius, Paladour, and Arviragus, with a Boar’s Head. 

Bellarius and the youths describe their experiences as hunters; at last Bellarius 
exclaims, ‘How now, what’s here? . . . But that he eats our victuals, I shou’d 
think He were a Fairy.’ And so on for the rest of the scene, pretty much in Shake- 
speare’s words. It concludes— 

Eugenia. I’m bound to you for ever; 

And now too well I can disprove report 
The. country is not savage, but the Court. [Exeunt, they embracing her. 


484 APPENDIX 


Scene III. opens with a soliloquy by Pisanio, who repents his cruelty to Eugenia 
and decides to go forth in search of her and give her aid. 

After his departure Cloten enters, with Iachimo dragging in Clarina (Pisanio’s 
daughter) in a man’s clothes. The brutal coarseness of the two men had better not 
be imagined—assuredly not described. ‘Rather be burned to ashes,’ screams 
Clarina, ‘help! help! Oh Heaven send down Thy thunder, dash me to the Earth, 
Rather than suffer this. Help! Help! 


Enter Pisanio. 


Pisan. What pitious Cry was that? sure ’twas a Woman’s voice 
By the shrill sound. Good Gods, what’s this I see? 
My daughter here? 
Clarin. Mercy—unlook’d for:’ Tis he, Oh my dear Father 
In a bless’d Minute are you come to save me! [Runs and embraces him. 
Pisan. Ha! Lord Cloten too? 
Then all’s discover’d, and I’me lost. 
Cloten. See Iachimo, yonder’s that old Traitor too luckily 
Faln into our snare: Go, go, take his Daughter 
From him, and ravish her before his face. 
Tachimo. With all my heart; I'll not lose for a million. 
Pisan. He comes upon his death that touches her: Base men, 
Have you no humane Nature? 
Cloten. Does he expostulate? Kill, kill the Stave. 
Pisan. I first shall see thy death. , 
Cloten. No, thou shalt never see agen; for when I have conquered thee, 
With my Sword’s point, Vle dig out both thy eyes, 
Then drag thee to my Mother to be tortur’d. 
Iachimo. Vle do his business presently. [Fight, Pisan. wounded. 
Pisan. Fly, Daughter, fly, whilst my remains of Life 
I render for thy safety. 
Clarin. Oh save my Father! Heaven save him, save him. [Exit. 
[Fight still, Pisanio kills Iachimo, then falls down with him, and Cloten disarms him. 
Pisan. Thou hast it now, I think. 
Iachimo. A Plague on him, he has kill’?d me. Oh— [Dyes. 
Cloten. Curs’d Misfortune! He’s dead; but I’me resolved to 
Be thy true Prophet however, thou shalt not 
See my death, unless with other eyes. [Puts out his eyes. 
Pisan. Hell-born Fury! Oh— 
Cloten. So, now smell thy way out of the Wood, whilst 
I follow thy daughter, find her, and cut her piece-meal; 
Tle sacrifice her to the Ghost of Iachimo. [Exit. 
Pisan. All dismal, dark as Night, or lowest shades, 
The regions of the Dead, or endless Horror; 
The Sun with all his light, now gives me none, 
But spreads his beamy Influence in vain, 
And lends no glimpse to light my Land of darkness. 
Sure near this place there lyes a sword, [Crawls about to find his sword. 
Tle try if I can find it. Pitiless Fate,. 
Wilt thou not guide my hand? My Wound’s not mortal, 
And I shall yet live Ages; True sign of Grief, 


DURFEY’S VERSION 485 


When we do wish to die before our time. 

le crawl into some Bush and hide myself, 

Till Fate’s at leisure; there 

To the dumb Grove recount my Miseries, 

Weep Tears of bloud from Wounds instead of Eyes. [Crawls out. 


ScENE Iv. As in Shakespeare, Eugenia pleads illness and begs hosts to go 
hunting as usual. They comply. She tastes Pisanio’s cordial. Cloten, in his 
search for Clarina, meets Arviragus, whom he insults, and by whom he is slain, as 
in the original. Arviragus leaves Bellarius and Polydour to throw Cloten’s head in 
the stream; and when he returns Polydour is gone to look after Fidele. As they 
approach the Cave (there is no mention of solemn music) they meet Polydour ‘with 
Eugenia as dead’: 

Pallad. See Brother, see; the pretty Bird is dead, 

That we so well did love. 

Bellar. Dead? and by Melancholy? this is strange. 

Arvir. Oh piercing Sight! Thou sweetest, fairest Lilly, 
My Brother wears thee now not half so well, 
As when thou grew’st thy self. 

Bellar. How did’st thou find him? 

Pallad. Just as you see, smiling as in slumber. 
His right Cheek reposing on a Cushion on the Floor; 
His arms thus cross’d, I thought he slept, and put 
My hunting shoes from off my feet, whose rudeness 
Answer’d my Steps too loud. 

Bellar. Well, ’tis in vain to mourn, what’s past recovery; 
Come Sons, let’s lay him in our Tomb. 

Arvir. Rest there sweet Body of a sweeter Soul, [They lay him in the Grave. 
Whil’st we lament thy Fate. 

Enter Caius Lucius, Captains and Souldiers, with Drum and Colours. 


There is no indication here of a change of scene, nor any indication that Bel., 
Arvir., and Palad. have left the stage. The scenes throughout are so negligently or 
erroneously indicated that I have paid but little attention to them or their divisions. 
The conversation which follows between Lucius and his Captains is about the same 
as in Shakespeare, until Lucius says, ‘What’s here? A Boy Asleep, I think, or dead; 
let’s see his Face.’ 

Cap. He is alive, my Lord. 

Lucius. What art thou, Youth? 

Eugen. 1am nothing; or if something 
’T were better I were nothing. 

Lucius. This Country sure 
Is savage grown: This morning in yon Wood 
T found an old Man, his Eyes just put out, wounded, 

And freshly bleeding; And not far off from him, 
A tender Virgin, running with Hair disheveled, 
And crying to Heaven for succour; whom strait I seiz’d, 
And carried to my Tent, where now they are. 
Capt. I saw ’um, and heard since they are of quality. 
Lucius. Look up, youth, Vle entertain thee, 
Thou shalt go with me. 


486 APPENDIX 


Eugen. I beseech you, sir, excuse me. 
Lucius. By no means; I like thee well, thou shalt be my Page. 
Eugen. He’s going with an Army ’gainst my Father; 
V’th’Battel sure I cannot miss a death, 
Amongst so many Swords. Well, Sir, if I must go. 
Lucius. Leave soft Grief, 
And bend thy mind to th’War; if thou dost nobly, 
Cesar shall honour thee. March. [Exeunt, Scene closes upon Cloten’s dead Body. 


This is the first and only time that Cloten’s dead body has been mentioned. 
The two youths who now enter with Bellarius are keen to join the Army and rush 
into the battle, but Bellarius holds back in fear lest he be recognized and tortured, 
but his sons persuade him that twenty years have so changed him that recognition 
is impossible. He yields, and the Fourth Act closes with the modest boast of 
Arviragus that, 

‘When I’me full of Wounds, begrim’d with Dust, 

Spotted with Blood, and hemm’d about with Enemies, 
I shall break through like the young God of War; 
With Blood of Foes the neighb’ring Valleys fill, 

Like Lightning scatter, and like Thunder kill.’ 


The Fifth Act opens with this soliloquy by Ursaces: 


‘From hollow Rocks and solitary Caves, 
Where the evil Genius hunts the Miserable, 
To mask in Shades, and shun the cheerful Light, 
Wretched Ursaces back to Britain comes, 
Bearing this bloody witness of his Cruelty: 
Heart-killing Sight! The Blood that stains this Linnen, 
Once swell’d the Veins of the mildest, fairest, chastest; 
O but not chast! In that my praise exceeded; 
That Title fatally she lost, and now 
Has paid too dearly for’t;—yet Divine Heaven, 
Should every one that forfeits Honour, be 
Depriv’d of Life; thy World wou’d be unpeopl’d. 
The full fed City-Dame wou’d sin in fear; 
The Divine’s Daughter slight the amorous Cringe 
Of her tall Lover; the close salacious Puritan 
Forget th’Appointment with her canting Brother. 
Should rigorous Death punish the veneal Error, 
The fashion of the World would be abolish’d. 
How great then is my Crime? I am brought hither 
Disguis’d among the Cavalry, to fight 
Against my Ladies Kingdom.—But ’tis enough, dear 
Britain, I have kill’d thy Mistress. 
Peace, I’le give no Wound to thee, 
But mourn my fault, and fall in thy defence; 
So some vile Wretch that in his Life has been 
Unhappy, and has done some deadly Sin, 
In Conscience struck, by some good Act does try 
To merit Heav’n—make his peace and die.’ 


DURFEY’S VERSION 487 


Although the deeds of Ursaces were in the distant Past, his thoughts were on the 
Present. We have seen how he sent his letter by a ‘packet-boat,’ and in the 
Cavalier times of Charles IT. he cannot refrain from a stoccata at the Puritans. 

The British and Roman Armies now enter by opposite doors and trumpets sound 
a parley. Cymbeline asks for the terms of peace and Lucius demands the payment 
of the tribute. This Cymbeline refuses, and without more ado, they fall to fighting. 
As in the original, the Britons are defeated; Ursaces rescues Cymbeline, and the 
onslaught of Bellarius and his two boys turns the tide of battle, and victory is 
gained. Shatillon attempts to escape by assuming the clothes of a British soldier; 
he meets Ursaces and the recognition is mutual. Hereupon there follows a highly 
vigorous dialogue wherein ‘Death,’ ‘Damnation,’ ‘Devil,’ ‘Fiend,’ and ‘Hell’ 
are sprinkled with a liberal hand. Shatillon proclaims Eugenia’s innocence, which 
Ursaces disbelieves, and pronounces a lie uttered by Shatillon to save his life. 
They fight, and, of course, Shatillon falls mortally wounded. ‘Thou hast perform’d 
thy word,’ says the dying man, 

My warm Blood 
Flows from my Heart, and my departing Soul 
Swims on the surface of the purple Gore: 

O too small recompense for Eugehia’s wrongs, 
That bless’d, that innocent Princess! 

Ursa. O Heaven! 

Shatt. Nay, thou’lt wonder more anon; Know then rash credulous Fool, I did 
betray the Princess. 

Ursa. Betray? How betray? How innocent? 

And how was she betray’d? 

Shatt. YVle tell the Cause I hate thee, therefore, observe me; 
I did bely her Virtue and by Cunning obtain’d 
The knowledge of her Apartment and Person. 

Ursa. By Cunning say’st thourp—Break not yet my Brain; 
Do not distract me till I have heard all: 

Say how by Cunning. 

Shait. Cunning that now I hope may chance to dam thee. 
I got myself convey’d into her Chamber, and at dead 
Of night, she innocently sleeping, took view o’th’ 

Hangings, Furniture, and Pictures, and all of which 
When return’d to Gaul I told you. 

Ursa. Horrid and damn’d Impostor! But say further, 
Speak on thy Soul, how did’st thou get that Bracelet? 

Shatt. There as she slept I cut it from her Arm, 

And viewing nearer, saw the Mole I spoke of. 

Ursa. And this is true, as thou hast [hope] of rest? 

Shatt. Whate’er I hope, rest or unrest, ’tis true. But Oh 
My soul is wand’ring to its unknown home, 

My Blood’s all Ice! [Dies. 

Ursa. Then am I damn’d more than the worst of Fiends; 

Heav’n keep not now thy Thunderbolt in vain 
To shoot at Trees, or cleave the marble Rocks, 
But dart it here; here in this wretched Head 
Throw thy swift Bolt, and dash me to the Center; 
Let Hell devour me quick, the Fiends dissect me, 


488 APPENDIX 


Burn, cut me to atomes.—O revenge, revenge 
The innocent Eugenia! Here he stands 
That caus’d her to be murder’d; dam him, dam him; 
Bathe him in molten Glass;—let a Cabal of Furies 
Meet and consult t’invent new Tortures for him, 
And be his Pangs eternal. He comes, ye Fiends, 
Swift as old Lucifer, when first he fell, 
And with this stroak transports himself to Hell. 
[Offers to fall on his Sword. The Britt. hold. 
‘Capt. That must not be while we stand tamely by. 
Souldiers, he has confess’d he kill’d 
The Princess; let’s bear him to the King. 
Death is too kind a punishment, he merits the worst 
Of Tortures: O horrid Murderer, away with him! 
Ursa. Let me kneel before thee, 
And thank thee for that Judgement; Thou art wise, 
And ’tis most true that only Death is much too kind.’ 


This offer of Ursaces to kneel to the Captain in gratitude for his judgement on 
him as a murderer is, to me, amid the whole fustian farrago if this Version, the 
one solitary gleam of a dramatic insight into the depths of human nature. And 
the introduction of the Captain is a happy solution withal of the problem of bring- 
ing Ursaces and Cymbeline face to face. 

In the last scene, Lucius appears as prisoner, before Cymbeline, and begs the life 
of his Page, pretty much as in the original, and with the same result. Ursaces is 
brought in. Cymbeline expresses lively gratitude to him for having saved his life, 
but Ursaces waives it aside because he is the murderer of Eugenia. ‘Then,’ ex- 
claims Cymbeline, ‘art thou damn’d indeed.’ 

‘Ursa. Then am I damn’d indeed? O true Assertion! 

And see I thus submit me to be tortur’d, 
Thus fall at thy Slave’s feet, and beg for justice. 
Be dark, thou Sun, 
And be ye lesser Lights extinguish’d all; 
Be Nature sick, let shades surround the World, 
And Order cease, till my Eugenia, the fair, the best Eugenia, 
Be in my horrid torturing Death reveng’d. 
Eugen. Shine brighter Sun, 
And all ye happy Stars glimmer for joy, 
At this unlook’d for Change. Oh my dear Husband! 
Here is thy Wife, here is Eugenia, 
Once more receive me as the gift of Heaven. 

Ursa. Of my Soul’s Joy! Can’st thou e’re pardon me? 
Canst thou forget? 

Eugen. Heaven knows, with all my heart; 

But let me beg you doubt my Faith no more. 
Ursa. If I do, may Heav’n forsake me ever, 
And thou, my better Genius, cease to guide me. 

Cymb. Has Love so blinded thee thou hast forgot me? 
Dost thou not know thy Father? 

Eugen. O my Lord! 


HARK, HARK THE LARK 489 
So thrive my Soul, as in my best of Duty 

My heart is vow’d to you; Pray pardon me. 

Cymb. Let this declare I do.’ 


The blinded Pisanio is led in by Clarina: 

‘Pisan, Where, where’s my Lord Ursaces? lead me to him. 

Ursa. Ha! His Eyes lost, and for my sake I fear: 

Speak, good old Friend, whose cruel deed was this? 

Pisan. ’Twas Cloten’s; but if you love me, do not pity me; 

For this was I ordain’d, and well can bear it. 
Where is the Princess? let me kiss her Hand.’ 

[Here Durfey repeats Imogen’s response, which he mistakenly thought was 
Shakespeare’s. | 

‘Eugen. Come not near me, Murderer: 

Thou left’st me in the Desart, and gavest me Poison.’ 

Pisanio explains the poison, says he killed Iachimo, and that Cloten then blinded 
him, but what thereafter befell Cloten he knew not. Arviragus steps forward and 
announces that he is responsible for Cloten’s death, and so the Version ends fol- 
lowing its original pretty closely. The last words of the last speech are spoken by 
Ursaces: 

‘Thus as some wounded Hero, 

That where most danger was, press’d forward still, 
At last his Life owes to Physician’s skill; 

So Love, the blest Physician of the Mind, 

Heals all my Griefs, immortal Joys I find, 

And Heav’n on Earth, whilst my Ewgenia’s kind.’ 


TRANSLATIONS OF 
HARK, HARK THE LARK! 


BENJAMIN LAROUCHE 


Chant 


L’alouette, aux portes des cieux, 
Eléve sa voix matinale; 
Et, sur la rive orientale, 
Le soleil monte radieux. 


Sur la terre, en perles liquides, 
L’Aurore a répandu ses pleurs; 
Phébus au calice des fleurs 
Abreuve ses coursiers rapides. 


La marguerite au bouton d’or 
Ouvre ses yeux a la lumiére; 
Tout ce réveille sur la terre; 
Réveillez-vous, mon cher trésor. 


490 APPENDIX 


» Lr TouRNEUR 
Air 
Ecoute, écoute, !’Alouette chante a la porte des Cieux. 
Phébus s’éveille, & monte dans les Airs: 
Du calice des fleurs s’éléve une rosée qui rafratchit les pieds de ses coursiers. 
Les Marguerites 4 peine écloses 
Commencent a entr’ouvris leurs yeux d’or. 
Eveille-toi, ma douce Maitresse, 
Avec toutes ces fleurs mignones; 
Léve-toi, léve-toi. 
FRANGcOISs-VictoR Huco 


Chanson 


Ecoute! écoute! l’alouette 4 la porte du ciel, 
Et Phébus se léve déja 
Pour baigner ses coursiers aux sources 
Que récele le calice des fleurs; 
Et les soucis clignotants commencent 
A ouvrir leurs yeux d’or. 
Avec tout ce qui est charmant, 
Ma douce dame, léve-toi, 
Léve-toi, léve-toi. 


Carto RUSCONT 


Sinfonia e Canzone 
Ascolta! ascolta! lallodola canta alle porte del cielo, e Febo incomincia a levarsi; 
i suoi cavalli s’abbeverano alle sorgenti, da cui si attigne la rugiada dei fiori; e le 
pratelline appena dischiuse lasciano travedere i loro occhi d’oro. Oh svegliati, 
svegliati, mia dolce amica! svegliati insieme con quest’odorosa famiglia! 


GIvoLo CARCANO 


Canto 
Alle porte del ciel canta l’allodola, 
Febo si leva e splende; 
E co’destrieri suoi de’ fior’ nel calice 
Per rinfrescarsi scende. 
Miro occhieggiar la margherita, e schiudere 
Le sue pupille d’or: 
Tutto che ride di bellezza svegliasi: 
E tu non sorgi ancor, 
O mio soave amor? 


A Song 
Sung by Guiderius and Arviragus over Fidele, supposed to be dead. 
By Mr Witt1am CoLiins 
To fair Fidele’s grassy tomb, 
Soft maids and village hinds shall bring 


Each opening sweet, of earliest bloom, 
And rifle all the breathing spring. 


CRITICISMS—GERVINUS 491 


No wailing ghost shall dare appear 

To vex with shrieks this quiet grove; 
But shepherd lads assemble here, 

And melting virgins own their love. 


No withered witch shall here be seen, 
No goblins lead their nightly crew: 

The female fays shall haunt the green, 
And dress thy grave with pearly dew. 


The red-breast oft at evening hours 
Shall kindly lend his little aid, 

With hoary moss, and gather’d flowers, 
To deck the ground where thou art laid. 


When howling winds and beating rain, 
In tempests shake the sylvan cell; 
Or midst the chace on every plain, 
The tender thought on thee shall dwell. 


Each lonely scene shall thee restore; 
For thee the tear be duly shed; 

Belov’d till life could charm no more; 
And mourn’d till pity’s self be dead. 


CRITICISMS 
PosTHUMUS 


Gervinus (Trans. by Bunnett, ii, p. 275): Not until the Italian actually taints 
the snow-white swan of Posthumus, and taunts him as though he must have cause 
to fear if he gave way, not until then does he wager upon his wife, whose fidelity he 
could trust for even more than this; she is to do her part to retrieve the honour of 
her sex, and then (this is the intention with which he accepts the wager) he will 
add to her repulse the deserved castigation, and punish Iachimo with the sword 
for his ill-opinion and his presumption. In this moral anger Posthumus is no less 
the same rare being as in the rest of his conduct. His irritation on such noble 
grounds shews his previous calmness and discretion for the first time in its right 
light, and this his ever-tested moderation reminds us to consider again and again 
the reason which drives him exceptionally to exasperation in a transaction so 
indelicate. Let us remember that the equally calm and even calmer Imogen, who 
is as rarely or more rarely excited, is driven by one and the same occasion to the 
same indignation; when the abject Cloten sets himself above her Posthumus, and 
attempts to disparage him, as Iachimo had attempted to defame Imogen. Let us 
remember that this abnegation of ‘a lady’s manners,’ her burst of indignation, her 
flight, shows no less self-forgetfulness in the woman than the wager does in the 
man. For that self-forgetfulness lies in both cases in both steps, we will not deny; 
the Poet himself, beautiful and excusable as are the inducements in both instances, 
would neither deny nor conceal this, since he has so severely punished the rashness 


on both sides. 
TAacHIMO 


Gervinus (Trans. by Bunnett, ii, p. 276): Base as he is, we must, however, be- 
ware of making him still baser. Want of faith in human goodness is not innate in 


492 APPENDIX 


him, but acquired from his never having met with virtuous men. A mere glance 
of Imogen shews him what he has never seen; he feels at once that here weapons 
of no common kind would be required. Repulsed by her, and ashamed, he feels 
neither hatred nor ill-will against her, but admiration alone. If it were not for 
the stings of a base ambition to maintain the glory of being irresistible, if half his 
fortune and his life had not been at stake, he might indeed have forborne the 
deception which he now plays upon Posthumus. He utters the horrible slander 
against Imogen, yet not for the pleasure of slandering her; he speaks ambiguously, 
he neither lies unnecessarily, nor degrades her unnecessarily. When he has at- 
tained his object—his own safety—the experience he has gained affects him, the 
virtue he has seen and tested awakens his conscience, the shame of his guilt op- 
presses him and makes him a coward in the fight with Britain; the speedy confes- 
sion of his sin shews him crushed with remorse worthy of pardon. 


IMOGEN 


Mrs JAMESON (ii, p. 50): We come now to Imogen. Others of Shakespeare’s 
characters are, as dramatic and poetical conceptions, more striking, more brilliant, 
more powerful; but of all his women, considered as individuals rather than as 
heroines, Imogen is the most perfect. Portia and Juliet are pictures to the fancy 
with more force of contrast, more depth of light and shade; Viola and Miranda, 
with more aérial delicacy of outline, but there is no female portrait that can be 
compared to Imogen as a woman—none in which so great a variety of tints are 
mingled together into such perfect harmony. In her we have all the fervour of 
youthful tenderness, all the romance of youthful fancy, all the enchantment of 
ideal grace,—the bloom of beauty, the brightness of intellect, and the dignity of 
rank, taking a peculiar hue from the conjugal character which is shed over all, like 
a consecration and a holy charm. In Othello and the Winter’s Tale the interest 
_ excited for Desdemona and Hermione is divided with others; but in Cymbeline 
Imogen is the angel of light, whose lovely presence pervades and animates the _ 
whole piece. The character altogether may be pronounced finer, more complex 
in its elements, and more fully developed in all its parts than those of Hermione 
and Desdemona; but the position in which she is placed is not, I think, so fine—at 
least, not so effective, as a tragic situation. . . . 

(p. 58): When Ferdinand tells Miranda that she was ‘created of every creature’s 
best,’ he speaks like a lover, or refers only to her personal charms: the same expres- 
sion might be applied critically to the character of Imogen; for, as the portrait of 
Miranda is produced by resolving the female character into its original elements, 
so that of Imogen unites the greatest number of those qualities which we imagine 
to constitute excellence in woman. 

Imogen, like Juliet, conveys to our mind the impression of extreme simplicity in 
the midst of the most wonderful complexity. To ‘conceive her aright we must 
take some peculiar tint from many characters, and so mingle them that, like the 
combination of hues in a sun-beam, the effect shall be as one to the eye. We must 
imagine something of the romantic enthusiasm of Juliet, of the truth and con- | 
stancy of Helen, of the dignified purity of Isabel, of the tender sweetness of ” 
Viola, of the self-possession and intellect of Portia—combined together so equally 
and so harmoniously that we can scarcely say that one quality predominates 
over the other. But Imogen is less imaginative than Juliet, less spirited and 
intellectual than Portia, less serious than Helen and Isabel; her dignity is not so 
imposing as that of Hermione, it stands more on the defensive; her submission, 


CRITICISMS—Mrs JAMESON 493 


though unbounded, is not so passive as that of Desdemona; and thus, while she 
resembles each of these characters individually, she stands wholly distinct from all. 

It is true that the conjugal tenderness of Imogen is at once the chief subject of 
the drama, and the pervading charm of her character; but it is not true, I think, 
that she is merely interesting from her tenderness and constancy to her husband. 
We are so completely let into the essence of Imogen’s nature that we feel as if 
we had known and loved her before she was married to Posthumus, and that her 
conjugal virtues are a charm superadded, like the colour laid upon a beautiful 
groundwork. Neither does it appear to me that Posthumus is unworthy of 
Imogen, or only interesting on Imogen’s account. His character, like those of 
all the other persons of the drama, is kept subordinate to hers; but this could 
not be otherwise, for she is the proper subject—the heroine of the poem. Every 
thing is done to ennoble Posthumus, and justify her love for him; and though 
we certainly approve more for her sake than for his own, we are early prepared 
to view him with Imogen’s eyes; and not only excuse, but sympathize in her 
admiration of him. 

(p. 76): It has been remarked that ‘her readiness to pardon Iachimo’s false 
imputation, and his designs against herself, is a good lesson to prudes, and may 
show that where there is a real attachment to virtue, there is no need of an out- 
rageous antipathy to vice.’ [See note by Hazrrrt, I, vii, 247.] 

This is true; but can we fail to perceive that the instant and ready forgiveness 
of Imogen is accounted for, and rendered more graceful and characteristic by the 
very means which Jachimo employs to win it? He pours forth the most enthu- 
siastic praises of her husband, professes that he merely made this trial of her out 
of his exceeding love for Posthumus, and she is pacified at once; but, with exceeding 
delicacy of feeling, she is represented as maintaining her dignified reserve and her 
brevity of speech to the end of the scene. 

We must also observe how beautifully the character of Imogen is distinguished 
from those of Desdemona and Hermione. When she is made acquainted with her 
husband’s cruel suspicions, we see in her deportment neither the meek submission 
of the former, nor the calm resolute dignity of the latter. The first effect produced 
on her by her husband’s letter is conveyed to the fancy by the exclamation of 
Pisanio, who is gazing on her as she reads: ‘What shall I need to draw my sword, 
the paper Hath cut her throat already.’ 

And in her first exclamations we trace, besides astonishment, and anguish, and 
the acute sense of the injustice inflicted on her, a flash of the indignant spirit, 
which we do not find in Desdemona or Hermione. . 

(p. 82): One thing more must be particularly remarked, because it serves to indi- 
vidualise the character from the beginning to the end of the poem. We are constantly 
sensible that Imogen, besides being a tender and devoted woman, is a princess and a 
beauty, at the same time that she is ever superior to her position and her external 
charms. There is, for instance, a certain airy majesty of deportment—a spirit of 
accustomed command breaking out every now and then—the dignity, without the 
assumption of rank and royal birth, which is apparent in the scene with Cloten and 
elsewhere: and we have not only a general impression that Imogen, like other hero- 
ines, is beautiful, but the peculiar style and character of her beauty is placed before 
us; we have an image of the most luxuriant loveliness, combined with exceeding 
delicacy and even fragility of person; of the most refined elegance, and the most 
exquisite modesty, set forth in one or two passages of description; as when Iachimo 
is contemplating her asleep: [II, ii, 20 et seq_]. 


494 APPENDIX 


The preservation of her feminine character under her masculine attire; her 
delicacy, her modesty, and her timidity are managed with the same perfect con- 
sistency and unconscious grace as in Viola. And we must not forget that her ‘neat 
cookery,’ which is so prettily eulogised by Guiderius, formed part of the education 
of a princess in those remote times. 


GrorcE FLeTcuer (p. 77): The ensuing explanation on the part of Iachimo, 
and her consequent reconciliation, demand our particular attention; the more, 
because, among other important misconceptions as to the qualities and the con- 
duct of this personage, Hazlitt, in his examination of this play, has the following 
remark upon this passage: [Fletcher here quotes Hazlitt’s note as given above, 
and also Mrs Jameson’s comment thereupon; he thus continues:] 

But this version of the matter is nothing less than degrading both to the intellect 
and the delicacy of the heroine as portrayed by Shakespeare. It is talking as if 
when, according to Hazlitt, she ‘pardons’ Iachimo, or, as Mrs Jameson expresses it, 
is ‘pacified,’ she still believed that her Italian visitor had really intended to leave 
her husband slandered in her opinion, and her own purity stained. Had she con- 
continued so to believe, it would have been contamination to her to exchange 
another sentence with one whom she held to be so foul a villain. But he, ‘singular 
in his art,’ has with subtle dexterity converted, in her estimation, his very defama- 
tion of her husband and his insult to herself into a precious testimony of his ex- 
treme solicitude for her dear lord’s welfare—that most irresistible of all claims upon 
her kindly regard. He had spoken thus only ‘to know if her affiance were deeply 
rooted,’ and to enable himself to carry back to her husband the more gratifying 
report of her incorruptible constancy. His eloquent eulogy of Leonatus—‘He 
sits ’mongst men like a descended god,’ etc.—has a double charm for her by 
contrast with the foulness of his previous imputations. She betrays no weak- 
ness of judgment in accepting this explanation from a man introduced to her, 
under her husband’s own hand, as ‘one of the noblest note,’ to whose kind- 
nesses he was most infinitely obliged. Overlooking, though not quite forget- 
ting, the liberty taken with herself, the revulsion of feeling in her generous 
breast makes her welcome the insinuating stranger with hardly less cordiality 
than before, though with the added reserve of a dignity and a delicacy too deli- 
cately wounded. ... 

(p. tor): And here, in justice to the performer, we must point out a certain 
misconception as to the predominant spirit of this scene, which her judgment has led 
her to avoid. Mrs Jameson, for example, tells us, in relation to it, that, after 
Imogen’s ‘affecting lamentation over the falsehood and injustice of her husband,’ 
she then resigns herself to his will with ‘the most entire submission.’ The critic 
here falls into the error of making Imogen desire Pisanio to ‘do his master’s bidding’ 
simply from a motive of obedience to the will of a man whom she is all the while so 
emphatically assuring us that she feels called upon to regard with indignant pity. 
This, however, is but one instance of the mistakes occasioned by the low estimate of 
Imogen’s character, in her conjugal relation, which has been so unaccountably 
prevalent among the critics; abasing her from her proper station as a noble, gen- 
erous, and intellectual woman, whose understanding has sanctioned the election of 
her heart to that of a creature blindly impassioned and affectionate, ready to 
submit quite passively to any enormity of indignity and injustice inflicted upon 
her by the man to whom she has devoted herself. The present actress of the 
character makes herself no party to this degradation. . . 


CRITICISMS—LA DY MARTIN—LENOX 495 


(p. 103): 


‘T do not bid thee beg my life, good lad; 
And yet, I know, thou wilt.’ 


And, at this moment, the auditor feels as if he knew so too; for all that he has 
learned, both of the character and the circumstances of Imogen, leads him in- 
evitably to this conclusion. Her husband being, she supposes, dead,—her servant 
treacherous,—her father, though present to her eyes, yet lost to her heart,—the 
only ray of sympathy that beams upon her soul amid the settled gloom of its deep 
though calm despair is that which she finds in the paternal kindness of the noble 
Roman. Can Imogen, then, do otherwise than petition for his life? Yes; for, 
“Alack, There’s other work in hand.’ Upon the finger of the captive Iachimo she 
had recognized the consecrated jewel, even that ‘diamond that was her mother’s,’ 
which when she had last beheld it her beloved Leonatus was putting on his finger, 


saying, ‘Remain, remain thou here, While sense can keep it on!’ Again, therefore, _ 
her doubts are cruelly awakened as to her deceased lord’s fidelity—‘I see a thing 
_Bitter to me as death!’ And the craving of her heart for the final solution of this | 
horrible enigma makes her eagerly forego the last human tie that slenderly binds | 


her to existence—‘ Your life, good master, Must shuffle for itself. This explicit 
rejection of the opportunity to save her ‘good master’s’ life should be retained in 
acting, to give, as we have hinted before, its full effect to the intensity of interest 
with which she looks upon the ring. 

From the beginning, however, of Iachimo’s confession the countenance and 
gesture of the present performer express to us, in their delicate variation, what 
Shakespeare’s text can but dimly suggest, even to the most thoughtful and imagina- 
tive reader. In them we trace, in vivid succession, the intensely fixed attention 
of the heroine to the commencement of Iachimo’s narrative,—the trembling anxiéty 
as it proceeds,—the tenderly mournful delight on receiving the full conviction of 
her husband’s fidelity ,—and then the grateful, tearful, overpowering joy on secing 
him so suddenly alive and hearing his repentant exclamations,—and that most 


difficult, perhaps, as it is the most pathetic stroke of all, the coming forward, for- | 


getful of her male disguise, to discover herself to him, and relieve him from that 
intolerable anguish which her generous heart can no longer endure to contemplate. 


Heena Faucit, LApy MartIN (p. 168): What Shakespeare intends us to see in 
Imogen is made plain by the impression she is described as producing on all who 
come into contact with her,—strangers as well as those who have seen her grow 
up at her father’s Court. She is of royal nature as well as of royal blood,—too noble 


to know that she is noble. A grand and patient faithfulness is at the root of her » 
character. Yet she can be angry, vehement, passionate upon occasion. With-a™ 


being of so fine and sensitive an organization, how could it be otherwise? Her 
soul’s strength and nobleness, speaking through her form and movements, impress 
all alike with an irresistible charm. Her fine taste, her delicate ways, her accom- 
plishments, her sweet singing are brought before us by countless subtle touches. 
To her belongs especially the quality of grace,—that quality which, in Goethe’s 
words, ‘macht unwiderstehlich,’ and which, as Racine says, is even ‘superior to 
beauty or, rather, is beauty sweetly animated.’ 


Mrs Lenox (p. 166): It would seem to be an endless Talk to take Notice of all 
the Absurdities in the Plot, and unnatural Manners in the Characters of this Play. 


490 APPENDIX 

Such as the ridiculous Story of the King’s two Sons being stolen in their Infancy 
from the Court, and bred up in the Mountains of Wales till they were twenty Years 
of Age. Pa ah se 

Then at their first essay in arms, these striplings stop the King’s Army, which is 
flying from the victorious Romans, oblige them to face their Enemies, and gain a 
compleat Victory. 

With Inconsistencies like these it everywhere abounds; the whole Conduct of 
the play is absurd and ridiculous to the last Degree, and with all the Liberties 
Shakespear has taken with Time, Place, and Action, the Story, as he has managed 
it, is more improbable than a Fairy Tale. 


RicHarpson (p. 191): Crowded theatres have applauded Imocen. There is 
a pleasing softness and delicacy in this agreeable character that renders it pecu- 
liarly interesting. Love is the ruling passion; but it is love ratified by wedlock, 
gentle, constant, and refined. . . . . 

(p. 204): Iachimo, with an intention of betraying her, sensible, at the same time, 
that infidelity and neglect are the only crimes unpardonable in the sight of a lover, 
and well aware of the address necessary to infuse suspicion into an ingenuous 
mind, disguises his inhuman intention with the affectation of a violent and sudden 
emotion. He seems rapt in admiration of Imogen, and expresses sentiments of 
deep astonishment. 

We never feel any passion or violent emotion without a cause, either real or 
imagined. We are never conscious of anger but when we apprehend ourselves in- 
jured; and never feel esteem without the conviction of excellence in the object. 
Sensible, as it were by intuition, of this invariable law in the conduct of our pas- 
sions, we never see others very violently agitated without a conviction of their 
having sufficient cause, or that they are themselves convinced of it. If we see a 
man deeply afflicted, we are persuaded that he has suffered some dreadful calamity, 
or that he believes it to be so. Upon this principle, which operates instinctively 
and almost without being observed, is founded that capital rule in oratorical com- 
position, ‘That he who would affect and convince his audience, ought to have his 
own mind convinced and affected.’ 

Accordingly, the crafty Italian, availing himself of this propensity, counterfeits 
admiration and astonishment. And, Imogen, deceived by the specious artifice, is 
inclined to believe him. Moved with fearful curiosity, she inquires about Leonatus; 
receives an answer well calculated to alarm her; and, of consequence, betrays un- 
easiness. 

By representing the sentiments of Leonatus as unfavourable to marriage and 
’ the fair sex, he endeavors to stimulate her inquietude. 

This expression of hope is an evident symptom of her anxiety. If we are certain 
of any future good, we are confident and expect. We only hope when the event is 
doubtful. 

Iachimo practises every art; and by expressing pity for her condition he makes 
farther progress in her good opinion. Pity supposes calamity; and the imagination 
of Imogen, thus irritated and alarmed, conceives no other cause of compassion than 
the infidelity of Leonatus. The mysterious conduct of Iachimo heightens her un- 
easiness; for the nature and extent of her misfortune not being precisely ascer- 

i tained, her apprehensions render it excessive. The reluctance he discovers, and 
‘the seeming unwillingness to accuse her husband, are evidences of his being at- 
tached to him, and give his surmises credit. Imogen, thus agitated and affected, 


—— 


CRITICISMS—RICHARDSON 497 


is in no condition to deliberate coolly; and, as her anxiety grows vehement, she 
becomes credulous and unwary. Her sense of propriety, however, and the delicacy 
of her affections preserve their influence, and she conceals her impatience by 
indirect inquiries. 

Tachimo’s abrupt and impassioned demeanour, his undoubted friendship for 
Leonatus, the apparent interest he takes in the concerns of Imogen, and his reluc- 
tance to unfold the nature of her misfortune, adding impatience to her anxiety, 
and so augmenting the violence of her emotions, destroy every doubt of his sin- 
cerity, and dispose her implicitly to believe him. He, accordingly, proceeds with 
boldness, and, under the appearance of sorrow and indignation, hazards a more 
direct impeachment. To have bewailed her unhappy fate, and to have accused 
Leonatus in terms of bitterness and reproach would have suited the injuries she 
had received, and the violence of disappointed passion. But Shakespeare, superior 
to all mankind in the invention of characters, hath fashioned the temper of Imogen 
with lineaments no less peculiar than lovely. Sentiments amiably refined, and a 
sense of propriety uncommonly exquisite, suppress the utterance of her sorrow 
and restrain her resentment. Knowing that suspicion is allied to weakness, and 
unwilling to asperse the fame of her husband, she replies with a spirit of meekness 
and resignation: 


“My Lord, I fear, 
Has forgot Britain.’ 


Formerly she expressed hope when the emotion she felt was fear. Here she ex- 
presses fear, though fully satisfied of her misfortune. 

There is a certain state of mind full of sorrow when the approach of evil is 
manifest and unavoidable. Our reason is then darkened, and the soul, sinking 
under the apprehension of misery, suffers direful eclipse and trembles, as at the 
dissolution of nature. Unable to endure the painful impression, we almost wish for 
annihilation; and, incapable of averting the threatened danger, we endeavor, 
though absurdly, to be ignorant of its approach. ‘Let me hear no more,’ cries the 
Princess, convinced of her misfortune and overwhelmed with anguish. 

Tachimo, confident of success, and, persuaded that the wrongs of Imogen would 
naturally excite resentment, suggests the idea of revenge. Skilful to infuse suspi- 
cion, he knew not the purity of refined affection. Imogen, shocked and astonished 
at his infamous offer, is immediately prejudiced against his evidence. Her mind 
recovers vigour by the renovated hope of her husband’s constancy and by indigna- 
tion against the insidious informer. And she vents her displeasure with sudden 
and unexpected vehemence. 

This immediate transition from a dejected and desponding tone of mind to a 
vigorous and animated exertion, effectuated by the infusion of hope and just in- 
dignation, is very natural and striking. 

The inquietude of Imogen, softened by affection and governed by a sense of 
propriety, exhibits a pattern of the most amiable and exemplary meekness. The 
emotions she discovers belong to solicitude rather than to jealousy. The features 
of solicitude are sorrowful and tender. Jealousy is fierce, wrathful, and vindictive. 
Solicitude is the object of compassion mixed with affection; jealousy excites com- 
passion, combined with terror. 

(p. 215): To be rescued from undeserved affliction Imogen flies for relief to 
the review of her former conduct; and, surprised at the accusation and indignant 
of the charge, she triumphs in conscious virtue. 


32 


498 APPENDIX 


Yet resentment is so natural in cases of heinous injury that it arises even in 
minds of the mildest temper. It arises, however, without any excessive or un- 
seemly agitation. Its duration is exceedingly transient. It is governed in its 
utterance by the memory of former friendship. And if the blame can be trans- 
ferred to any insidious or sly seducer, who may have prompted the evil we com- 
plain of, we wreak upon them the violence of our displeasure. 

The resentment of Imogen is of short continuance. It is a sudden solitary flash, 
extinguished instantly in her sorrow. 

It is not the malice of a crafty step-dame that moves the heart of Imogen to 
complain; nor the wrath of her incensed and deluded parent, nor that she, bred up 
in softness and little accustomed to suffer hardships and sorrow, should wander 
amid solitary rocks and deserts, exposed to perils, famine, and death. It is that she 
is forsaken, betrayed, and persecuted by him on whose constancy she relied for 
protection, and to whose tenderness she entrusted her repose. Of other evils she 
is not insensible; but this is the ‘supreme crown of her grief.’ Cruelty and in- 
gratitude are abhorred by the spectator and resented by the sufferer. But, when 
the temper of the person injured is peculiarly gentle, and the author of the injury 
the object of confirmed affection, the mind, after the first emotion, is more apt to 
languish in despondency than continue inflamed with resentment. The sense of 
misfortune, rather than the sense of injury, rules the disposition of Imogen, and, 
instead of venting invectives, she laments the misery of her condition. 

If a crime is committed by a person with whom we are unconnected or who has 
no pretensions to pre-eminent virtue, we feel indignation against the individual, 
but form no conclusions against the species. “The case is different if we are con- 
nected with him by any tender. affection, and regard him as of superior merit. 
Love and friendship, according to the immutable conduct of every passion, lead 
us to magnify, in our imaginations, the distinguished qualities of those we love. 
The rest of mankind are ranked in a lower order, and are valued no otherwise than 
as they resemble this illustrious model. But perceiving depravity where we ex- 
pected perfection, mortified and disappointed that appearances of rectitude, 
believed by us most sincere and unchangeable, were merely specious and exterior, 
we become suspicious of every pretension to merit, and regard the rest of man- 
kind, of whose integrity we have had less positive evidence, with cautious and un- 
kind reserve. 

Imogen, conscious of her innocence, convinced of Leonatus’s perfidy, and over- 
whelmed with sorrow, becomes careless of life, and offers herself a willing sacrifice 
to her husband’s cruelty. 


HARTLEY COLERIDGE (ii, p. 190): May it not plausibly be conjectured that 
Shakespeare, by making causeless jealousy the foundation of so many plays, in- 
tended an oblique compliment to queen Elizabeth—a delicate vindication of Anna 
Bullen? 

Lovely as the poetry of Cymbeline is, and most lovely as Imogen is, this play is, 
to me, one of the least agreeable in the collection. Nowhere, not even in Leontes, 
is the odiousness of jealousy displayed in such glaring colours as in Posthumus, 
who, in plain terms, acts a villain’s part. A man who could lay wagers upon his 
wife’s virtue, and wilfully expose her to the insults of such a ribald scoundrel as 
Tachimo, is not only unworthy of Imogen, but richly deserving of the worst possible 
consequences of his folly. Shakespeare wisely conceives jealousy to be a passion. 
pre-existent to the occasions it is sure to find or seek. Iachimo is a scamp, utterly 


CRITICISMS —HA ZLITT 499 
unredeemed by the master mind and soldierly carriage of Iago and Edmund. The 
beautiful poetry he is made to utter in Imogen’s chamber could scarce have ema- 
nated from such a reptile spirit. Cloten is a mere ass, without humor or even fun. 
Shakespeare has not another such. It is, however, a just and natural judgment 
upon the subtle witch, his mother, to have borne such a moon-calf. These amazing 
clever, wicked women generally produce Clotens—witness Semiramis, Agrippina, 
and Catherine the Second. 


Hazuirr (p. 1): Cymbeline is one of the most delightful of Shakespeare’s histor- 
ical plays. It may be considered as a dramatic romance, in which the most strik= 
ing parts of the story are thrown into the form of a dialogue, and the intermediate | 
circumstances are explained by the different speakers, as occasion renders it neces- 
sary. The action is less concentrated in consequence; but the interest becomes 
more aérial and refined from the principle of perspective introduced into the sub- 
ject by the imaginary changes of scene as well as by the length of time it occupies. 
The reading of this play is like going a journey with some uncertain object at the 
end of it, and in which the suspense is kept up and heightened by the long inter- 
vals between each action. Though the events are scattered over such an extent 
of surface, and relate to such a'variety of characters, yet the links which bind the 
different interests of the story together are never entirely broken. The most strag- 
gling and seemingly casual incidents are contrived in such a manner as to lead at 
last to the most complete development of the catastrophe. The ease and con- 
scious unconcern with which this is effected only makes the skill more wonderful. 
The business of the plot evidently thickens in the last act: the story moves for- 
ward with increasing rapidity at every step; its various ramifications are drawn from 
the most distant points to the same centre; the principal characters are brought 
together and placed in very critical situations; and the fate of almost every person 
in the drama is made to depend on the solution of a single circumstance—the answer 
of Iachimo to the question of Imogen respecting the obtaining of the ring from 
Posthumus. Dr Johnson is of the opinion that Shakespeare was generally inatten- 
tive to the winding up of his plots. We think the contrary is true; and we might 
cite in proof of this remark not only the present play, but the conclusion of Lear, of 
Romeo and Juliet, of Macbeth, of Othello, even of Hamlet, and of other plays of 
less moment, in which the last act is crowded with decisive events brought about 
by natural and striking means. 

The pathos in Cymbeline is not violent or tragical, but of the most pleasing and 
amiable kind. A certain tender gloom o’erspreads the whole. Posthumus is the 
ostensible hero of the piece, but its greatest charm is the character of Imogen. Post- 
humus is only interesting from the interest she takes in him, and she is only inter- 
esting herself from her tenderness and constancy to her husband. It is the peculiar 
characteristic of Shakespeare’s heroines that they seem to exist only in their attach- 
ment to others. They are pure abstractions of the affections. We think as little 
of their persons as they do themselves, because we are let into the secrets of their 
hearts, which are more important. We are too interested in their affairs to stop 
to look at their faces, except by stealth and at intervals. No one ever hit the true 
perfection of the female character, the sense of weakness leaning on the strength 
of its affections for support, so well as Shakespeare—no one else ever so well painted 
natural tenderness free from affectation and disguise—no one else ever so well 
showed how delicacy and timidity, when driven to extremity, grow romantic and 
extravagant; for the romance of his heroines (in which they abound) is only an 


500 APPENDIX 


excess of the habitual prejudices of their sex, scrupulous of being false to their 
vows, truant to their affections, and taught by the force of feeling when to forego 
the forms of propriety for the essence of it. His women were in this respect ex- 
quisite logicians; for there is nothing so logical as passion. They knew their own 
minds exactly; and they followed up a favorite idea, which they had sworn to with 
their tongues, and which was engraven on their hearts, into its untoward conse- 
quences. They were the prettiest little set of martyrs and confessors on record. 
Cibber, in speaking of the early English stage, accounts for the want of prominence 
and theatrical display in Shakespeare’s female characters from the circumstance 
that women in those days were not allowed to play the parts of women, which 
made it necessary to keep them a good deal in the background. Does not this 
state of manners itself, which prevented their exhibiting themselves in public and 
confined them to the relations and charities of domestic life, afford a truer ex- 
planation of the matter? His women are certainly very unlike stage heroines; the 
reverse of tragedy-queens. 

(p. 9): The other characters in this play are represented with great truth 
and accuracy, and, as it happens in most of the Author’s works, there is not 
only the utmost keeping in each separate character, but in the casting of the 
different parts and their relation to one another there is an affinity and harmony 
like what we may observe in the gradations of color in a picture. The striking 
and powerful contrasts in which Shakespeare abounds could not escape observation; 
but the use he makes of the principal of analogy to reconcile the greatest diversity 
of character and to maintain a continuity throughout has not been sufficiently 
attended to. In Cymbeline, for instance, the principal interest arises out of the un- 
alterable fidelity of Imogen to her husband under the most trying circumstances. 
Now the other parts of the picture are filled up with subordinate examples of the 
same feeling, vigorously modified by different situations and applied to the pur- 
poses of virtue or vice. The plot is aided by the amorous importunities of Cloten, 
by the tragical determination of Iachimo to conceal the defeat of his project by a 
daring imposture; the faithful attachment of Pisanio to his mistress is an affecting 
accompaniment to the whole; the obstinate adherence to his purpose in Belarius, 
who keeps the fate of the young princes so long a secret in resentment for the un- 
grateful return to his former services, the incorrigible wickedness of the Queen, and 
even the blind, uxorious confidence of Cymbeline, are all so many lines of the same 
story, tending to the same point. The effect of this coincidence is rather felt than 
observed; and as the impression exists unconsciously in the mind of the reader, so 
it probably arose in the same manner in the mind of the Author, not from design, 
but from the force of natural association, a particular train of feeling suggesting 
different inflections of the same predominant principle, melting into and strength- 
ening one another like chords in music. 

The characters of Belarius, Guiderius, and Arviragus and the romantic scenes in 
which they appear are a fine relief to the intrigues and artificial refinements of the 
court from which they are banished. Nothing can surpass the wildness and sim- 
plicity of the descriptions of the mountain life they lead. They follow the business 
of huntsmen, not of shepherds; and this is in keeping with the spirit of adventure and 
uncertainty in the rest of the story, and with the scenes in which they are afterwards 
called on to act. How admirably the youthful fire and impatience to emerge from 
their obscurity in the young princes is opposed to the cooler calculations and pru- 
dent resignation of their more experienced counsellor! How well the disadvantages 
of knowledge and of ignorance, of solitude and society are placed against each other. 


CRITICISMS—SCHLEGEL 5Ol, 


SCHLEGEL (p. 183): Cymbeline is also one of Shakespeare’s most wonderful com- ; 
positions. He has here connected a novel of Boccaccio with traditionary tales of/ 
the ancient Britons reaching back to the times of the first Roman Emperors, and 
he has contrived, by the most gentle transitions, to blend together into one har- 
monious whole the social manners of the latest times with heroic deeds, and even 
with appearances of the gods. In the character of Imogen not a feature of female 
excellence is forgotten: her chaste tenderness, her softness, and her virgin pride, her 
boundless resignation, and her magnanimity towards her mistaken husband by 
whom she is unjustly persecuted, her adventures in disguise, her apparent death, 
and her recovery form altogether a picture equally tender and affecting. The two 
Princes, Guiderius and Arviragus, both educated in the wilds, form a noble con- 
trast to Miranda and Perdita. Shakespeare is fond of showing the superiority of 
the innate over the acquired. Over the art which enriches nature he somewhere 
says there is always a higher art created by nature herself. As Miranda’s uncon- 
sciousness and unstudied sweetness is more pleasing than those charms which 
endeavour to captivate us by the brilliant decoration of the most refined cultivation, 
so in these two young men to whom the chase has given vigor and hardihood, but 
who are unacquainted with their high destination, and have been always kept far 
from human society, we are equally enchanted by a naive heroism which leads them 
to anticipate and to dream of deeds of valour, till an occasion is offered which they 
are irresistibly impelled to embrace. When Imogen comes in disguise to their cave; 
when Guiderius and Arviragus form an impassioned friendship with all the inno- 
cence of childhood for the tender boy, in whom they neither suspect a female nor 
their own sister; when on returning from the chase they find her dead, ‘sing her to 
the ground,’ and cover the grave with flowers—these scenes might give a new life 
for poetry to the most deadened imagination. If a tragical event is only apparent, 
whether the spectators are already aware of this or ought merely to suspect it, 
Shakespeare always knows how to mitigate the impression without weakening it: 
he makes the mourning musical, that it may gain in solemnity what it loses in 
seriousness. With respect to the other parts, the wise and vigorous Bellarius, who 
after living long as a hermit again becomes a hero, is a venerable figure; the dex- 
terous dissimulation and quick presence of mind of the Italian, Iachimo, is quite 
suitable to the bold treachery which he plays; Cymbeline, the father of Imogen, 
and even her husband, Posthumus, during the first half of the piece are somewhat 
sacrificed, but this could not be otherwise; the false and wicked Queen is merely an 
instrument of the plot; she and her stupid son, Cloten (the only comic part in the 
piece), whose rude arrogance is portrayed with much humor, are got rid of by 
merited punishment before the conclusion. For the heroic part of the fable, the 
war between the Romans and Britons, which brings on the conclusion, the Poet 
in the extent of his plan had so little room to spare that he merely endeavors to 
represent it as a mute procession. But to the last scene, where all the numerous 
threads of the knot are untied, he has again given its full development, that he 
might collect the impressions of the whole into one focus. This example and many 
others are a sufficient refutation of Johnson’s assertion that Shakespeare usually 
hurries over the conclusion of his pieces. He rather introduces a great deal which, 
for the understanding of the dénouement, might in a strict sense be spared, from 
a desire to satisfy the feeling. Our modern spectators are much more impatient 
than those of his day to see the curtain drop when there is nothing more to be 
determined. 

(p. 250): The commentators of Shakespeare, in their attempts to deprive him 


502 APPENDIX 


of parts of his works or even of whole pieces, have for the most part displayed very 
little of the true critical spirit. Pope, as is well known, was strongly disposed to de- 
clare whole scenes for interpolations of the players; but his opinions were not much lis- 
tened to. However, Steevens still accedes to the opinion of Pope respecting the appa- 
rition of the ghosts and of Jupiter in Cymbeline while Posthumus is sleeping in the 
dungeon. But Posthumus finds on waking a tablet on his breast, with a prophecy on 
which the dénouement of the piece depends. Is it to be imagined that Shakespeare 
would require of his spectators the belief in a wonder without a visible cause? Is Post- 
humus to dream this tablet with the prophecy? But these gentlemen do not descend 
to this objection. The verses which the apparitions deliver do not appear to them 
good enough to be Shakespeare’s. I imagine I can discover why the Poet has not 
given them more of the splendour of diction. They are the aged parents and brothers 
of Posthumus, who, from concern of his fate, return from the world below; they 
ought consequently to speak the language of a more simple olden time, and their 
voices ought also to appear as a feeble sound of wailing, when contrasted with the 
thundering oracular language of Jupiter. For this reason Shakespeare chose a 
syllabic measure which was very common before his time, but which was then 
getting out of fashion, though it still continued to be frequently used, especially in 
translations of classical poets. In some such manner might the shades express 
themselves in the then existing translations of Homer and Virgil. The speech of 
Jupiter is, on the other hand, majestic, and in form and style bears a complete 
resemblance to the Sonnets of Shakespeare. 

Nothing but the incapacity of appreciating the views of the Poet, and the per- 
spective observed by him, could lead them to stumble at this passage. 


W. W. Liovyp (Singer’s ed., vol. x, p. 499): Sooth to say, I have never been dis- 
posed to number Cymbeline among the chiefest works of its Author, even while 
asserting its origin for his ripend art; to do so would be to wrong the perfections of 
works of larger scope, of deeper interest, of nobler capabilities of concentration and 
development. In this respect I would compare it with Timon of Athens, whichremains 
like a statue half sculptured from the block, and left so on account of a natural 
flaw that would make further labour thrown away. The elaboration of Cymbeline 
is much more extensive and much nearer to completeness, but still I believe it in- 
complete, and from the same feeling and conscience not to mask an essential weak- 
ness by gauds of ornament or false declamation. Cymbeline, from whom the play 
takes its name, is the personage in whom all the lines of interest from both the 
plots cross and converge; but he is far too weak and vacillating to assert the 
dignity of the other drama to which he lends his name, as of the same stamp as the 
other dramas with personal titles,—as the regal plays generally, or as Hamlet, as 
Lear, Othello, or Macbeth. Management, sequence, and development dominate 
over characterisation, and the highest creative power which we know to be in 
Shakespeare is never throughout the play in highest manifestation. . . . 

In Cymbeline, also, we may note what has presented itself in the plays of 
admitted inferiority: a recurrence of hints of motive and character that are fully 
worked out in more perfect pieces. This is sometimes an anticipation, but some- 
umes a memory; and possibly the appearance that Iachimo is a first idea of Iago 
and Posthumus the crude conception of the passion of Othello, as Cymbeline of the 
weakness and tyranny of Lear, may be but fallacious. Indeed, the thought has 
sometimes occurred to me that Shakespeare indulged himself designedly in this 
drama in playing with the same motives in less severe combination, and in falling 


CRITICISMS—BA VNES—WETSS 503 
back for relief, after the tension of his great tragic actions, upon the milder har- 
monies that might be evoked as truly from the self-same themes. 


BAyYNES (p. 132): In the three dramas belonging to Shakespeare’s last period or, 
rather, which may be said to close his dramatic career, the same feeling of severe 
but consolatory calm is still more apparent. If the deeper discords of life are not 
finally resolved, the virtues which soothe their perplexities and give us courage 
and endurance to wait, as well as confidence to trust the final issues,—the virtues of 
forgiveness and generosity, of forbearance and self-control,—are largely illustrated. 
This is a characteristic feature in each of these closing dramas, in the Winter’s Tale, 
Cymbeline, and the Tempest. 


WeIss (p. 237): Why, if Shakespeare endowed [Imogen] with this penetration 
does she not at a glance unmask Iachimo when he comes pretending that Post- 
humus has been false to her in exile, and proffering himself that she may take revenge 
in kind? Because she has such a heart of trust in her husband that both her ears 
cannot hastily abuse it. The conflict between Iachimo’s counterfeit news and her 
loyal memory occupies the whole field of her being, and keeps out the base design. 
She listens to Iachimo with ears attuned by the high praises which her husband 
sends by letter to introduce a friend ‘of the noblest note.’ Iachimo is the creature 
of her husband’s admiration, sent to be admired, suspicion disarmed in advance, 
not a sentry left on duty before her frankness. His hints of a dishonorable purpose 
cannot be taken by a mind that is unable to conceive dishonor. So her absolute 
spotlessness drives him to the plainest speech; for such an artless and unconscious 
woman never tasked his lips before. When the revelation comes, like a hideous 
scrawl of flame across her clear firmament in the very high noon of her confiding, 
the heaven of purity rains down at once, and there he is, swimming for life in the 
flood of her disdain. ‘Then he saw womanhood in one ‘awe-inspiring gaze’ that 
might have prompted Shelly to exclaim, ‘Her beams anatomize me, nerve by 
nerve, And lay me bare, and make me blush to see My hidden thoughts.’ 

What an angelic impossibility of hearing is Imogen’s! She has nothing that ever 
dreamed to itself of the covert meaning of his words. Without a second’s interval 
of parley, not’even time enough for natural astonishment, one peremptory instant 
annihilates his hope. 

It is not every woman, even of the irreproachable kind, who wields so prompt a 
lightning of her chastity. And here Shakespeare has marked the difference between 
unconsciousness and prudery. I think that Isabella would have understood Iachimo 
much earlier, for the matter of her virtue was constantly in her thoughts, as a thing 
to be guarded against an undermining world. Her indignation is voluble; and she 
undertakes to reason in a priggish fashion with Angelo. But Imogen simply calls 
her servant that Iachimo may be taken in an instant out of the room. Many a 
woman whose life has been without a stain is still less intolerant than Isabella, and 
more complaisant than Imogen. Race and climate are largely implicated in these 
natural differences. 

When Madame de Sevigne heard of her husband’s infidelities it was through the 
interested malice of her cousin, Bussy-Rabutin, who was in love with her. He pro- 
posed that she should so be revenged: ‘I will go halves in your revenge; for, after 
all, your interests are as dear to me as my own.’ She quietly replied: ‘I am not 
so exasperated as you think.’ 

Iachimo said, ‘Revenge it. I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure, And will 
continue fast to your affection.’ 


504 APPENDIX 


Imogen’s white heat of honor shrivels up the wit of the French lady. Her mind 
can make but one motion, to cry out, ‘What ho, Pisanio!’ ‘Away!—I do condemn 
mine ears, that have So long attended thee.’ 

‘Thou . . . solicit’st a lady that disdains Thee and the devil alike.’ 

Tachimo now pretends that he was only making trial of her by a false report and 
by a counterfeited overture,—and for the sake of the love he bore her husband. 
This is quite enough: her frankness returns as suddenly as it was dismissed. For, 
as Iachimo well said, ‘The gods made you, Unlike all others, chaffless.’ 

And that is a statement of the limit placed by Nature to her womanly shrewd- 
ness of observation. 


Drake (p. 466) [quotes Dr Johnson’s remarks on this play, and thus com- 
ments]: Of the enormous injustice of this sentence nearly every page of Cymbe- 
line will, to a reader of any taste and discrimination, bring the most decisive 
evidence. That it possesses many of the too common inattentions of Shake- 
speare, that it exhibits a frequent violation of costume, and a singular confusion of 
nomenclature cannot be denied; but these are trifles light as air when contrasted 
with its merits, which are of the very essence of dramatic worth, rich and full in 
all that breathes of vigour, animation, and intellect, in all that elevates the fancy 
and improves the heart, in all that fills the eye with tears or agitates the soul 
with hope and fear. 

In possession of excellences, vital as these must be deemed, cold and fastidious is 
the criticism that, on account of irregularities in mere technical detail, would shut 
its eyes upon their splendour. Nor are there wanting critics of equal learning with 
and superior taste to Johnson who have considered what he has branded with 
the unqualified charge of ‘confusion of manners,’ as forming, in a certain point 
of view, one of the most pleasing recommendations of the piece. Thus Schlegel, 
after characterising Cymbeline as one of Shakespeare’s most wonderful composi- 
tions, adds, ‘He has here connected a novel of Boccaccio with traditionary tales 
of the ancient Britons reaching back to the times of the first Roman Emperors, 
and he has contrived, by the most gentle transitions, to blend together into one 
harmonious whole the social manners of the latest times with the heroic deeds, and 
even with appearances of the gods.’ It may also be remarked that, if the unities of 
time and place be as little observed in this play as in many others of the same poet, 
unity of character and feeling, the test of genius, and without which the utmost 
effort or art will ever be unavailing, is uniformly and happily supported. 

Imogen, the most lovely and perfect of Shakespeare’s female characters, the 
pattern of connubial love and chastity, by the delicacy and propriety of her senti- 
ments, by her sensibility, tenderness, and resignation, by her patient endurance of 
persecution from the quarter where she had confidently looked for endearment and 
protection, irresistibly seizes upon our affections; and when compelled to fly from 
the paternal roof, from ‘A father cruel, and a step-dame false, A foolish suitor to a 
wedded lady, That hath her husband banished,’ she is driven to assume, under the 
name of Fidele, the disguise of a page, we follow her footsteps with the liveliest 
interest and admiration. . . . 

(p. 468): Of this latter character [Cloten] the constitution has been thought so ex- 
traordinary, and involving elements of a kind so incompatible, as to form an excep- 
\, tion to the customary integrity and consistency of our Author’s draughts from nature. 

But the following passage from the pen of an elegant female writer will prove that 
this curious assemblage of frequently opposite qualities has existed, and no doubt 


CRITICISMS—BOWDEN 505 


did exist in the days of Shakespeare: ‘It is curious that Shakespeare should, in so 
singular a character as Cloten, have given the exact prototype of a being whom I 
once knew. The unmeaning frown of the countenance; the shuffling gait; the burst 
of voice; the bustling insignificance; the fever and ague fits of valour; the forward 
tetchiness; the unprincipled malice; and, what is more curious, those occasional 
gleams of good sense, amidst the floating clouds of folly which generally darkened 
and confused the man’s brain; and which, in the character of Cloten, we are apt to 
impute to a violation of unity in character; but in the sometime Captain C——n 
I saw that the portrait was not out of nature.’ 

Poetical justice has been strictly observed in this drama: the vicious characters 
meet the punishment due to their crimes, while virtue, in all its various degrees, is 
proportionably rewarded. The scene of retribution, which is the closing one of the 
play, is a masterpiece of skill; the development of the plot, for its fullness, com- 
pleteness, and ingenuity, surpassing any effort of the king among our Author’s 
contemporaries, and atoning for any partial incongruity which the structure or 
conduct of the story may have previously displayed. 


H. S. Bowden (p. 366): In its lessons Cymbeline has several points of comparison 
with Measure for Measure. Thus, Belarius’s whole theory of political justice, ex- 
pressed in the words ‘beaten for loyalty excited me to treason’ (V, v.), is merely a 
subtle variation of the ‘Like doth quit like’ of the former play, and the theory of 
truth, falsehood, and fidelity is absolutely the same, as the quotations given suffi- 
ciently testify. But the object of the play goes beyond that of Measure for Measure. 
The latter play only ventured to urge the suppression of the penal laws by royal 
prerogative; Cymbeline recommends a reconciliation with Rome on certain con- 
cessions affecting the tribute and the franchise or liberties of the people, which 
Simpson takes to refer to the vexed question of Peter’s pence, the provisos, and the 
temporal suzerainty. 

To the obvious objection that the grievances enumerated would apply only to 
the early Roman sway over Britain, and not at all to the Roman question such 
as it existed in the days of James I, it is answered, first, that according to Shake- 
speare’s doctrine plays ought to take the stamp of the age, and exhibit the pressure 
of the time. Next, that the current Roman question in those days was of such 
paramount importance that common audiences could admit no other idea, and that 
all references to Rome were considered to allude more or less plainly to the circum- 
stances of the day. This is clear by the prologue spoken by Envy in Ben Jonson’s 
Poetaster: ‘The scene is? ha! Rome? Rome? Rome? . . . O my vext soul How 
might I force this to the present state? Are there here no spies who—could wrest 
Pervert, and poison all they hear and see with senseless glosses and allusions?’ 

Catholics as well as Protestants saw in Imperial Rome an image of the Papacy, 
and the two failures of Cesar were a commonplace of the day. After the failure 
of the Armada, Father Parsons reminded the Catholics that Julius and Henry VII. 
had both been unlucky in their first attempts, though they afterwards became 
lords of the country. ‘The children of Israel (too) were twice beaten with great 
loss in the war they had undertaken by God’s express command against the Ben- 
jamites: it was not till the third attempt that they were successful.’ And the 
attitude of James at that time was such as to encourage the belief that recon- 
ciliation with Rome was by no means impossible. Thus he told a prince of the 
House of Lorraine who visited him, not without the knowledge of Paul V, that 
after all there was but little difference between the two confessions. He thought 


506 APPENDIX 


his own the better, and adopted it from conviction, not from policy; still he liked 
to hear other opinions, and, as the calling of a council was impossible, he would 
gladly see a convention of doctors to consult on the means of reconciliation. If 
the Pope would advance one step, he would advance four to meet him. He also 
acknowledged the authority of the holy Fathers; Augustine was to him of more 
weight than Luther; Bernard, than Calvin; nay, he saw in the Roman Church, even 
in that of the day, the true Church, the mother of all others; only she needed puri- 
fication. He admitted in confidence that the Pope was the head of the Church, 
the supreme Bishop. 

Whether or no there be a political allegory in Cymbeline, the religious allusions 
are again on the Catholic side. Imogen is the ideal of fidelity, and of religous 
fidelity—to be deceived neither by the foreign impostor who comes to her in her 
husband’s name, nor by the ennobled clown who offers himself under the Queen’s 
protection. ‘Stick to your journal course,’ she says to her brothers; ‘the breach 
of custom is the breach of all’ (iv, 2). And she adheres to the old customs; the new 
gods of the Cloten dynasty had forbidden prayers for the dead, and the beads were 
baubles, and the rosary, with its ‘century of prayers,’ but a vain repetition in their 
eyes. Yet she begs Lucius to spare her till she had bedecked her husband’s sup- 
posed grave, ‘And on it said a century of prayers Such as I can, twice o’er’ (iv, 2). 


SNIDER (ii, p. 83): The entire action, accordingly, will be divided into three 
parts or movements. The first movement portrays the world of conflict and 
disruption, which had its center at the court of Cymbeline. Family and State 
are in a condition of strife and wrong; the union of Posthumus and Imogen, repre- 
senting the Family, has to endure a double collision—from within and from with- 
out; Britain, representing the State, is involved in a war with a foreign power. 
This movement, therefore, exhibits struggle and contradiciton on all sides; be- 
cause of such condition of things there will necessarily result a flight from the 
world of institutions to a primitive life. Hence we pass to the second movement, 
which is the Idyllic Realm—the land of peace and harmony, inhabited by hunters, 
and far removed from the conflicts of the time. But this narrow existence will 
disintegrate from within, and will be swallowed up in the conflict from without. 
The third movement, therefore, is the Restoration, involving the repentance of 
those who are guilty, the return of those who have been wrongfully banished— 
in general, the harmony of all collisions of Family and State. 

The presupposition of the action is the love and marriage of Posthumus and 
Imogen. It is in the highest degree a rational union; the characters of husband 
and wife seem just fitted for one another. Moral worth, strong emotion, intellec- 
tual gifts, are all present. Posthumus had been instructed in every kind of knowl- 
edge; he is also endowed with the fairest exterior and noblest manners. But that 
which he lacks is a long line of noble ancestry, though his father and brothers 
had rendered the most important services to their country—in fact, his entire family 
had perished, directly or indirectly, in its defense, and he had been left an orphan. 
This untitled origin, then, is the sole ground of objection to him; the play em- 
phasizes the conflict between birth and intelligence. Imogen, the daughter of 
the king, has chosen him in preference to the degraded and half-witted nobleman, 
Cloten, against the will of her father and against the plans of her step-mother. 
Her choice, however, meets with the secret, but unanimous, approval of the cour- 
tiers. Now, to break this union so true and so deep, the most powerful instru- 
mentalities are brought forward in the course of the play. But particularly the 


CRITICISMS—SNIDER 507 


wife, Imogen, is subjected to the sorest trials, and passes through them in triumph— 
nothing can undermine her devotion. Here we see the inherent necessity for the 
restoration and final union of the pair, since the Family reposing on so deep and 
rational a basis cannot be destroyed without violence both to thought and to our 
most sacred emotions. 

Against the marriage of Posthumus and Imogen there is a double assault, 
giving what may be named the external and internal collision, in which there is an 
attempt to destroy the union of the married pair by force—by violent separa- 
MON Go 

(p. 85): The Queen, however, is the lever of the whole action, and her great 
object is to place her son upon the throne. She is the perfection of cunning and 
ambition. . . . The Queen is, therefore, the villain of the play, and assails the 
subsisting ethical relations. 

Cloten, her son, is the type of the brutalized nobleman, indulging in every 
species of degrading amusement. He is the designed contrast to Posthumus in all 
respects; a rational union with him is impossible—at least to a woman of the char- 
acter of Imogen. . . . These are the three persons who assail the marriage; in the 
very beginning of the play Posthumus has to flee, being banished by the King; 
Imogen, the wife, is left alone to withstand the anger of her father, the machina- 
tions of her step-mother, and the rude courtship of Cloten. . . 

(p. 86): With the departure of Posthumus the separation is accomplished; 
external force has thus disrupted the members of the Family. Still, they are one 
in emotion though far apart in space. Now comes the internal collision—the bond 
of emotion which unites husband and wife is to be assailed. This assault, if suc- 
cessful, must destroy the foundation of marriage, which is based upon the fidelity 
of each party. Let either man or wife be brought to believe that the other is untrue, 
the emotional unity upon which the Family reposes is destroyed. . . . 

(p. 87): The assault upon Imogen has, therefore, failed; her confidence in her 
husband is unimpaired; the wily Italian has not succeeded in destroying the union 
in her bosom. 

Next comes the assault upon Posthumus. Jachimo returns to Rome; the trick 
of concealment in the chest has furnished him with certain kinds of evidence, which 
he employs to the best advantage. No doubt the chain of suspicious circumstances 
was very strong; it convinces the impartial Philario, but it ought not to have con- 
vinced a husband who was very partial towards his wife, and who firmly rested on 
the belief in her fidelity. . . . Thus Iachimo succeeds with the husband, though 
he failed with the wife; as regards Posthumus, the confidence upon which the 
Family reposes is destroyed... . 

(p. 88): But Pisanio has not lost confidence in the integrity of his master; and 
he, the skillful mediator, proposes still to save the Family, though its members 
despair. He tells her that she must disguise herself and take service with the 
Roman Lucius till she finds out the truth concerning her husband. Imogen ac- 
cedes; for it is her deepest principle to maintain the union—to be true to the 
Family through all adversity. 

Thus we behold the bond of union between Posthumus and Imogen in almost 
complete disruption—suspended, as it were, by a single thread. First, external 
violence separated husband and wife—Posthumus has to leave the Court, and 
Imogen remains behind. Then comes the internal attack, which aims at under- 
mining their emotional unity. With Imogen it fails, but succeeds with Post- 
humus; and, finally, the wife becomes aware of the alienation of the husband. 


508 APPENDIX 


Such are what were before called the external and internal collisions of the Family. 
Only Imogen remains faithful to the union, though assailed from without and 
from within. The beauty of her character lies in this devotion to the highest prin- 
ciple of her sex. Against parent, against the most powerful enemies, and, finally, 
against the very husband who rejects her, does she assert her unconquerable 
fidelity to the Family, and in the end saves it from destruction. 

The second thread of this movement is the conflict between the two States, 
though it is much less prominent than the first thread. Britain had ceased to pay 
tribute to Rome; and an ambassador is sent to demand it; the refusal of Britain 
causes war to be declared. It is national independence against foreign subjugation. 
The King announces the right of revolt, and asserts the duty of maintaining the 
ancient laws of the land. But the chief instigator and active supporter of the 
rebellion is the Queen; without her strong will the weak King could not have been 
brought to undertake such an enterprise. It must be said that her conduct in this 
case is not only defensible, but noble; she appears as the champion of nationality 
against the greatest power in the world. Even Cloten is arrayed on the same 
side—not from any merit in him, perhaps, but through the influence of his mother. 
Her motive was doubtless selfish; she wanted to possess absolute authority for 
herself and for her son as successor to the crown. Still, it is in itself a noble ambi- 
tion to desire to rule over a free country. 

Here occurs the great jar to our ethical feeling which has always been felt in 
this play, notwithstanding its power and beauty. The wicked Queen, who, on the 
one hand, assails the Family in its loftiest and purest manifestations, on the other 
hand vindicates the State, the highest ethical institution of man. What, there- 
fore, is to be her fate? She ought not to live—she ought not to die; she is a con- 
tradiction which runs through the entire play and blasts its effect. Nor can she be 
called a tragic character, which goes down in the conflict of institutions, for her 
support of the State in no way necessitates her hostility to the Family. To the class 
of villains she rather belongs—those whose nature it is to defy all ethical principles. 
We feel the discord, the double pathos of her character, from this time forward. 
The Poet undoubtedly seeks to condemn her as the enemy of the true marital rela- 
tion; but, then, on the other side, she stands the main supporter of national inde- 
pendence. When it is added that the drama ends with undoing the whole work of 
the Queen—that not only the sundered pair are restored to one another, but 
also Britain returns to the Roman allegiance, and thus nationality is destroyed— 
we see how deep is the violence done to the feelings of an audience—especially 
of a British audience. This play has never been popular, compared with most of 
Shakespeare’s pieces, and never can be, for the reasons just given. There is no 
other work belonging to the Poet which shows so great a discord in his Ethical 
World. 

Such is the portraiture of the first movement—the realm of conflict—from 
which we pass to the second movement, or the Idyllic Land. The Poet has 
here introduced a new variety of inhabitants, namely, the hunters, correspond- 
ing to the shepherds of Winter’s Tale and As You Like It. But the transition is 
not so decided; this world is not marked off so plainly here as in other WEL, 6.6.0 

(p. 91): (a) The Hunter World is the contrast to the Court, and it logically 
springs from the latter, which has become intolerable as the abode of man. . . . 

(p. 92): (6) Imogen, fleeing from the Court, comes to its opposite—this idyllic 
land—and is most kindly received by its inhabitants. . . . 

(p. 93): The second thread is also introduced into this Hunter Land, namely, 


CRITICISMS—SNIDER 509 
the collision between the Roman and British states. It necessarily swallows up 
the idyllic realm, which has always a tendency to return to society. . . . 

(p. 94): Next comes the third movement—the Restoration—which will bring 
all the separated and colliding elements of Britain into harmony. The external 
means for accomplishing this purpose has already been stated to be the war with 
Rome. Connected with it, in one way or another, are all the characters for whom 
reconciliation is prepared... . 

(p. 95): The battle, being only an external instrumentality, is of minor im- 
portance; hence the Poet does not dwell upon it, but has it pass before our eyes 
rapidly in the form of pantomime. The point, however, which is of the highest 
significance is the internal ground for the return and salvation of the different char- 
acters. They who have done wrong can be saved only through Repentance; they 
must as far as possible make their deed undone. There are at least three persons 
who manifest contrition for their conduct—Posthumus, Iachimo, and the King. 
But the worst character of the play, the Queen, will not, or cannot, repent; at 
least her repentance is of that kind which does not purchase reconciliation, for 
she ‘Repented The evils she hatched were not effected.’ Her violation of the 
ethical world has taken such deep possession of her nature that it could not be 
cast off—renunciation of ambition and crime means death. 

The chief of the repentants is Posthumus. He supposes that his order to kill 
Imogen has been fulfilled by Pisanio; he is full of the deepest tribulation for his 
hasty action. Though he is not yet aware of the innocence of Imogen, he neverthe- 
less repents of his command; for thus she has not had the opportunity to repent. 
He courts death; he would gladly offer up his own life as an atonement for his deed. 
Repentance can go no further. When the individual is ready to sacrifice his ex- 
istence, what more can he give? Posthumus seeks death from both Romans and 
Britons; but his wish is not fulfilled—he still lives. It is evident that he has made 
his deed undone as far as lies in his power; the sorrow within and the action with- 
out indicate the deepest repentance. . . 

(p. 96): Here the Poet might stop, for he has amply motived the reunion of 
Posthumus and Imogen, which will hereafter take place. But he has chosen to go 
further, and to give a detailed representation of the above-mentioned reconciliation 
in another form—to present a literal image of the repentant soul harmonizing itself 
with the rational principle of the Universe. Posthumus falls asleep and dreams; his 
dream is of forgiveness. . . . 

(p. 97): This passage, including the dream of Posthumus and his conversation 
with the jailers, has often been condemned for its manifold defects, and some- 
times declared not to be the work of the Poet. That its literary merit falls below 
the average literary merit of Shakespearian composition is hardly to be denied; 
that it is not strictly necessary to the development of the action is also true, since 
the repentance already manifested by Posthumus logically involves restoration. 
The example of the Poet may also be cited, for, though he has often employed 
Repentance in other dramas, he has nowhere introduced such an intercession of 
divinity to secure its results. Still, even if it is not absolutely requisite for the 
action, the plea may be made in its favor that it gives an imaginative completeness 
to the mediation. Deity is introduced in person, manifesting grace for repentance. 
It is thus the most profound Christian doctrine in a heathen dress, and this dress is 
taken, instead of the real Christian dress, for the purpose of avoiding the charge of 
blasphemy. To bring God upon the stage, pardoning the repentant sinner, would 
be a pretty hazardous undertaking. Such a liberty may be taken with an old, 


510 APPENDIX 


worn-out Greek divinity, though even this procedure is not strictly that of the 
drama, which should exhibit man as determined from within, and not from with- 
out. But the introduction of the tablet, with its prophetic inscription and its in- 
terpretation, is not only useless, but also ridiculous. The authorship of the entire 
passage, however, cannot well be taken away from Shakespeare, in the absence 
of positive testimony, though one may wish it were not his. It is also jointed too 
closely into the rest of the Act to pass for an external interpolation. 

The second of these repentants is Iachimo, who has been guilty of defaming a 
pure woman, and destroying the internal bond of union of the Family. He also 
has come with the Roman army; his first declaration is sorrow for his wrong. The 
main ground of his change seems to lie in the fact that he has lost his former valor; 
the guilty soul paralyzes the strong arm; he is vanquished by one who seems to him 
to be a mere peasant. Before the King and the entire company he confesses his 
deed, and, finally, asks for death at the hands of Posthumus, whom he so deeply 
wronged. Thus his repentance has carried him to the point of a necessary recon- 
ciliation; he has offered for it the highest possible price, namely, his own life. At 
this price it cannot be withheld—for how could his punishment obtain more? 
The character of Iachimo, as well as that of Posthumus, is not tragic; their com- 
plete repentance, going so far as to make a voluntary sacrifice of their own ex- 
istence for their wrongs, forestalls the tragic end, since the latter, at most, could 
exhibit their lives taken for their guilt. Repentance is the mind’s sacrifice; it is 
the individual sitting in judgment upon his own act, and condemning himself, 
even to death... . 

(p. 98): The King also repents of his conduct toward Imogen, and is reconciled 
with Belarius. Thus his two great acts of wrong are undone; the two deeds which 
disrupted his family—one of them causing the loss of his sons, the other the loss of 
his daughter—are recalled. The result is, sons and daughter are restored to him, 
and his family is once more united. But not only the Family but also the State 
is restored from its internal disruption. 

(p. 99): The critics have not been very satisfactory in their views of this play. 
To determine its true nature has evidently given them great difficulty, and, as a 
consequence, they have employed to designate it certain high-sounding phrases, 
which, however, add very little to our knowledge. It has been called a dramatic 
novel, mainly on account of the supposed loose connection of the unwieldy number 
of its incidents and characters; it has also been called a dramatic Epos, chiefly 
because of the introduction of Jupiter in the last Act. The idyllic element, too, has 
been declared to be foreign to the action and unusual in the drama. In general, 
this play is considered peculiar in its kind among the works of Shakespeare. But 
the Poet has elsewhere frequently employed epical elements, and to say that 
Cymbeline is the most loosely connected and the most varied of all his plays is a 
hazardous statement. If the preceding analysis has been successful, it has shown 
that the drama before us has the same unity, the same fundamental thought, 
and the same essential structure as the other mediated dramas of the ideal class. 
Let the reader make the comparison, and he will find fundamentally the same 
general movement in all of them, and will have revealed to himself one of the 
deepest principles of Shakespearian art. 


A. C. SWINBURNE (p. 227): The passion of Posthumus is noble, and potent 
the poison of Iachimo; Cymbeline has enough for Shakespeare’s present purpose 
; ‘ : : 
of ‘the king-becoming graces’; but we think first and last of her who was ‘truest 


CRITICISMS—R OSE S11 


speaker’ and those who ‘called her brother, when she was but their sister; she them 
brothers, when they were so indeed.’ The very crown and flower of all her father’s 
daughters,—I do not speak here of her human father, but her divine,—woman 
above all Shakespeare’s women is Imogen. As in Cleopatra we found the in- 
carnate sex, the woman everlasting, so in Imogen we find half-glorified already the 
immortal godhead of womanhood. I would fain have some honey in my words at 
parting—with Shakespeare never, but for ever with these notes on Shakespeare; 
and I am, therefore, something more than fain to close my book upon the name of 
the woman best beloved in all the world of song and all the tide of time; upon the 
name of Shakespeare’s Imogen. 


Epwarp Rose (Sh. Soc. Transactions, 1880-86, p. 1): I shall, indeed, endeavour 
to sketch the effect upon many different personages of sudden emotion; but I shall 
look upon their characters not as many and diverse, but as essentially only two— 
as modifications (or, more rarely, pure examples) of two great opposing types: 
the men who are habitually self-conscious, given to analyse their own minds and 
deeds, and the men who are not. 

In real life we know too little of people to be able unhesitatingly to classify any 
but the most striking examples of a type; we have, it is true, the manners and faces 
of men from which to estimate their natures, and we have a few—generally the 
most casual and unimportant—of their actions; but this is all. In Shakespeare we 
have, if not their whole lives, yet (in the case of his greatest characters) almost all 
that is essential, stripped of much that, while merely accidental, is very puzzling; 
and we have the clearest statement of the one great act of each man’s life, with all 
its causes and consequences fully set out. From a collection of such examples as 
these, made by an observation so vast and a judgment so true, we ought to be able 
to deduce general rules such as could hardly be obtained from the particulars of 
real life, multitudinous and confused. 

Yet, to make clear what I mean, I should like to mention one or two characters 
in real life which impress every one, I believe, as almost pure types of the two classes 
I have named. In the class of simple direct minds, acting from obvious motives 
and with a minimum of self-consciousness, must surely come those of John Bright, 
of Darwin, of the late Duke of Wellington, and of a vast mass of undistinguished 
people, some dull, some hard, some exquisitely innocent, some marvellously selfish. 
These people vary as much as angel from devil, yet there is about them all a certain 
childlikeness, good or bad, a certain self-confidence, useful or dangerous. Even 
Darwin, while he admits most freely that he may be mistaken, had the self-con- 
fidence of utter purity; he knows that he is merely telling you what he had seen, 
honestly, fully, and without arriére-pensée or reserve. So the Duke of Wellington 
did simply what seemed to him his duty, never thinking what it might seem to 
other men; and so many a man quite unconsciously obeys his own pleasure, his own 
ambition, or the will of some superior nature who without an effort masters him. 

Of the opposite kind are many modern poets—Tennyson, Browning, very notice- 
ably the late Arthur Clough—men who constantly look into their own minds, ex- 
amine their own motives, deliberate, doubt, and change. A student of human 
nature, in the literary sense—a subjective poet—is, in the nature of things, bound to 
be of this class. Goethe and Byron, though both men of much practical sense, 
belonged essentially to it—they made it the business of their lives to think, and to 
express their thoughts: they were not among the great doers of this world. Their 
fine general powers might have obtained for them a good place among practical 


512 APPENDIX 


men, but nothing like the rank to which some parts of their faculties would seem to 
have entitled them. That there have also been men of infinite littleness in this class 
hardly needs to be said: a tiny intellect eagerly scrutinising itself cannot well be 
of any calculable value. 

Shakespeare, as a purely dramatic poet, had of necessity a nature prone to self- 
analysis, though his genius was large enough to analyse also nearly every other 
mind, while it yet noted all natural objects, and constantly kept all things in due 
proportion. But he made his one great representative character, Hamlet, per- 
petually self-conscious, hardly doing a single thing mechanically; and I think that 
the valuable criticism that ‘Hamlet was the only one of Shakespeare’s plays’ 
points to a true fact—that Hamlet was intended by Shakespeare as a portrayal of 
himself, though of himself under strange and unfavorable circumstances. . 

(p. 16): In his very latest plays, the Winter’s Tale and Cymbeline, he has com- 
panion studies of two contrasting characters, under circumstances to a considerable 
extent the same. Both Hermione and Imogen are accused by their husbands of 
infidelity, though it is true that the former is impeached in the presence of many 
people, while the latter is quite alone, except for the faithful servant who bears 
the news. But Hermione’s is evidently a simple and grand nature of unusual 
strength, which, though fully realizing its position, has force enough to bear with 
the amplest dignity a terrible trial, For this great soul no personal attack is too 
heavy to be endured; it is only at the death of her son—following upon a joy so 
great that she could utter but one word—that, like Hero, and not unlike Othello, 
she falls into a deadly swoon. ; 

It is not thus that Imogen’s curious, imaginative character is affected by such 
an accusation. She thinks; thinks fast and hard, and talks as fast—she makes what 
is an almost continuous speech of sixty lines. She does not even casually mention 
Cloten without an elaborate definition of his character—‘that harsh, noble, simple 
nothing.’ These are her first words after that silence so often to be noticed in 
parallel cases in Shakespeare. 

Two facts I have not yet noticed which are of considerable importance. The 
immediate necessity for obvious action—even the opportunity of action—often 
greatly modifies the result of sudden emotion, acts as a vent for it; and the sharing 
of emotion with others has also a great effect, not quite easy to define. A good ex- 
ample of both these facts is the behaviour, so strangely alike, of Brutus and Cassius 
(two most unlike men) immediately after the murder of Cesar. 

An early play and a late one—King John and King Lear—give curious studies of 
the effect of sudden emotion on exceptional characters. One is apt to take Con- 
stance as a passionate, single-minded woman; and much of the expression of her 
grief might be held to be merely conventional—such lines as: ‘O amiable lovely 
death! Thou odoriferous stench! sound rottenness!’ of course remind one at once 
of Juliet’s rhetoric. But if we continue the scene, and examine particularly the 
famous lines ‘Grief fills the room up of my absent child, Lies in his bed, walks up 
and down with me,’ we shall find that Constance’s intellect is keenly analysing 
herself: that, intense as her sorrow is, she thinks about it quite as much as she feels 
it; and that there is little danger of its breaking the o’er-fraught heart, as does the 
speechless grief of more massive characters. 

Lear would need an essay to himself, so I will leave him alone, with this criticism 
only—that the mad old king, with his intellect, his will, and his animal nature, 
all strong and all violently wayward, are curiously paralleled in a famous modern 
man of letters; and that those who would understand the deeds and the emotions 


CRITICISMS—WENDELL— THORNDIKE 513 


of King Lear cannot find a better clue to them than the Life of Walter Savage 
Landor. 


WENDELL (p. 361): Not the least normal thing about the play, too, is the mate- 
rial of which its bewildering plot is composed. Very slight examination will show 
that Cymbeline is a tissue of motives, situations, and characters which in the earlier 
work of Shakespeare proved theatrically effective. There is enough confusion of 
identity for a dozen of the early comedies; and the disguised characters are headed, 
as of old, by the familiar heroine in hose and doublet. Posthumus, Iachimo, and 
Cloten revive the second comic motive—later a tragic one—of self-deception. 
At least in the matter of jealousy and villainy, too, Posthumus and Iachimo recall 
Othello and Iago. In the potion and the death-like sleep of Imogen we have again 
the death-like sleep of Juliet. In the villainous Queen we have another woman, 
faintly recalling both Lady Macbeth and the daughters of King Lear. In the 
balancing of this figure by the pure one of Imogen, we have a suggestion of Cor- 
delia’s dramatic value. And so on. If, in some fantastic moment, we could 
imagine that Shakespeare, like Wagner, had written music-dramas, giving to each 
character, each situation, each mood, its own musical motive, we should find in 
Cymbeline hardly any new strain. .. . 

Looking back at the plays we have considered, only one appears to have been so 
completely recapitulatory as Cymbeline; this is Twelfth Night. In almost every 
other respect, however, the effects of these two plays differ. Among their many 
differences none perhaps is more marked than their comparative relations to the 
older works which they recapitulate. In Twelfth Night the old material is almost 
always presented more effectively than before; in Cymbeline it is almost always less 
satisfactorily handled. To a reader, and still more to an enthusiastic student, 
Cymbeline has the fascinating trait of at once demanding and rewarding study. 
On the stage, however, compared with the best of Shakespeare’s earlier plays, it is 
tiresome. For this there are two reasons: it contains too much,—its complexity 
of both substance and style overcrowds it throughout; and with all its power it 
lacks not only the simplicity of greatness, but also the ease of spontaneous imagina- 
tion. It has amazing cunningness of plot; its characters are individually con- 
structed; its atmosphere is varied and sometimes—particularly in the mountain 
scenes—plausible; its style abounds in final phrases. Throughout, however, it is 
laborious. Just as in Twelfth Night, for all its recapitulation, one feels constant 
spontaneity, so in every line of Cymbeline one is somehow aware of Titanic effort. 

In brief, then, Cymbeline seems the work of a consciously older man than the 
Shakespeare whom we have known. As such, it takes a different place in our study. 
In thus placing it, to be sure, we must guard against certainty. At best our results 
must be conjectural; and we have no external evidence to confirm us. 

Always remembering that we may not assert our notions true, however we 
are free to state and to believe them. 


THORNDIKE (p. 135): Such a dénouement [as in Cymbeline] is evidently not the 
natural outcome of a tragedy or a comedy; it is the elaborate climax, in prepara- 
tion for which the preceding situations have been made involved and perplexing. 
It is the dénouement of the drama of situations so arranged as constantly to excite 
and vary the attention of the spectators up to the moment of the final unravelling. 
As a matter of fact, the dénouement of Cymbeline is so ingeniously intricate that it is 
ineffective on the stage and thereby defeats the purpose for which the ingenuity 


33 


514 APPENDIX 


was apparently expended. One feels inclined, indeed, to assert with some positive- 
ness that the artistic skill required in managing so elaborate a scene was not ex- 
erted without definite purpose. The new technical achievement bespeaks de- 
liberation. Again one feels inclined to conjecture that this artistic effort may have 
been exerted for the purpose of rivalling similarly heightened dénouements in 
Beaumont and Fletcher. 

Without insisting too much on deliberate rivalry, we may surely say that, just 
as in the Beaumont-Fletcher romances, the elaborate dénouement is the most 
marked characteristic of the construction of Cymbeline. . . . Entirely unprece- 
dented in the preceding plays of Shakespeare, such heightened construction of 
the dénouement is practically unprecedented in all earlier Elizabethan plays; it 
has its only parallel in Beaumont and Fletcher. 

Finally, these plays all end happily. Essentially tragic as are the incidents of 
Cymbeline, the first three acts of the Winter’s Tale, and the Italian story at the 
basis of the Tempest, no one of these stories is carried out to its tragic conclusion. 
In Cymbeline the happy ending is secured by a violation of the most liberal notions 
of poetic justice; in the Winter’s Tale the happy ending is deliberately substituted 
for the tragic one of Greene’s novel; and in the Tempest the happy ending is ex- 
panded into an entire play. In consequence there have been many speculations 
in regard to Shakespeare’s forgiving charity, his reconciliatory temper, and his at- 
tainments of a serene, calmly philosophical maturity. These speculations are 
interesting so far as they express to us the emotional components of the artistic 
moods in which these plays were composed. The feelings which arise in any artist 
during creative work must, however, be distinguished from the practical objective 
circumstances which for most artists, as for Shakespeare, play an important part in 
determining the subject and form of production. Shakespeare’s moods may 
have had little resemblance to the emotional experiences of Beaumont and 
Fletcher, but so far as stage representation goes, his romances were tragi-come- 
dies, just as Philaster and A King and no King were tragi-comedies. . . . 

Shakespeare may possibly have written these plays to inculcate forgiveness or 
serenity of disposition; he certainly did write them to be acted on the stage of the 
Globe Theater. The happy culmination of tragic circumstances seems likely, then, 
to have had its origin in a desire to gratify the public. At this time, too, it was 
a new structural experiment for Shakespeare and an innovation on the practice of 
his contemporaries, unless it was an adoption of a fashion already successfully 
set by Philaster. ... 

‘Of all his women,’ says Mrs Jameson, ‘considered as individuals rather than as 
heroines, Imogen is the most perfect.’ ‘Imogen, the most lovely and perfect of 
Shakespeare’s female characters,’ is the comment of Nathan Drake. ‘Of all his 
heroines,’ says Charles Cowden Clarke, ‘no one conveys so fully the ideal of womanly 
perfection as Imogen.’ ‘In the character of Imogen,’ says Schlegel, ‘no one 
feature of female excellence is omitted” __ 

These quotations indicate well enough the impression Imogen gives—she is 
perfect. Like most perfect people, she is not real, she is idealized, and that is 
possibly what these critics mean by their perfects. In comparison with the women 
in the early sentimental comedies—Rosalind, Beatrice, Portia, and Viola—she 
lacks the details of characterization, the mannerisms which remind us of real 
persons, and suggest the possibility of portraiture. In comparison with these 
heroines, an analysis of Imogen’s character fails to supply really individual traits; 
one is thrown back on a general statement of her perfectibility. She is extremely 


CRITICISMS—COUR THOPE 51s 


idealized, or, in other words, the exigencies of the romantic drama required a hero- 
ine who should be very, very good; and Shakespeare, by the delicacy and purity 
of his fancy, by the exquisite fitness of his verse, succeeded in doing just what 
Beaumont and Fletcher were for ever trying to do with their Bellarios and Aspatias. 

That the methods of characterization are the same may be seen when one 
examines Cymbeline and notes just what Imogen says and does. She is good and 
chaste and spirited; she resists an attempt at seduction; she wears boy’s clothes; 
she leaves the court in search of her lover; she remains true to him after he has 
deserted her and sought to kill her; she dies and is brought back to life again; she 
passes through all sorts of impossible situations to final reconciliation and happi- 
ness. In all this there is little trace of an individual character; all this can be dupli- 
cated in the stories of Bellario and Arethusa. 

Take, again, what she says. Take, for example, her speeches in the dialogue with 
Tachimo; read the lines by themselves—‘ What makes your admiration?’ ‘What is 
the matter, trow?’ ‘What, dear sir, thus raps you, are you well?’ ‘Continues well 
my lord? His health beseech you?’—and so on. Manifestly, there is no individual- 
ity there. What she says is suited admirably to the situation, but Bellario, Are- 
thusa, or any one of half a dozen of the romantic heroine type might say it just as 
well. Take, again, the rest of her dialogue with Iachimo, or with Pisanio on the way 
to Milford Haven; or take her soliloquy on cruel fate; or the one bemoaning her 
weakness and fatigue; or her speeches in the final act; consider how these speeches 
spoken by a boy actor would have appealed to an Elizabethan audience. They are 
part and parcel of the ordinary situations of the romantic drama. 

Moreover, even the intense sentimentalization does not produce consistency. 
The girl who makes some very spirited replies to her father when he interrupts her 
parting with her lover, the girl who declaims so oratorically to Pisanio when he 
delivers her lover’s letter, the girl who stains her face in the blood of her supposed 
lover, and the girl who recovers immediately to follow Lucio as a page, are hardly 
recognizable as the same individual. 

Still further, it must be noticed that the character is presented largely by means 
of comments and descriptions on the part of others. The tributes of Iachimo, 
Posthumus, Pisanio, Guiderius, Averagus do more to create our ideas of Imogen’s 
beauty of character than anything she does or says. . . . 


W. J. Courtuopr (History of English Poetry, IV, p. 134): Though Measure for 
Measure touches almost unprecedented depths of tragic emotion, and though 
both Cymbeline and The Winter’s Tale contain episodes of the most beautiful and 
pathetic romance, these plays, as a group, leave the imagination with a sense of 
something wanting, and cannot, therefore, be counted among Shakespeare’s hap- 
piest works. At the same time, they are of great historical interest, as throwing 
light on the gradual transition of his invention from comedy to tragedy. 


TA DOUG —LONL01d Cee tentete 85 
Absorption. .... 56, 86, 87, 117, 124, 270 
INDUS G'— deceived seri one ee 847 
ACCME OR ee Rese 125, 126 
Adder SF Ce . 296 
Additions, see Inter polations. 
PATTON G—= (CILCCk oar ene ts 368 
US) NSN a 4 conser eine ieee RO 343 
INCHING meme Pilsen ane 421 
INANCING, on on5cben gaurooes 190, 449 
Amaz’d=confounded............. 343 
AN TROPONIN, o odocte 6 paoudsos 126, 196 
AOACOMMOD 5 6.4 conccnackoconecd 17 
FATICILONS se Lyi O10 Sy aes enn S 7 
Answer=relaliation........... 346, 368 
IN OLISt Meme eRe Soren, Ben aaa Beste 381 
INES oat hn POOn Geer Hee AOE 310 
Approbation=Proof..+..5-......- 57 
Arabian-bird=Phenix............ oa 
Arme=take up in the arms....... 340 
IATA SSR eee eRe lat sari ars sac cite in?) 
Arviragus, source of name........ 3 
AS OSE Ui aie nae - 408, 433 
& SOS GHIOR OSscockearnoeueenes 98 
SeUSeGElikeelauly ceemerreereients 427 
Assumed —aita7ned eerie eee 425 
At first=from the first............ 56 
RADU Crete sre Aecctasts eysks os ec ecaee rads 264. 
AXES ISH occ oc cocooscengeuns 36 
STM LTE OV ey ere ane eens acta 275 
CLENCING a eaee eae cea toof. 
FRUDACES pe are eer cenale «seers wee 127 
Averring =avouching.............. 410 
ISAINS. of .5 oot ego Smosh Eero 190f., 445 
Basilisk emery ar cenit ean 160 
Bastard, etymology............-. 165f. 
Bate —1licdiews. ee eee tk 189 
IByanyanless orn UHe JEM, noc oaneanceo cs 503 
IBeare— are maria neta etter: 121-124 


‘Becomid aaa e eae pcre er. 432 
Beene wbitvyen ren etree eee 48 
BIG —=MIMNHAP) os covossconcaogoonr 68 
Bellariusteeemo herein e tec ne 3) 
Beste ec eek ree 264, 266 

* advice=consideration........ 30 
SBin S lor isaer emer ete res 129 
Blamewassadjectivea. ee 252 
Bloods, inter pretation.............. 8-11 
Boccaccio’s Decameron as Source of 

Plotaeae ic aren oe 45sff. 
iBold—conjider tape ee 147 
Boodle on Source of Plot.......... 478 
Booktiiscs tact eerie aetenrtinuciae 384 
Bore in hand= professed........... 395 
Botany, Shakespeare’s knowledge 

OL Panes Oe ease 63, 120, 128 
Bowdentoni/2ePlay eee 505 
Boyldstuttereemn ree rene merece 98 
Brainie anna etnenae neee es 303 
Brandl on Source of Plot.......... 480 
Brayvety=—depancene ee 172 
Brawnes= fleshy paris............. 330 
Britaine (country), history...16o0f., 171, 


172, 173f., 179f., 359 


{Gr Y OT ye: Scammers Ge ee ee 48, 86 
Brogue=a rude shoé............-- 315 
Brouzierr sciences tae che eenteetclens 268 
(BUSS = Ver 01 Se en ee ee rare 365 
iBunialecustoms eee ne eee 323 
By-dependances = side-issues....... 431 
By-peepin heist reer tenet 94,95 
“© confounded with t=) 42- seen. Igl 
Cadwal, source of name........... 3 
Casura aise ne ae ee 448 
Caius ucits eee ee eee 
Calvinistic allusions............. 28, 35 
Capell on Source of Plot.......... 462 
(Ceysxtwolll, aie IRCWNS..cnogauveoonor 04 


518 

Caponerraeneris seine ce ciocice 109, I10 
Carbuncleeeravcn eis uence 409 
(Carle GHUPbomtnee sie evel eto erst esis erele 356f. 
Gassibulancees cc dee cictels ccieere 15 
Casnalli=aecidental....- <8. ese ers 56 
Cave of Belarius, location........ 1976. 
Chalmers on Date of Play........ 444f. 
(CUNZel aan apes ea stoc Tn .0r oof. 
@herubim: spellings... =: 02 seer 157 


Chiasm, see Respective construction. 
Child’s English and Scottish Ballads. 481 


Ghimney-peece sa sae tan eaten 156 
Citizen =city-bred pera artes 284 
Close=‘secrety secre nasi.) eer ee 99 
Cloten, characterssene eee 33f., 255 

‘<> historical motes... ase 12 
Clot=polée Mia udis eon oe atiaenen ae 225f. 
Clowted is nada ras etoae doers 315 
Cloyd =burdened . teas se =) eet 346 
Cloyes=claws.. 383 
Cognisance = ie ahs . 162 
Coleridge, ciassifeation ol ican 445 


4 O11 7/10 Petter ee age 
Collection =inference...........-. 434 
Collier on Date of Play............445f. | 

“on Source of Plot...... 462, 474f. | 
Commitvoffience< sean se ete IIo 
Companies= people.........-..0+- 293 
Companion, a word of contempt... 110 
Comparative= proportionable...... 143 
Comparatives, double............. 102 
Compare=stand comparison....... 13 


Composition, Date of........ 258, 443ff. 
‘Concern’ used intransitively...... 105 
Conclusions=experiments......... 64 
Condition =character............. 407 
Conduct =escort, guard............ 247 
Confections=compounded drugs.... 64 
@onfinersiy. nse caiehie eh eee aS 
Conscience =consciousness......... 119 


Consider=requiten... o... senses 120f. 


Consigne=47eld meen ae ee 325 
Constant = gifted with constancy.... 51 
Contraction Seems set ere II 


@onuey’d=steq/ peers eee 


Convince =overcome............... 56 
Cook’ de. cenua ag doe 386 
Cornelius. . Bs toe 
Counsaile = Lae sonpenes sce eee 186 
Counter=abacus.c.......2 0 eeeee 3871. 


INDEX 


Country base;a game... 3.3. ae 361 
Courthope on the Play........... 515 
Covenant. ios: «see or aniar 61 
Cowslippesi aa: aaein seiner tte 7s 
Crack= boast sree eee 408 
Credit=confidence..... 3002-0 102 
Creepes acquaintance............. 47 
Cropi i omuse tee mice tanto een 80 
Cunobelinus, original of Cymbeline i 
Curious sso. seat or ee 105 
Cymbeline, historical account... .. 16of. 
“s origin of name........ I 
ca pronunciation......... 8 
a weakness of character.. 22, 
23, 27; 28, 30 
Dalmatians? <.ccecase os eee 179 
Dangerous bonds=bonds of indebt- 
CONESS via. svatsis + sielos Ree ee 186 
Date of Composition........ 258, 443ff. 
Deeme=estimatée. .. 22225 < eee 380 
Dee p@ncan anc sete Oe ae 136f 
Defended |God sweac . serneons eee 103f. 
Delieate=m1gensous 2 3...0¢7- tee 305 
Dependanciese acne ee ere 141 
Werogatess aceasta eee r1of. 
Detest 5.23: tor ot oo aoe eee 168 
Didnals, Priest. \ ac ae 99 
SS» (Rangers nance eee 134 
Divineaccents sea eee Tid, 307 
Douce on Source of Plot.......... 460 
Dragons) ot the aightas eee eer 121 
Drake on the Play. oo.) dese 504 
Dullardigs :casc cee eee eee 419 
Durtey7si Version=- ase eee 481ff. 
Dycelon Datcio, Playa 452 
<ed finaliomitted = eee eee 330 
Eglan tine sect acl ene 317 
‘Either’ as monosyllable........... 304 
Elder; (tree) anc eee eee 291 
ilipses wars oo wee 25, 48, 92, 386 
Eimperiets, fcc. tee eee aoe 07 
Emperious=imperidl............. 287 
Encounter= meet and punish...... 96 
Hntertaine— ise ere ee eae 339 
Huriphile.| fone. tener peers sieht 210 
Even=just, precisely.............. 264 
Evill contracted to a monosyllable.... 19 


Exhibition= pension, salary........ 97 


INDEX 


519 
ISXOFCISOL sa eu ate er ee 325f. | Garnett on Date of Play.......... 450ff. 
Experiments, medicalaeneenee eee (Vil, || (OARS. wo) One eee eR 380 
Eimtend 2 aspen ieee ney ee oe 14, 45 | Genée on Source of Plot.......... 478 
lO Gu: onoaoodooaoonnenedon. 39 | Gentle=well-born................ 288 
Gervinus on Jachimo............. 491 
Pact= ev decd uanance ny ere tenes 183 os OM POSHHIMUS....0. 5200 - 401 
“LOUISE laden a pond dows 046 134f. | Ghesse in=gwess in ascertaining... 18 
Pang led centre ne aur htc eee 3 SAn Glan eset aps Pee ee SES I. ars 107 
Barre farsie: tao erent. ae eS || GIP LEU Ney Re eee eT ey ccc cia ae 174 
elas teflon jasted Ayana Na ene 336 | ‘Gins,’ aphetic form of begin...... 127 
See also Participle. Goa tanotaGoatsaepee erence 348 
Faucit (Helena), Lady Martin, on 
EMCO SCN Mente Mera Vane arr AB 6 AGG, || MERON SBo 5 ono nooo cnaasve 165 
AV OUD sheers hero ars 83, 298, 398 | Halliwell on Source of Plot... .462, 4778. 
HAV OUTS Hee see eiscnem oe acevo ees 218 | Hand-fast, meaning............... 70 
AV TICS ee ee ate ns care ee 113 | Happy=accomplished............. 243 
Bear dihopestea creek rn trot TAS) Llare-bell ener eerie ce sie eae 317 
Beate—dexterouss nen eee 308 | ‘Hark, Hark theLark,’translationsof 489 
eatedwyeantio peer tee T6f, || Haviour, etymology...5-3........ 213 
Feature= proportion of parts...... Boon PElazlit oni Herelay aerate tee 499 
Pemininerendingssasceeee ance ee AAG El Car tn. ccbineniocteee siniwiow tact 203 
Fetch in=apprehend.......... Rory, Gey. lld aKa cen ao conomanonOn ane oGcL as 13 
Inierce=venemenl annem eecen ee 430); Elelnes'—/,077,Saee eee eee 144 
Iiering =Virine eee en eee 03) Elel pesi==_Curesmrasrtaeresie tere etoile 263 
Figure= part enacted.............. 209 | Hepthemimeral cesura............ 448 
Minish G76 were tata aces gto ek 3044432) Een Lense) i eam eee narra 183 
Bit prepared some. sc iere = te vies eer 243 | Hertzberg on Date of Play........ 449 
Birra Clit aera ore crete uaiceestaron tere oe lake Piola hi(ehbeles same s © caigd 4 ou nDaome Otte 142 
Fleay on Date of Play............ 450 | ‘Him’ confounded with ’em or them 202 
lefcheniouy Morena sere 494 | Holinshed. .169, 171, 172, 179, 350, 444 
Flowers, see Botany. Holysdutyanecr creer ernie 20,210 
Foedarie=a confederate............ fey Ee Mone cco o Senko neues « 244 
I ROEM RNs oc powders 006 278, 303 | Horsemanship, Shakespeare’s knowl- 

Scan 170GS PILE <Of aparrgat yee rant ere thes BOOMs REGZE OL Ace. netseloninte aot arn yer 210 
Forbear=withdraw..........--+..- 13S) PHOrse-Ta cl Saree iether eee torf. 
Fore-say=torwillne ace BOs || How, Low—H0,, 1ouneeerenae ae 23 
Fore-stall =deprive................ 253i Hunter on ate of ICV rises 447 
10) d (3 00a age caes one cag sich ad oy ares 432 
Forman, note on Cymbeline....... ZAGN B= OYE CV6c a cient ares 314, 358 
Fortunes nes cise eines. fess 279 | Ignorant =wnacquainted........... 174 
Foundations =institutions.......... 263) | Hlkustrious: sacs /creuhe ack del halter 95, 96 
1 NG (es Sic rca ea Eee A eA 141f. | Imogen, source of name.......... 5,6 
Franklin=freeholder............-- 192 | Imperseverant = most constant...... 282 
SHUIEMACE MASLUCHO uid am etretestnrt Lie 87 | Importance=sulject, occasion, im- 
IRV) GEA AAG Ee Boon oo on oma 0b: 76| portunity, instigation........... 48, 49 

STi fOLSCHLO cers eure eet cn 270 
Gaine= restores os 0 oe ocee ereaeens BOP es ee LOT LON a etys acre ter Wy har hee ert 269 
Gallia ane nec eee Sie ohare arf. | Infinitive, complete present........ 268 
Gallicism@nenr sc) vrs Sarveeiets ese te 292 x used indefinitely. .68, 101, 371 
Galowseser ancien ceine noice SYeys))|| [NAVA SCBOUE. cocnne 606 ob bcd5.04 LOCO 300 


520 

Ingleby on Date of Play.......... 450 
Ingram on Date of Play..........: 44of. 
Injurious =insulting..........- 176, 2905 
Inserted passages, see Inter polations. 
[nstinetewaccent-eer ics 0 cle Mer 308, 430 


Intelligence = mental intercourse.... 336 

Interpolated s, see s, final. 

Interpolations. ...34, 36, 40, 72, 84, 168, 
210, 285f., 310, 321, 323f., 374ff- 


ETI CO ref OF1267000/~ elelarn «/olovekevehatenmeraunneae 103 
Urregulousss races aecrn cre eee 330 
Tswabsorption Of. . 0. saeeiae: 124, 275 
Tt; ellipsis of. ....1¢5 sarc eeeeeeOO 
SS EOL. t1Scccnct errr: sale sofas atow (ens 240f 
“ indefinite after nouns used as 

VeIDSiesresne ce eee 208 
Jachimo, origin of name.......... 4 
Jackesin bowling. ere erie 108 
Jameson, Mrs, on Jmogen......... 492 
'PAEINEM A srassrelerelleryuaesae tae Save el iL OOF 
Jay: of Ltaly Soe. ote aritamere soe 218 


Jealousie=suspicion.............. 342 
JOE SIU, Gone crests x ats ama ents 197 
Journall=daclyieinee ete 284 
Joviall, belonging to Jove........... 330 
Joynerhisehonoraeeee. tere 14, 15 
‘UMD = Hazard a.eea st eereaeee eiee 380 
pitersineoathions svar rere 161 
Justicer=a justices 240m. eee 412 
Kenne=range of sight............. 263 
Kissithesjacke sunt eer soc ee 108 
KG EEVOl Sin pst Tamer eres 4626. 
Knight ons areola Vaan 4468. 
Knowing =experience............. 48 
Knownestocithersesecnmere tenn 
Lady, as title of respect............ 21 
Langbaine on Source of Plot....... 455 


Languish in transitive sense. .30, 87, 88 
Larouche, Hark, Hark the Lark... .480ff. 
Lay the leavenkne eee 
Leagu’d=folded together........... 
ean es}7776071771¢ eee ee 
Learn =teach 


Leidger=ambassador.............. 


71 
Lenox, Mrs, on Imogen........... 405 
Leonatus, origin of name.......... 2 


INDEX 


Leonhardt on Date of Play........ 454 
a on Source of Plot....... 478 
Levy on Source of Plot........... 478 
‘Like’ used impersonally.......... 133 
Limb=-1iealesaarectsee arate: 163 
‘Linger’ as transitive....... 2..+- 305 
Liver sepgecteo ert al as eo ees 393 
Lloyd on Date of Play sae 447K. 
eS ONE E Lay sae ee eae 502 
Long=alongye das seiner 419 
‘Lover’ as feminine...........--- 407 


Luds-Towne= London... .174f., 207, 437 


. | Macbeth, parallels to Cymbeline....1124., 


114, 124 
Malone on Date of Play...........443f. 
A On S0urce Of Clots nee 462 
Manacle. iinoscaost ssl pees 25 
‘Marry’ as monosyllable........... 20 
Mary-buds’ a-iavten: Sober oes 128 
Masks ieetercc ovaerehe wataaeeraes 241, 361 
Miatch'=contpachenss eee eee 267 
Matter =Gusiiessinn. aos aes 4S 
Meé =x Self cto ce vs sa eee ee gl 
Mi ecane = average ras.c)-sa ean ee 189 
Mednesin. disci see 147 
Medicinable in active sense....... 185 
Meere= pure, unmixed............ 207 
Mend-upotisssoncntenc dy cee ae SE 
Mervaile=wonder...............- 171 
IMGtre ce ere 37f., III, 129, 190, 432 
55 FS COSSUT cD yk, c) ee a a ee 448 
ce pac Gelectiven.. 2 Sot p essen 26, 331 
“« ~ laws of, disregarded..... 15f., 145 
«mechanical, versus music of 
TAY COIS ae 18, 64, 220, 344 
‘“* redundant syllables......... 448 
Michel on Source of Plot.......... 4701. 
Mindeydarketsena.a see 238 
‘Moe’ comparative of many....... 366 
Morgan. oases ee eee ae 
Muhervetymolocy. step enereee 435 
Mulmutiuget ener eee er 177 
‘My’ confounded with thy........ 261 
Natural= actual, legitimate........ 210 
Needle as monosyllable........... 32 
Negatives, double and triple....... 46f. 
‘Neither’ as plural pronoun....... 322 


Nerves =sinews 


INDEX 


New Shakespeare Society and Date 


OL-PlAyS:b tee eee ee 440 
Niceslonging apenas ae eee 167f. 
NONE ‘S033. ci es ae ten eee 56 
Note=notice, taking note...... 344, 346 
Nothing-guift.......... wr273 
Nouns used as verbs......... 208, 230 
Noysome and infectious.......... 65 


Number’d= abounding in numbers.. 82 
Oa thane ee eer rece eee 161 
SOds — Godiswretm nat eee eee 328 
Of=as regards, concerning........ 349 
OES terry Gal tine Taee ete eens II 
Ohle on Source of Plot............ 479 
One=ahovelal eee ere eee 102 
SE DLONUNCIA ONTO laa eee 312 
Oppositions=combats............. 280 
OLbestmeracenc atc eee 429 
Orderly —7erular see eee 131 
Ord nancesm cree tere 305 
Ore-crownesaeceerer eee 3478. 
Orthographyseeereetere coe 48 
Outzcraftied ease ee eee 213 
OUt=pecrexen ete a ete ee eee cee 274 
Outsell kere ere ae 159 
Out=yecnomedaeeeee eae 215 
Packing —=ploiincermnen ne eee 255 
Patd=punished...-.200---+. +++ 322, 387 
Painted —descr70cd er ere 212 
Painting Sere see re ee ete ie 2r8ff. 
Pang dite cree cere eee 230 
(Pannoniansaaree eee etl 7.0 
Pantlerceactectacec ctoctien crete eke r42f. 
Parallels with Macbeth. . tes II4, 124 
Parke. ee 7 3 
Pericole, fen i) emiteed! meee 336 
sf formed from noun...... 350 

Ie Uae ee ere 432 
Passable = affording ie passage... 34 
Passage = occurrence. e220 
Peevish = silly, Delish SEE eit as Se 85f. 
Penetrate, intransitive............ 126 
Perkectia emcee nee acres: 179, 302 
Cen tx ey Sars ot aerate cient e-eel: Til 
PiecO=— Woman. ee 434f. 
Pin Gee ee ta te eee eee 2090f., 308 
Pittikins=diminutive of pity...... 328 


Plants, see Botany. 


521 
’Please=so or an’ it please........ 20 
PIOt mR COULCCROL Ser rr ore ee 455i. 
Plural by attraction............ 45,154 
See also s, final. 
“preceded by there is........ 338 
“subject preceded by verb 
hag mci roe ae eee 414 
Polidoreneenprrerire ccna sec B 
JRO ON NOD) IAW san ooanacere 455 
Posthumus, accent.......... Ay WS, Bere 
Postures Sitges eee en oe 407 
Preterre—promote--e nee eee 426 
m= T'CCONLINENG See 131, 339 
Pregnanteecree tee eee 332 
Preposition omitted in relative sen- 
COTLCE Reretesusye eeeere encodes aera tere 436 
Prevent in Latin derivative sense. . 395 
Primrose, etymology.............. 7. 
Probable= provable............... 160 
Prone =¢4 erect a ee ee ee 390 
Pronoun, irregularities............ 13 
eeCCOUNGAn toe-rer eerie it 15 
Proper=honest, respectable........ 225f. 
CAI 8 Gobadeautd eoG nee One 207 
“« names as adjectives........ 380 
Protection, pronunciation......... 15 
prune — Ongena eer ee 383 
Riolemaicisyst emia eeee rere 429 
Rution—=7t7si7catce eerie 350 
Puts to=imparts, offers, etc....... 16 
Puttocke ma bird s0je prey are eer 29 
Qualified = possessed of good qualities 51 
QuarrellousSy.cncme aoe 241 
@uartendi fresnel rete 340 
Quench) 2iranstiiven eels 68 
QuotationSspacseceerin womens 310 
See also Inter polations. 
Raddocke, see Ruddock. 
RAD Sarssetnd orstansustonsl te clvairatereu te ener 85 
Raven's. eyes. scat een ree 121-124 
Ready, double meaning.......... 1356. 
Recoyle= prove degenerate......... 98 
Redundant syllables.............. 448 
Referr’d in Latin sense............ 12 
Reflect upon, meaning............ 78 
Reichionsource Of Plotenm ere es - 480 
‘Re-inforce’ used intransitively.... 358 
Relativelomitted@eenrewr ria 318 


522 
Remembrancenacserctya. srersincisteleretrs 70 
*Remder, as WOU. oc. oc « s:eisesreuneiere 345 
Repetition un-Shakespearian...... 34 
Report, double meaning........... 136 
rs =f EIU OL LOMA tetera ner ert? 205 
os themselveSiicc ccc cneec ees 156 
Respective construction...........170f. 
Restie= indolent. . es uli 
Return from poe, date aces 443 
REV OL GLOSTACY «101. yams ae neta 06 
IREMOlES = C0OLLETS «1. sister ernest 345 
Richardson on Imogen...........- 496 
Ridi== Cover, CLCOT <a .k aeetere eta 191 
Robin-red-breast.. sa. 100s. + -reers 318 
Romishtscoccxc octreeieia cra reer orersriehe 101 
Roseonti ie Playa wsercincna ate tate 511 
‘Rouse’ as term of venery........ 200f. 
Ruddockta tase etree eet 318 
Rushes Nace aa ninacactiocs oneie searre 114 
Ses timalion a2 rheiaysisy Meneses 55, 58, 74, 131 
SOLON Sha aes a Jaton at estore 1oof., 210 
“inflection preceding plural sub- 

JOCU acres ore, ew hee ener uses 414 
Sadness=seriousmess...........---- 86 
Scansion, see Metre. 

SCRETO Sana ee Rosco EE ees Oey ae 422 
Schenkl on Source of Plot........ 477 
Schlegeliomthe:Play: «sees ee 501 
Scottish Chromelercenacia asec 444 
SGEIPEUTES eyes a eee ie oe rere 228 
Scruple—doudy a ererarie eee 408 
SEAT EOCENE sms he eo neers Heats 24 
Séason= ge sae axe ee 243 

= C10 relisWitOm a. inert 76 
Selfe-explication ete eos 213 
SENsei= DOG asia ree ten ie anes 119 
Senselesse, double meaning........ 133 
‘Shall’ as impersonal verb.......... 320 
Shallis—=s/all <weusenc ere II, 320 
Sharded-beetlesery etree: 198 
“Shey “Shes mason ae 40, 83 
Shift: a:shirt hy. oc sear eee 34 
‘Short’ as transitive verb........... 106 
DATINEA 2: 1 wee carn ea ee eee 406 
Silly=simple, rustic............... 368 
Simpathy =equality............... 386 
Simrock on Source of Plot......... 46of. 
Simular=specious................ 410 
Single oppositions = single combats.. 280 


INDEX 


Singular after plural relative...... 128 
sf bysattraction(.. ).7r sr 07, 331 

i | SH AVEV OR! x: hore: ssaievernie ens or ae ewe ner 04 
Slip =a he 100Se etter te 342 
Snider on the lay ce cepa eee 506 
Sniufle; Gand ets. ac suiharee le ee eae gl 
Solicltys=COUrtSHID 0. vine oe 2 oe 131, 132 
Sorrowsi4 dante a aera ee 421 
Sourcewot Plotitavacon as atetirror 455ff 
South-Hog cc erasccct tact ie 143, 144 
Soveraignty=royal dignity........ 247 
Spectacles, i. crus. tt cc lee ero 82 
Spider 4h e< aeieuaita toe eee ee 296f. 
Sprighted 52.14; «: canara ee 
Sprightly shewes: -cey.ncryaeraaeies 434 
SPUIES isis cee cine rere . 290 
Stage directions.) sere QI, 233, 356 
SO" SOULE siaisie isomer ee 196 

‘S -traverse-curtainiwnce rete 125 
Stage-time. . 125 
Stampe=a stanited COURS: Ahaha 373 
Staniptss <a coe eeee 166 
States= persons of high rank...... 2S 
Stagist— statesman ie. ee eee 149 
Steevens on Source of Plot........ 462 
Sterves meaning.) ..c.cac0 cee 61, 62 
Stones of sulpher= Thunderbolts... 414 
Straight-pight=erect.............. 406 
Straine 77, pillse ncn ote 229 
& SINCa ge eo es 285 
Strange=a foreigner.............. 85 
SS =astranger a .c2 a NaS 
Stricter= more restricted........... 372 
Subjection=service..............- 342 
Subjunctive for future............ 57 
Salpher,stones!of ))2. .4.c0eaoeee 414 
superlatives. doubles... eee 102 
Sumaddition tense ate 15, 182 
sune=failhifidly asa se ae 99 
Sweete= lover 20 dy eee Fae 
SWeeb Stan ntecc ae eee 427 
Swinburne on the Play............ 510 
SYMONDS: eh ges ae rt oneae eeer ee 225 
*T’ confounded with ¢............ IOI 
ake\in'= conquers eee 182 
Cait ==" ie erm eet eo 302 
Makenip==7cbukcuemercen ene oe 108 
‘Eanlingse en sn etree Gee 347 
Larges? fa eee ea cee eee 392 


INDEX 


TBASGEH Ria nines ee are eet ee eae 423 
WUatOlog yarn, Coe ya eter ee ee 22,74 
Cen antiusee ywnecty anette eee 15 
ANGI CP asaccamon coo joausee 398 
ANSE AOacatcagaooanaasannes Cag 
SINS? AOU Cio scccaas 56, 68, 87 
AL hes ther ace ken eee 316 
“There is’ preceding plural subject. 338 
Thicke, referring to quantity... .. 87, 189 
Thorndike on Date of Play........ 453f. 
ON Y3 JWOMs cao ueuneee 513 
dinough'—becausceaseeren eee SS 
cRhunderstones-erer erat een ems es 
V ARO occicientyes Oko he tl cre Oe NSE RTO ate 57 
APSO GT OVMO os cba ga0cer 117, 270 
ANGENGUE cohen Caton cl OIE eee 205 
eRombOyes meee cores aitesrayteime ciate 97 
Whouch—wounderrerceiae seein 341 
TAPAS, soscopouonsadosaes LAG 
Mbriall = test ue vatsemenvaleruaw ae stone 263 
TROT CUO Po conbooonnaueoone 83 
PErovlOditesmeee eer etic ses ciaaee 409 
ABECCS ENN, on a mada ss or ce ean ee TAG 
TURES Ssoboncasakconesas 408 
pag Liaing Cave ecerg ta MA cee ycee gorau 80 ff 
plytidi—ailired eateries serene 262f. 
ihyre —tordotes clodt ee wecnae oeler 230 
WiticifonsDatevoferlay seen 448 
Undergoes= bears without yielding. . 182 
Ungrammatical remnants......... 392 
Un-Shakespearian passages, see [n- 
ter polations. 
Use= serviceneaceracry ec 345 
Wsuries—7isa lcs eer ene ee 204 
Utteranceteecnn crews cke eet ia oe 179 
Vantage=favorable opportunity.... 40 


Venery, Shakespeare’s knowledge of 210 


523 
Ventures=Chance lemans......... 98 
Wer bale te tatty nai eos ae wianan 130f. 
Verbs formed from nouns..... 208, 230 
NAOIIS Sooo doo ne-4 oS eee 71 
WOVE WOON INBPoocoognnsondganur 61 
Wake = watchin ars as tre +. 230ff. 
Walke a-while=withdraw......... 32 
NWO? BE GO Dooccco ves b0en660 284 
“Warres” as singular. s........-... 276 
\WCAUINERSGUTIS.c000000000070nbD 206 
Wieazellieg aire et Ry ees se 241 
WRSCESSQGHOBS. scacc8hooccccnans 355 
IWIeISStOnm LCE.) ere nee 503 
WiendellKonticiee Pic yee 513 
Westward for Smelts as Source of 
Plott erent Ces eee 462ff 
CVE TRO H) Co cnaacaapee 314, 348 
Wihilesererarets tienen ern ten c 87 
Who=whom............-. 102, 208, 204 
Wiing-ledapmmrraccarser rene reorna te 1508. 
Niner ero unc aaa ee eee 310f. 
‘Wisht,’ participle formed from 
LUE eS GOGO D HAG © OOO rene 350 
Withee anna 4 ata Beets s Bis 
Witch=male sorcerer.............. 102 
Woodman=umnter............... 267 
‘Words hintieree ie een. 45 
Wormes of Nyle=asps of the Nile.. 215 
‘Wrings’ in sense of suffer........ B73 
WIyile ar oe are esters 350 
Xenophon of Ephesus as Source of 
Ploteee ce totes eterna 469 
Yardley on Source of Plot......... 479 
Nica restage wa aracaenta ierctereracterete rete 26-28 


mer bh vi 


i) 


yt a 


S ie Ne 
a eal oe 


” 
See, eg 
= ears 
ees me 
ye 
x aS, 
ee 
es ae S 
ac 
ee. 
< = 


MAIN & 
mb 


7 


2 


