< 


1  '  : 

■  ^  \v^ 


?///£*% 



i 



•  i 


' 


•- 


A  NEW  VARIORUM  EDITION 


b  L  2. 

J-F 

VI 


OF 


Shakespeare 


EDITED  BY 

HORACE  HOWARD  FURNESS 

HON.  PH.  d.  (halle),  l.  h.  d.  (columb.),.ll.d.  (penn.  et  harv.) 

HONORARY  MEMBER  OF  THE  ‘DEUTSCHE  SH  AKESPEARE-GESELLSCH  AFT  ’  OF  WEIMAR 
MEMBER  OF  THE  AMERICAN  PHILOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY 
FELLOW  OF  THE  AMERICAN  ACADEMY  OF  ARTS  AND  SCIENCES 


The  Winter's  Tale 


r  SEVENTH  EDITION .] 


PHILADELPHIA 

J.  B.  LIPPINCOTT  COMPANY 

LONDON  :  1 6  JOHN  STREET,  ADELPHI 


Copyright,  1898,  by  H.  H.  Furness 


Copyright,  1926,  by  H.  H.  Furness,  Jr. 


Westcott  &  Thomson, 
Electrotypers,  Phila. 


Press  op  J.  B.  Lippincott  Company 
Phila. 


iN. 


IN  MEMOR1AM 


PREFACE 


Inasmuch  as  each  volume  of  this  edition  is  independent  of  the 
others,  it  is  proper,  for  the  convenience  of  the  reader,  that  the  general 
plan  of  the  work  should  be  briefly  set  forth. 

In  Textual  Notes  will  be  found  the  various  readings  of  the  Folios 
and  of  modern  critical  editions,  together  with  such  conjectural  emen¬ 
dations  as  have  come  under  the  Editor’s  notice.  A  feature  of  this 
edition, — wherein  it  stands  alone, — is  that,  after  each  reading  recorded 
in  the  Textual  Notes  the  names  follow  of  those  editors  who  have 
adopted  that  reading ;  the  student  can  thus  estimate,  at  a  glance,  the 
weight  of  authority. 

In  the  Commentary  are  set  forth  explanations  and  criticisms ;  some 
of  them  antiquated ;  but  useful, — at  least,  the  Editor  has  so  deemed 
them, — as  marking  the  history  of  Shakespearian  criticism. 

In  the  Appendix  are  given  various  discussions,  such  as  The  Source 
of  the  Plot,  The  Date  of  the  Play,  etc.,  together  with  Criticisms  too 
long  or  too  general  to  be  inserted  in  the  Commentary. 

The  Text  here  given  is  again  that  of  the  Editio  Princeps,  the  Folio 
of  1623.  At  this  late  hour,  when  the  language  of  even  Chaucer  is 
becoming  familiar,  it  is  hardly  reasonable  to  insist  that  the  language 
of  Shakespeare,  in  an  edition  for  students  like  the  present,  shall  be 
divested  of  the  few  trifling  differences,  chiefly  in  spelling,  which  dis¬ 
tinguish  it  from  the  language  of  to-day ;  where  words  are  obsolete, 
it  is  not  due  to  the  spelling  in  the  First  Folio ;  they  will  need  ex¬ 
planation  howsoever  they  be  spelled ;  and  where  the  meaning  of  a 
phrase  is  obscure,  notes  are  required  whatsoever  the  text. 

The  Winter' s  Tale  was  published  first  in  the  Folio.  There  is  no 
Quarto  edition  of  it ;  a  Quarto  edition  whereof  the  mere  title  ap¬ 
peared  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,  in  a  list  of  plays,  has  never 
been  seen,  and  its  existence  has  been  justly  discredited. 

In  this  play,  more  than  in  any  other,  the  construction  of  the  sentence 
is  involved,  and  the  meaning  condensed.  Possibly  by  accident,  and  a 
happy  one,  the  Play  was  committed  by  the  publishers  of  the  Folio  to 


V 


VI 


PREFA  CE 


unusually  intelligent  compositors, — compositors  superior  in  their  craft 
to  those  from  whose  hands  we  have,  for  instance,  King  Lear.  In 
one  regard  it  stands  unparalleled,  by  any  other  play,  in  typography. 
For  some  years  past  it  has  been  growing  more  and  more  obvious  to 
the  students  of  the  language  of  Shakespeare  that  what  has  been 
called  the  ‘  absorption  ’  (not  the  omission)  of  certain  sounds,  in  pro¬ 
nunciation,  by  similar  sounds  terminating  preceding  words,  takes  place 
to  a  far  greater  extent  than  has  been  hitherto  supposed.  Indeed, 
phrases  which  have  been  condemned  as  faulty  in  construction,  and 
even  hopelessly  obscure,  are,  by  the  application  of  this  principle  of 
Absorption ,  become  clear.  Thus,  Romeo  says :  ‘  There  lies  more 
‘  peril  in  thine  eye  than  [/.  e.  tha n  in]  twenty  of  their  swords Antonio 
in  The  Tempest  says :  *  Let’s  all  sink  with’  [i.  e.  wi th  th’]  king  ;’  Lear 
says:  ‘This  [i.  e.  thA  is]  a  good  block,’  and  so  on.  In  three  plays 
(there  may  be,  possibly,  others,  I  speak  only  from  my  own  knowledge) 
the  compositors  have  marked  this  absorption  by  an  apostrophe,  as  in  the 
speech  of  Antonio  just  quoted.  This  careful  and  suggestive  apostrophe 
occurs  twice  in  The  Tempest,  once  in  Measure  for  Measure,  and  no 
less  than  eight  times  in  The  Winter’s  Tale.  (A  list  is  given  in  a  note 
on  II,  i,  1 8.)  It  is  in  the  number  of  these  apostrophes  that  this  play 
thus  stands  unparalleled.  Evidence  of  the  care  wherewith  this  text 
is  printed,  more  conclusive  than  this,  it  would  be  difficult  to  supply. 
Still  more  remarkable  does  this  care  become  when  we  reflect  that  in  all 
likelihood  the  compositors  had  no  guide  in  any  MS  before  their  eyes, 
but  composed  their  types,  guided  solely  by  the  ear,  from  sentences 
which  were  read  aloud  to  them, — a  practice  in  early  printing  offices 
which,  had  it  been  known  to  Steevens  and  Malone,  would  have 
removed  the  necessity  of  supposing  that  the  plays  were  occasionally 
taken  down  by  shorthand  at  a  public  performance  ;  what  these  editors 
held  to  be  the  voice  of  the  actor  was  most  probably  the  voice  of  the 
reader  to  the  compositor. 

Another  characteristic  of  the  typography  of  the  present  play  is  the 
hyphen,  which,  more  frequently  than  elsewhere,  joins  a  verb  and  a 
particle,  for  instance :  come-on,  go-by,  shews-off,  talked-of,  look-on, 
pluck-back ;  and  also  a  hyphen  joining  compound  words,  such  as : 
court-odour,  court- contempt,  finder-out,  etc.  These  are  minute  items, 
to  be  sure,  but  what  else  is  to  be  expected  from  a  microscopic  exam¬ 
ination  ? 

Twelfth  Night,  which  immediately  precedes  The  Winter’s  Tale,  ends, 
in  the  Folio,  on  p.  275.  Page  276  is  left  blank,  and  The  Winter’s 
Tale  begins  on  p.  277.  For  this  anomaly  several  reasons  have  been 


PREFACE 


vn 


assigned,  such  as,  that  in  gathering  the  plays  together  Heminge  and 
Condell  had  overlooked  The  Winter' s  Tale,  and  added  it  at  the  last 
minute,  after  the  series  of  Comedies  was  complete,  which,  it  would  seem, 
is  indicated  by  a  blank  page,  inasmuch  as  similar  blank  pages  are  found 
separating  the  Comedies  from  the  Histories,  and  the  Histories  from  the 
Tragedies.  Indeed,  a  copy  of  the  Folio  actually  exists  wherein  The 
Winter's  Tale  is  missing,  and  King  John  immediately  follows  Twelfth 
Night.  Again,  it  has  been  conjectured  that  it  was  not  altogether  over¬ 
looked,  but  originally  classed  with  the  Tragedies ,  and  was  hastily 
transferred  to  its  proper  place  among  the  Comedies.  Neither  the  pagi¬ 
nation  nor  the  signatures  help  us ;  a  new  numbering  and  a  new 
series  begin  with  King  John.  One  of  the  very  few  facts  of  which  we 
are  assured  in  regard  to  the  Folio  is  that  it  was  printed  at  the  charges 
of  four  Stationers ;  and  throughout  its  pages  proofs  are  abundant  that 
the  plays  were  set  up  by  various  groups  of  compositors,  possibly  by 
journeymen  printers  in  their  own  homes.  Consequently,  this  blank 
page  may  indicate  nothing  more  than  an  instance  of  badly  joined 
piece-work.  Inasmuch  as  the  sheets  were  printed  off,  as  was  the  cus¬ 
tom,  at  different  presses,  it  was  undoubtedly  easier  to  leave  a  whole 
page  blank  at  the  end  of  a  signature  than  to  transfer  a  single  page 
of  The  Winter’s  Tale  to  the  press  which  was  striking  off  Twelfth 
Night.  Such  is  the  best  solution  which  occurs  to  me. 

The  texts  of  the  Second,  Third,  and  Fourth  Folios  are  substantially 
the  same  as  that  of  the  First.  Through  what  must  have  been  a  mere 
accident  a  whole  line  (II,  iii,  26)  was  omitted  in  the  Second  Folio, 
and  as  the  gap  did  not  leave  utter  nonsense,  or,  at  least,  the  sense 
was  not  thereby  rendered  more  obscure  than  the  compositors  found  it 
to  be  for  them  in  many  another  passage,  the  omission  was  followed  in 
the  Third  and  Fourth,  and,  as  Rowe  printed  from  the  latter,  it  was 
repeated  in  his  edition  also.  Other  than  in  this  omission  the  Sec¬ 
ond  Folio  differs  materially  from  the  First  in  only  five  or  six  places, 
which  the  Textual  Notes  will  show.  It  is  noteworthy  that  these  dif¬ 
ferences,  when  they  are  additions  to  the  text,  are  uniformly  attempts 
toward  improvement  in  the  rhythm,  and  can  have  proceeded  only  from 
an  authority  higher,  assuredly,  than  that  of  a  compositor.  For  in¬ 
stance,  where  the  First  Folio  reads  :  ‘  (Which  you  knew  great)  and  to 
‘  the  hazard,’  the  Second  Folio  has  ‘  (Which  you  knew  great)  and  to  the 
‘ certain  hazard,’  (III,  ii,  181  ;  the  propriety  of  the  phrase:  ‘certain 
‘  hazard  ’  is  not  here  in  question,  I  give  the  instance  merely  as  an  at¬ 
tempt  to  improve  the  rhythm).  Again,  three  lines  further  down,  where 
the  First  Folio  has,  ‘Through  my  rust,’  the  Second  reads,  ‘Through 


vm 


PREFACE 


‘  my  darke  rust/  an  improvement  in  rhythm  and  force  superior  to  Ma¬ 
lone’s  emendation:  ‘ Thorough  my  rust.’  In  line  191  of  the  same 
Scene  the  Second  Folio  adds  burning  to  the  ‘  flaying?  boyling?’  of  the 
First,  again  an  emendation  better  than  any  which,  for  mere  rhythm’s 
sake,  has  been  since  proposed.  In  III,  iii,  65,  the  Second  Folio  adds 
the  stage-direction  Enter  a  Shepheard,  where  in  the  First  Folio  there  is 
no  stage-direction  at  all.  In  the  twenty-fourth  line  of  Time’s  solilo¬ 
quy,  the  Second  Folio  improves  the  metre  by  adding  here :  ‘  I  mention 
‘  here  a  sonne  o’  th’  King’s.’  Again,  in  the  Song  of  Autolycus,  ‘  with 
‘  heigh  ’  is  repeated,  to  the  great,  nay,  almost  indispensable,  amendment 
of  the  metre.  In  IV,  iv,  7,  the  Second  Folio  reads,  ‘Is  as  a  merry 
‘  meeting  of  the  petty  gods  ’  (zeal  outdid  performance  here  by  two  syl¬ 
lables,  but,  none  the  less,  it  was  zeal  in  a  good  direction).  In  line  43 
further  on:  ‘Oh,  but  dear  sir,’  etc.  etc.  These  changes  betoken  a 
more  sensitive  ear  and  a  more  authoritative  hand  than  those  of  a  mere 
mechanical  compositor.  Indeed,  it  was  the  rhythmical  element  in  these 
changes  and  in  others  elsewhere,  like  them,  which  led  Tieck  to  surmise 
that  the  Second  Folio  was  edited  by  Milton. 

As  You  Like  It  has  its  ‘  lion  ’  in  the  Forest  of  Arden,  and  The 
Winter' s  Tale  has  its  ‘  sea-coast  in  Bohemia.’  It  is  so  pleasing  to  find 
ourselves  superior  to  Shakespeare  in  anything,  no  matter  how  trifling, 
that  attention  to  these  two  violations  of  History,  both  Natural  and 
Political,  has  been  eagerly  called  by  many  a  reader  and  editor.  With 
the  ‘  lion,’  criticism  assumed  a  singular  and  curiously  interesting  phase  : 
all  critics  were  aware  that  Shakespeare  had  a  right  to  introduce  in 
an  imaginary  forest  what  imaginary  tragic  brutes  he  pleased,  and  yet 
each  critic  wished  to  show  that  he  had  noticed  the  incongruity  of  a 
tropical  beast  in  a  temperate  zone ;  thereupon  one  and  all  fell  to 
reviling  and  anathematizing  ‘  certain  critics  ’  for  jeering  at  Shake¬ 
speare.  Who  these  jeering  scoffers  were,  try  as  I  would,  I  could  never 
find  out, — no  names  were  ever  given.  Nevertheless,  editors  and  critics 
became  for  the  nonce  Don  Quixotes  and,  in  defence  of  Shakespeare, 
belaboured  malevolent  giants.  It  was  suggested  that  we  should  borrow 
a  fiction  of  the  Law  and  adopt  a  Shakespearian  John  Doe  and  Richard 
Roe,  on  whom  all  the  indignation  in  the  poet’s  behalf  could  be  heaped  ; 
and  thus  while  all  zealous  defenders  would  be  exhilarated  no  one  would 
be  really  one  atom  the  worse.  But  in  The  Winter's  Tale  the  case  is 
different.  No  plea  of  imaginary  localities  avails  the  culprit  here ; 
Sicilia  is  Sicilia  and  Bohemia  is  Bohemia ;  and  the  one  is  no  more  on 
the  mainland  than  the  other  is  on  the  sea-coast.  In  the  eyes  of  Sir 
Thomas  Hanmer  the  disgrace  of  the  blunder  was  so  indefensible  that 


PREFA  CE 


IX 


he  removed  it  at  once  from  Shakespeare,  and,  placing  it  all  upon  the 
compositors,  changed  the  locality  throughout  the  play  from  ‘  Bohemia  ’ 
to  Bithyyiia.  Some  time  after  the  baronet’s  edition  appeared,  attention 
was  called  to  the  fact  that  the  ‘  sea-coast  of  Bohemia  ’  was  mentioned 
in  Greene’s  novel  of  Dorastus  and  Fawnia,  out  of  which  Shake¬ 
speare  had  moulded  his  Winter' s  Tale.  Thereupon  the  geographical 
guilt  was  shifted  from  Shakespeare  to  Greene,  who,  as  Utriusque 
Academics  in  Artibus  Magister,  should  have  known  better;  and 
Shakespeare  was  converted  from  a  culprit  to  a  victim.  Then,  at  the 
beginning  of  this  century,  the  question  assumed  a  new  phase,  and  it 
turned  out  that  there  was  no  blunder  at  all.  A  time  has  been  when 
Bohemia  held  more  than  enough  sea-coast  whereon  to  wreck  Antigonus 
and  his  shipmates ;  and  so  Greene  in  turn  is  exonerated. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  the  earliest  critic  of  this  ‘  sea-coast  of  Bohe- 
‘  mia  ’  is  Ben  Jonson,  who,  in  1619,  said  to  Drummond  of  Hawthorn- 
den  that,  ‘  Shakespear  in  a  play,  brought  in  a  number  of  men  saying 
‘  they-  had  suffered  ship-wrack  in  Bohemia,  wher  yr  is  no  sea  neer  by 
‘some  100  miles.’  This  is  noteworthy  indeed!  Here  was  an  inti¬ 
mate  friend  of  Shakespeare,  Jonson,  the  breath  of  whose  life  was 
the  drama,  whose  notice  no  incident  or  allusion  in  a  play  would  be 
likely  to  escape,  who  had  read  everything,  was  endowed  with  a  pro¬ 
digious  memory,  and  yet  this  man,  probably  the  most  intelligent  and 
keenest- witted  of  all  Shakespeare’s  auditors,  did  not  recognize  an 
allusion  taken  directly  from  a  very  popular  novel  reprinted  but  a  year 
or  two  before  !  What  credence  thereafter,  may  I  ask,  is  to  be  given  to 
the  numberless  allusions  wherewith  the  commentators  and  editors  would 
fain  have  us  believe  that  Shakespeare’s  plays  are  crammed? — allusions, 
which,  unless  recognized  and  appreciated  by  the  audience,  lose  all  their 
point.  In  the  ballad,  hawked  by  Autolycus,  of  ‘  a  fish  that  appeared 
‘upon  the  coast,  on  Wednesday,  the  fourscore  of  April,’  did  not  Ma¬ 
lone  find  a  direct  allusion  to  a  ‘  monstruous  fish  ’  that  was  exhibited 
in  London  ?  To  be  sure,  the  exhibition  took  place  seven  years  before 
Autolycus  sang  his  song,  but  the  allusion  was  so  clear  and  direct  that 
it  helped  that  exact  but  prosaic  editor  in  assigning  the  date  when  this 
play  was  written.  And  did  we  not  have  in  A  Midsummer  Night’ s 
Dream  an  allusion,  down  to  the  minutest  detail,  to  a  festivity  which 
took  place  seventeen  years  before,  which  every  auditor  was  expected 
instantly  to  recognize?  With  this  signal  example  of  Ben  Jonson  be¬ 
fore  us,  ‘  let  us  hear  no  more  about  ’  allusions  or  references  which  are 
to  settle  by  internal  evidence  the  date  of  a  play, — that  most  trivial 
question,  except  in  Shakespeare’s  Biography,  on  which  time  can  be 
wasted. 


X 


PREFA  CE 


The  Comments,  in  the  Appendix,  which  I  have  been  able  to  glean 
from  German  sources  are  rather  less  in  number  than  in  some  of  the 
other  plays.  This  comedy  appears  to  have  attracted  less  attention  in 
Germany  than  As  You  Like  It,  A  Midsummer  Night' s  Dream,  or 
Cymbeline.  The  comments  of  Gervinus,  of  Ulrici,  and  of  Kreyssig 
are,  as  usual,  and  as  they  should  be,  chiefly  for  the  benefit  of  German 
readers.  Elze  makes  a  stout  defence  of  the  allusion  to  Julio  Romano, 
not,  to  be  sure,  as  a  contemporary  of  the  Delphic  Oracle,  but  as  at  once 
a  painter  and  a  sculptor.  The  most  recent  translations  are  by  Otto 
Gildemeister  and  by  Dr  Alexander  Schmidt  ;  both  were  issued 
in  the  same  year.  The  notes  of  Dr  Schmidt,  to  whom  we  owe  the 
Lexicon,  where  they  are  not  reproductions  of  English  notes,  will  be 
found  in  due  place  in  the  Commentary .  Against  one  of  his  notes,  how¬ 
ever,  a  respectful  but  firm  protest  should  be  made.  Gratitude  for  the 
Lexicon  ought  perhaps  to  silence  criticism, — it  will  certainly  temper  it, 
— but  this  especial  note  springs  from  the  same  pernicious  source  which 
banishes  Dame  Quickly,  Dogberry,  and  Verges,  and  in  their  places 
gives  us  Frau  Hurtig,  Holzapfel,  and  Schleewein  ;  a  sense  of  personal 
bereavement  must  have  voice.  We  all  know  the  characteristic  song  with 
which  the  charming  scoundrel,  Autolycus,  steps  blithely  before  us  : — 

‘  When  daffodils  begin  to  peer, 

With  hey,  the  doxy  o’er  the  dale,’  etc. 

Hereupon  Dr  Schmidt  observes: — ‘Shakespeare’s  “daffodil”  is  as- 
‘suredly  not  our  Narcissus  [as  Dorothea  Tieck  had  translated  it], 
‘  but  the  Snowdrop,  Leucoium  vernum,  which  belongs  to  the  same 
‘family.  Unquestionably  “o’er  the  dale”  is  dependent  on  “peer,” 

‘  and  the  sense  is  “  When  the  snowdrops  and  the  doxies  reappear  in  the 
‘  “dale.”  Only  thus  do  the  two  lines  following  form  a  natural  con- 
‘  elusion.’  Accordingly,  Dr  Schmidt  gives  us  the  rollicking  song  in 
the  following  demure  garb  : — 

‘  Wenn  Schneeglockchen  sich  zeigt  im  Thai, 

Juchhei !  und  du  auch,  MS-delein  gut, 

‘  Dann  sag’  ich  Valet  der  Sorg’  und  Qual, 

Denn  warm  wird  des  Winters  kaltes  Blut.’ 

Without  stopping  to  discuss  Dr  Schmidt’s  doubtful  assertion  that 
the  Leucoium  vernum  is  the  Snowdrop,  or  to  refer  to  the  unanimous 
opinion  of  Botanists  that  the  ‘  daffodil  ’  is  the  Narcissus,  it  is  this  free¬ 
dom  in  dealing  with  the  language  of  Shakespeare  and  with  the 
names  of  his  characters  against  which  I  wish  to  protest.  An  errone- 


PREFA CE 


xi 


ous  idea  is  abroad,  even  among  English  readers,  that  Germany  was 
the  earliest  to  appreciate  Shakespeare,  and  our  German  brothers 
appear  to  believe,  to  this  hour,  that  he  belongs  to  them  by  some 
fancied  right  of  discovery.  Lessing’s  voice  was  the  first  to  sound 
in  Germany  the  praises  of  Shakespeare, — a  grand  and  mighty 
voice,  it  must  be  gladly  confessed, — but  when  the  masterly  Hamburg- 
ische  Dramaturgie  appeared  (and  before  that  date  Shakespeare’s 
name  may  be  said  to  have  been  unknown  in  Germany),  Shake¬ 
speare’s  works  had  been  edited  by  Rowe,  Pope,  Theobald,  Han- 
mer,  Warburton,  Johnson,  and  Capell,  in  edition  after  edition, 
and,  possibly,  Steevens  was  at  work  on  the  First  Variorum.  We  do 
not  wish  to  blink  one  atom  of  indebtedness  to  our  German  fellow- 
students  for  all  the  indefatigable  zeal,  and  labour,  and  learning  which 
they  have  brought,  and  helpfully  brought,  to  the  study  of  Shake¬ 
speare, — the  thirty-three  noble  Year-books  would  put  us  to  the  blush 
if  we  did, — but  it  is  none  the  less  befitting  that,  at  least  every  now  and 
then,  we  should  set  them  up  a  glass  wherein  it  may  be  seen  how  far 
afield  the  very  best  of  them  may  grope,  by  no  means  owing  to  any  lack 
of  knowledge  and  great  learning,  but  simply  because  they  were  not 
born  to  the  inheritance  of  the  tongue  of  *  the  greatest  name  in  English 
‘  literature, — the  greatest  name  in  all  literature,’ — and  of  all  which  that 
inheritance  implies.  No  one  to  whom  the  English  language  is  native 
would  for  a  moment  think  of  exchanging  the  ‘  daffodils  ’  in  this  song 
for  any  other  flower  on  earth,  least  of  all  for  the  modest  snowdrop, 
the  emblem  of  purity.  Lovely  as  is  the  daffodil,  bewitching  even  the 
winds  of  March  with  its  beauty,  we  are  conscious  by  the  very  instinct 
of  our  English  blood  that  in  the  eyes  of  Autolycus  it  is  the  only 
match  and  emblem  of  his  flaunting  sweetheart,  and  at  the  mention 
of  it,  in  his  mouth,  its  hue  becomes  brassy  and  it  peers  with  effrontery. 
And  as  for  the  idea  that,  according  to  Dr  Schmidt,  it  together  with 
the  doxy  peers  over  the  dale, — I  doubt  that  it  ever  entered  an  English 
mind.  The  ‘  with  ’  betokens  no  accompaniment ;  it  is  the  *  with  ’  of 
innumerable  refrains,  such  as:  ‘With  hey,  ho,  the  wind  and  the  rain.’ 
The  words:  ‘With  hey,  the  doxy  o’er  the  dale’  mean  no  more  than 
‘  With  hey,  my  sweetheart  over  in  yonder  glen.’ 

The  mention  of  Autolycus  reminds  me  that  I  have  found  no  word 
of  gratitude,  or  even  of  praise,  anywhere  bestowed  on  Capell,  that 
excellent  but  sadly  neglected  editor,  for  a  stage-direction  in  the  scene 
between  Autolycus,  that  ‘rog,’  as  Dr  Simon  Forman  calls  him,  and 
the  Clown, — a  stage-direction  which  has  been  adopted  by  every  editor 
since  Capell,  and,  except  in  the  Cambridge  Edition,  I  think,  with- 


PREFA  CE 


xii 

out  acknowledgement.  That  the  Clown’s  pocket  was  then  and  there 
picked  by  Autolycus  we  all  know  by  the  Clown’s  confession  in  a  sub¬ 
sequent  scene,  but  in  the  scene  itself,  where  the  theft  is  actually  com¬ 
mitted,  there  is  no  hint  in  the  Folio  of  the  precise  moment.  To  select 
the  very  minute,  as  Capell  did,  and  insert  \_picks  his  pocket ]  between 
two  groans  by  Autolycus,  and,  after  the  deed  is  done,  to  give  thereby 
a  double  meaning  to  ‘you  ha’  done  me  a  charitable  office,’ — all  this 
required  the  acuteness  of  a — shall  it  be  said? — ‘sharper,’ — an  acute¬ 
ness  not,  in  general,  deemed  requisite  to  a  Shakespearian  editor. 

In  1756  Garrick  brought  out  at  Drury  Lane  a  version  of  The  Win¬ 
ter' s  Tale ,  called  Florizel  and  Perdita ,  a  Dramatic  Pastoral,  in  Three 
Acts.  Like  all  of  Garrick’s  adaptations,  it  was  designed  to  meet  the 
popular  demands  of  the  hour,  whereof  he  was  an  excellent  and  success¬ 
ful  judge.  Is  it  not  folly  to  criticise  harshly  such  adaptations?  When 
they  are  successful,  they  assuredly  reflect  the  taste  of  the  day,  and  for 
that  taste  the  manager  of  a  theatre  is  as  little  responsible  as  a  book¬ 
seller  for  the  style  of  poetry  on  his  counter.  We  must  remember  that 
the  great  literary  arbiter  of  that  day  asserted  that  certain  lines  in  Con¬ 
greve’s  Mourning  Bride  were  the  finest  poetical  passage  he  had  ever 
read,  and  that  he  could  recollect  none  in  Shakespeare  equal  to  them. 
When,  too,  that  same  ponderous  authority  had  said  that  there  were  not 
six,  or  at  most  seven,  faultless  lines  in  Shakespeare,  what  excuse  in 
omitting  or  altering  scenes  did  a  theatrical  manager  need  ?  Certainly 
no  compunctious  visitings  of  conscience  need  Garrick  have  had  after 
receiving  such  approval  as  the  following,  from  one  who  was  not  only 
a  Bishop  and  an  editor  of  Shakespeare,  but  a  luminary  in  the  world 
of  letters  but  little  less  brilliant  or  worshipped  in  his  day  than  Dr 
Johnson : — 

‘  Dear  Sir  :  As  you  know  me  to  be  [no]  less  an  idolizer  of  Shake- 
‘  speare  than  yourself,  you  will  less  suspect  me  of  compliment  when  I 
‘  tell  you,  that  besides  your  giving  an  elegant  form  to  a  monstrous  com- 
‘  position,  you  have  in  your  own  additions  written  up  to  the  best  scenes 
‘  in  this  play,  so  that  you  will  easily  imagine  I  read  the  “  Reformed 
‘  “  Winter’s  Tale  ”  with  great  pleasure.  You  have  greatly  improved 
‘  a  fine  prologue,  and  have  done  what  we  preachers  are  so  commonly 
‘  thought  unable  to  do — mend  ourselves  while  we  mend  others.  .  .  . 
1 1  am,  dear  sir,  With  truest  esteem  and  regard, 

‘  Your  most  affectionate  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

‘  W.  Warburton.’* 


*  Garrick's  Private  Correspondence,  vol.  i,  p.  88. 


PREFACE 


X1U 


However  much,  therefore,  we  in  these  days  may,  with  Othello, 
‘  yawn  at  alteration,’  let  us  be  lenient  with  Garrick,  who  as  a  theatrical 
manager  studied  his  public,  and  knew  its  temper  far  better  than  we 
can  possibly  know  it.  In  feeling  the  pulse  of  that  public  he  had  as 
a  guide  the  most  sensitive  of  nerves  :  the  pocket ;  and  we  may  be  very 
sure  that  its  pulsations  were  to  him,  as  they  are  to  us  all,  unmistake- 
able.  It  is  not  the  author  of  Florizel  and  Perdita  who  deserves  the 
ferule,  but  the  hands  that  applauded  it. 

Moreover,  does  it  not  really  betoken  small  faith  in  the  true  quality 
of  Shakespeare’s  plays,  by  whose  ‘adamant  Time  passes  without 
‘injury,’  to  suppose  that  any  art  of  man’s  device  can  seriously  affect 
them?  Who  now  remembers  a  line  of  Dryden’s  Tempest,  or  of 
Charles  Johnson’s  Love  in  a  Forest?  The  loudest  echoes  of  these 
Versions  have  long  since  died  away,  but  Miranda  and  Rosalind  and 
Perdita  remain  the  same,  and  will  reign  unchanged  and  unchangeable 
for  ever  in  our  hearts. 


December,  1897. 


H.  H.  F. 



THE  WINTERS  TALE. 









y  ■  • 

. 

























. 









The  Names  of  the  A£tors. 


L Routes,  Kmg  of  Sicillia. 

Mandllus ,  yong  Prince  of  Sicillia. 

Camillo. 

Antigonus.  I  Foure  5 

Cleomines.  r  Lords  of  Sicillia. 

Dion.  j 

Hermione,  Queene  to  Leontes. 


1.  The  Names... ]  At  the  end  of  the 
Play  in  the  Folios.  Dramatis  Personae. 
Rowe.  Persons  represented.  Cap. 

2,  3,  6.  Sicillia]  Sicilia  Ff,  Rowe  et 
seq. 


3.  Mamillus]  F2,  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Han. 
Mamilius  F3F4.  Mamillius  Rowe  i,  et  cet. 
yong]  young  F3F4. 

6.  Cleomines]  Cleomenes  Warb.  Cap. 
et  seq. 


I.  Names  of  the  Adtors.]  Steevens  :  In  the  novel  of  Dorastus  and  Fawnia 


the  King  of  Sicilia,  whom  Shakespeare  names 

Leontes,  is  called . Egistus, 

Polixenes,  King  of  Bohemia . Pandosto, 

Mamillius,  Prince  of  Sicilia . Garinter, 

Florizel,  Prince  of  Bohemia . . . Dorastus, 

Camillo . Franion, 

Old  Shepherd . Porrus, 

Hermione . Bellaria, 

Perdita . Fawnia,  and 

Mopsa . Mopsa. 


[This  list  Steevens  gave  first  in  the  Variorum  of  1778.  By  a  clerical  error  Leontes 
and  Polixenes  have  exchanged  names,  as  a  cursory  glance  at  the  Novel  will  show. 
And  yet  this  error  stands  uncorrected  in  all  the  succeeding  Variorums,  including  even 
that  of  1821,  and  in  comments  on  this  play  even  down  to  1884. — Ed.]  Hales 
(Essays,  etc.  106):  In  his  nomenclature,  Shakespeare  is  never  merely  servile  in 
following  his  originals ;  but  exercises  a  remarkable  independence,  sometimes  simply 
adopting,  sometimes  slightly  varying,  sometimes  wholly  rejecting,  the  names  he  found 
in  them.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  this  conduct  was  merely  arbitrary  and  care¬ 
less.  Euphony  must  of  course  have  had  its  influence ;  often  there  must  have  occurred 
other  considerations  of  no  trifling  interest,  if  only  we  could  discover  and  understand 
them.  A  singular  instance  of  a  complete  re-christening  is  to  be  found  in  The  Winter's 
Tale.  To  those  Greek  names  [there  adopted]  may  be  added  Antigonus,  Cleomenes, 
Archidamus,  Dion,  Autolycus,  and  Dorcas.  All  these  names,  except  perhaps  Dorcas 
and  Leontes,  are  found  in  Plutarch’s  Lives. 

8.  Hermione]  Collier  (ed.  i,  Introd.  427) :  It  may  be  noticed  that,  just  anterior 


2 


THE  NAMES  OF  THE  ACTORS 


Perdita ,  Daughter  to  Leontes  and  Hermione  . 

Paulina ,  wife  to  Antigonus  .  .10 

Emilia ,  a  Lady. 

Polixenes ,  King  of  Bohemia. 

Florizell ,  Prmce  of  Bohemia. 

Old  Shepheard ,  reputed  Father  of  Perdita. 

Clowne,  his  Sonne.  15 

Autolicus ,  a  Rogue. 

II.  a  Lady.]  A  Lady  attending  on  16.  Autolicus]  Autolycus  Var.  ’78  el 

Hermione.  Rowe.  seq. 

13.  Florizell]  Florizel  F3F4. 

to  the  time  of  our  poet,  the  name  he  assigns  to  the  Queen  of  Leontes  had  been 
employed  as  that  of  a  male  character :  in  The  rare  Triumphs  of  Love  and  Fortune, 
acted  at  court  in  1581-2,  and  printed  in  15891  Hermione  is  the  lover  of  the  heroine. 
Ruskin  ( Munera  Pulvems,  127)  :  Shakespeare’s  names  are  curiously — often  bar¬ 
barously  much  by  Providence, — but  assuredly  not  without  Shakespeare’s  cunning 
purpose  mixed  out  of  the  various  traditions  he  confusedly  adopted,  and  languages 
which  he  imperfectly  knew.  .  .  .  Hermione  (Ip pa)  ‘  pillar-like  ’  {tj  elSoc  iXe  XPvt m 
’A<ppo£i.T7]<;).  C.  Elliot  Browne  ( Athenceum ,  29  July,  1876)  :  Hermione,  no  doubt, 
was  named  after  the  daughter  of  Menelaus,  who  was  carried  off  by  Orestes,  but  the 
name  was  not  uncommon  in  contemporary  literature. 

*2>  !3>  lT  Bohemia]  For  a  discussion  on  ‘the  desert  of  Bohemia,’  see  III,  iii,  5. 
— Hanmer  changes  ‘  Bohemia  ’  to  Bithynia  throughout. 

13.  Florizell]  Walker  ( Crit .  ii,  33) :  Dorides,  the  assumed  name  of  Florizel, 
occurs  in  FEn.  v,  620, — ‘  Fit  Beroe,  Tmarii  conjux  longseva  Dorycli.’ — C.  Ellliot 
Browne  ( Athenizum ,  29  July,  1876)  :  As  in  As  You  Like  Lt,  there  are  traces  of  the 
Charlemagne  romances,  so  I  think  in  The  Winter's  Tale  there  are  evidences  of 
Shakespeare’s  familiarity  with  those  of  Amadis.  Florizel,  as  Don  Florisel,  is  the 
hero  of  the  ninth  book  of  the  ‘  Amadis  ’  series,  believed  to  have  been  written  by  Don 
Feliciano  de  Silva,  and  originally  published  at  Burgos  in  1535.  In  the  romance, 
Florisel,  in  the  guise  of  a  shepherd,  woos  a  princess,  who  is  disguised  as  a  shep¬ 
herdess,  and  it  was  therefore  an  appropriate  name  for  the  hero  of  The  Winter's  Tale. 
The  history  of  Don  Florisel  became  one  of  the  most  popular  romances  of  the  cycle, 
and  was  speedily  translated  into  French  and  Italian.  .  .  .  No  English  version  of  it  is 
known,  but  it  is  possible  there  may  be  an  abstract  of  his  adventures  in  The  Treasurie 
of  Amadis  of  Fi  aunce,  London,  1567,  of  which  only  one  copy  is  believed  to  exist, 
and  that  in  private  hands.  It  is  by  no  means  improbable,  however,  that  Shakespeare 
knew  the  story  in  the  French  version  of  Charles  Colet,  Champenois,  1564,  a  dainty 
little  volume,  with  charming  little  wood- cuts  of  pastoral  scenes,  one  of  which  repre¬ 
sents  the  Prince  piping  to  his  sheep,  with  Perdita  (Sylvia)  sitting  by  him  and  busily 
plying  her  distaff.  There  is  no  mention  of  Don  Florisel  in  Greene’s  book,  but  he  has 
taken  the  name  of  one  of  his  characters  (Garinter)  from  it. 

16.  Autolicus]  When  this  character  enters  on  the  scene  in  the  Fourth  Act,  and 
says  that  he  received  his  name  because  he  was  born  under  Mercury,  the  god  of  thieves, 
Theobald  remarks  that  the  allusion  is  unquestionably  to  Ovid,  Metam.  xi,  312: _ 


THE  NAMES  OF  THE  ACTORS 


3 


Archidamus ,  a  Lord  of  Bohemia.  1 7 

Other  Lords ,  and  Gentlemen ,  and  Seruants  . 

Shepheards  ,and  Shephearddeffes. 


19.  Shepheards...]  Goaler,  shep¬ 
herds...  Rowe. 

Mopsa.  ")  Shepherdesses.  Added  by 
Dorcas.  /  Rowe. 

Another  Sicilian  Lord.  Rogero,  a 
Sicilian  Gentleman.  An  Attendant  on 
young  Prince  Mamillius.  Officers  of  a 


Court  of  Judicature.  A  Mariner.  Time, 
as  Chorus.  Two  other  Ladies.  Satyrs 
for  a  Dance. — Added  by  Theob.,  and 
followed  (subs.)  by  subsequent  editors. 

[Scene,  partly  in  Sicilia,  and  partly 
in  Bohemia.  Rowe.  ...in  Bithynia. 
Han. 


‘  Alipedis  de  stirpe  dei  versuta  propago  Nascitur  Autolycus,  furtum  ingeniosus  ad 
omne which  Golding  thus  translates :  ‘  Now  when  shee  [*.  e.  Chione]  full  her  tyme 
had  gon,  shee  bare  by  Mercurye  A  sonne  that  hyght  Avvtolychus  who  provde  a  wyly 
pye,  And  such  a  fellow  as  in  theft  and  filching  had  no  peere.’  This  allusion,  War- 
burton,  in  his  wonted  dictatorial  style,  flatly  denies,  and  asserts  that  it  was  to  ‘  Lucian’s 
Discourse  on  Judicial  Astrology,  where  Autolycus  talks  much  in  the  same  manner.’ 
Of  course,  Theobald  was  right,  if  any  allusion  were  meant  at  all. — Douce  (i,  353) 
observes  that  if  Autolycus,  according  to  Warburton,  talks  much  in  the  same  manner- 
in  Lucian,  Warburton  ‘must  have  used  some  edition  of  Lucian  vastly  preferable  h> 
those  which  now  remain.’ — Halliwell  quotes  Barron  Field  to  the  effect  that 
‘  when  Warburton  pretends  that  the  whole  speech  of  Autolycus,  on  his  first  appear¬ 
ance,  is  taken  from  Lucian’s  book  on  Astrology,  where  Autolycus  speaks  much  more 
in  the  same  style,  he  must  have  been  dreaming.  In  this  book  the  myth  that  Autol¬ 
ycus  is  the  son  of  Hermes  is  explained  thus :  that  the  art  of  stealing  came  to  himi 
from  Hermes,  under  whose  star  he  was  born ;  and,  at  most,  the  passage  in  Shake¬ 
speare  contains  only  an  allusion  to  this.’ — Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  J.  F.  Gronovius,  in  his 
Led.  Plautina,  p.  161,  ed.  1740,  after  citing  Martial,  viii,  59,  observes:  ‘  Celebratur 
autem  in  fabulis  Autolycus  maximus  furum.’  Hales  (p.  109) :  Whence  came  this 
prince  of  pedlars  and  of  pickpockets  ?  No  doubt  the  man  had  in  some  sort  been 
espied  and  watched  by  him  who  has  painted  him  for  all  time, — at  some  Stratford 
wake,  when  Mr  Shakespeare  of  New  Place  was  taking  Mistress  Susanna  and  her 
sister  Judith  to  see  what  was  to  be  seen  ;  or  at  Bartholomew  Fair,  as  he  strolled 
through  it  perchance  with  Mr  Benjamin  Jonson ;  but  what  a  name  to  give  him !  Yet 
it  was  carefully  chosen.  There  was  an  ancient  thief  of  famous  memory  called 
Autolycus.  His  name  probably  is  significant  of  his  nature.  It  should  mean  All¬ 
wolf,  Very-wolf,  Wolf’s-self.  See  Homer,  Od.  xix,  392-8,  where  the  old  nurse 
Eurukleia  is  bathing  the  feet  of  the  not  yet  identified  Odusseus. 

Mopsa  and  Dorcas]  Of  these  two  names,  Dorcas  is  Biblical,  and,  in  Doras/us, 
and  Fawnia,  Mopsa  is  the  name  of  the  old  shepherd’s  wife. 


The  Winters  Tale. 


A  Plus  Primus.  Sccena  Prima . 


Enter  Camillo  and  Archidamus. 

Arch. 

F  you  fhall  chance( Camillo)  to  vifit  Bohemia ,  on 
the  like  occafion  whereon  my  feruices  are  now  5 

on-foot,  you  fhall  fee(as  I  haue  faid)great  dif¬ 
ference  betwixt  our  Bohemia,  and  your  Sicilia.  7 


The  Winters  Tale.]  Winter’s  Tale. 
Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  ’93, 
Var.  ’03,  ’13,  ’21,  Knt. 

1.  Sccena]  Scena  F^. 

2.  [A  Palace.  Rowe+.  An  Anti¬ 


chamber  in  Leontes’s  Palace.  Theob.  et 
seq. 

4.  Bohemia,]  Bithynia ,  Han.  (through¬ 
out). 

6,  on-foot]  on  foot  F4  et  seq. 


The  Winters  Tale.]  In  the  Appendix  is  given  an  extract  from  Forman’s  diary 

■wherein  an  account  is  given  of  his  witnessing  a  performance  of  ‘  the  Winters  Talle 

at  the  glob.’  In  reference  to  the  title,  Collier  ( New  Particulars,  20)  remarks  that 

4  it  would  prove  little  that  Forman  gives  the  piece  the  same  name  as  Shakespeare’s 
play,  because  it  was  not  very  uncommon  for  two  authors  to  adopt  the  same,  or  nearly 
the  same,  title,  and  “  a  winter’s  tale,”  like  “  an  old  wife’s  tale  ”  (which  Peele  adopted 
for  one  of  his  dramas),  was  an  ordinary  expression.  We  meet  with  it,  among  other 
places,  in  Marlow  and  Nash’s  Dido,  Queen  of  Carthage,  1594,  III,  iv,  where  Eneas 
says:  “Who  would  not  undergoe  all  kind  of  toyle  To  be  well  stor’d  with  such  a 
a  winter’s  tale?”’. — Hunter  ( Illust .  i,  412):  There  is,  perhaps,  no  very  strong 
reason  for  preferring  one  to  the  other,  but,  on  the  whole,  the  indefinite  article,  A 
Winter’s  Tale,  appears  to  me  to  express  more  exactly  the  meaning  of  the  author  than 
the  definite,  which  is  prefixed  in  the  original  editions.  It  is  a  Tale  for  Winter,  or,  as 
in  the  Book  of  the  Revels,  a  Winter  Night’s  Tale,  such  a  tale  as  we  may  conceive  to 
have  cheered  the  dreary  hours  of  a  winter’s  night  as  a  family  crowded  round  the  fire, 
the  storm  beating  against  the  casement,  or,  as  it  is  ingeniously  expressed  in  the  title 
of  one  of  the  manuscripts  in  the  library  of  Martin  of  Palgrave,  written  in  1605,  as 
if  written * * *  4  of  purpose  to  shorten  the  lives  of  long  winter  nights  that  lie  watching  in 
the  dark  for  us.’  Shakespeare  alludes  to  this  practice  of  his  times  both  in  Macbeth, 
III,  iv,  and  in  Richard  the  Second,  V,  i.  There  are  passages  in  the  play  which 

5 


6 


THE  WINTERS  TALE  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

Cam.  I  thinke,  this  comming  Summer,  the  King  of  8 


8,  14,  16,  22.  /]  I  F3. 


8.  comming ]  common  Ff,  Rowe  i. 


plainly  allude  to  it. — Lloyd  (p.  133)  :  The  title  suggests  that  it  is  in  some  manner  a 
pendant  of  the  Midsummer  Night' s  Dream.  The  classic  and  romantic,  the  pagan 
and  chivalric,  are  huddled  and  combined  here  as  there,  and  still  more  glaringly  and 
unscrupulously.  In  this  play,  however,  we  have  no  night  scenes ;  the  sea  side  storm 
is  wintry ;  there  is  a  hint  of  season  once  at  the  fall  of  summer,  and  more  significantly 
in  the  words  of  Mamilius,  that  note  a  tale  of  sadness  as  fittest  for  winter.  Perhaps, 
again,  the  length  of  time  covered  by  the  story  is  in  the  spirit  of  a  winter’s  tale,  when 
time  is  to  spare  for  unstinted  narrative ;  but  the  main  appropriateness  of  the  title 
depends,  after  all,  on  the  certain  abruptness  and  violence  of  transition  and  combina¬ 
tion  which  pervade  the  play,  of  which  the  anachronisms  are  minor  types,  associated 
with  incongruities,  to  the  full  as  startling,  in  the  province  of  History’s  other  hand¬ 
maid,  Geography. — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i,  272):  Shakespeare  sought  only  to  put  a 
very  popular  story  into  a  dramatic  form ;  and  of  this  he  advertised  his  hearers  by 
calling  this  play  a  Tale,  just  as  before  he  had  called  a  play  similarly  wanting  in  dra¬ 
matic  interest  a  Dream. — Halliwell  ( Introd .  p.  45) :  The  title,  an  acknowledge¬ 
ment  that  although  a  regular  drama  it  was  also  a  romance  or  tale  suited  for  the  even¬ 
ings  of  winter,  is,  perhaps,  a  reason  for  the  supposition  that  it  originally  appeared  at 
the  Blackfriars,  a  theatre  which  restricted  its  season  to  the  winter  months.  The 
words  of  Mamilius  in  the  Second  Act  can  scarcely  be  imagined  to  have  any  intimate 
connection  with  the  selection  of  the  title  of  the  comedy.  In  Shakespeare’s  time  the 
country  fire-side  attracted  many  a  narrator,  whose  knowledge  of  the  vernacular  tra¬ 
ditional  and  imaginary  tales  current  at  the  time  would  have  sufficed  to  explain  more 
than  one  allusion  in  contemporary  literature  that  has  baffled  the  collective  efforts  of 
modem  enquirers.  Many  a  winter’s  tale  has  shared  the  fate  of  Wade  and  his  boat 
Guingelot,  which  was  then  so  universally  known  that  an  editor  of  the  time  excuses 
himself  from  giving  even  an  outline  of  the  story,  but  the  slightest  further  trace  of 
which  has  escaped  the  careful  researches  of  all  who  have  treated  on  the  series  of 
romances  to  which  it  is  supposed  to  have  belonged.  [See  Tyrwhitt’s  note  on  v.  9298, 
Canterbury  Tales. — Ed.] — Ward  (i,  437)  :  It  is  possible  that  the  pretty  title  was 
suggested  to  Shakespeare  by  that  of  A  Winter  Night’s  Vision,  an  addition  to  The 
Mirror  for  Magistrates ,  published  by  Nichols  in  1610,  the  year  when  The  Winters 
Tale  was  perhaps  written. 

4.  Coleridge  (p.  254) :  Observe  the  easy  style  of  chitchat  between  Camillo  and 
Archidamus  as  contrasted  with  the  elevated  diction  on  the  introduction  of  the  Kings 
and  Hermione  in  the  second  scene. 

4,  5,  6.  on  .  .  .  whereon  ...  on  foot]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  ii)  :  A  marked  indica¬ 
tion  of  the  heedlessness  in  regard  to  nicety  of  style  with  which  Shakespeare  wrote 
his  plays.  [Is  not  this  very  ‘  heedlessness  ’  an  illustration  of  the  excellence  which 
Coleridge  detected  in  this  conversation  ?  The  mere  fact  that  the  conversation  is  in 
prose  ought  to  lead  us  to  expect  a  certain  careless,  colloquial  ease.  The  disparaging 
tone,  undeniably  present  in  some  of  the  comments  on  the  text  in  White’s  Second 
Edition,  springs,  I  think,  from  an  honest  desire  on  White’s  part  to  be  absolutely 
impartial  in  his  literary  judgement  of  Shakespeare.  It  was  White’s  way,  perhaps 
not  the  happiest,  of  protesting  against  indiscriminate  and  rhapsodical  laudation. — Ed.] 

6.  as  I  have  said]  In  itself  this  parenthetical  remark  is  quite  needless,  but, 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


7 


Sicilia  meanes  to  pay  Bohemia  the  Vifitation,  which  hee 
iuftly  owes  him.  10 

Arch.  Wherein  our  Entertainment  fhall  fhame  vs:  we 
will  be  iuftified  in  our  Loues  :  for  indeed — 

Cam.  ’Befeech  you — 

^r^.Verely  I  fpeake  it  in  the  freedome  of  my  know¬ 
ledge  :  we  cannot  with  fuch  magnificence —  in  fo  rare —  15 

I  know  not  what  to  fay — Wee  will  giue  you  fleepie 
Drinkes,  that  your  Sences  (vn-intelligent  of  our  infuffi- 
cience)  may,  though  they  cannot  prayfe  vs,  as  little  ac- 
cufe  vs. 

Cam.  You  pay  a  great  deale  to  deare,  for  what’s  giuen  20 

freely. 

Arch.  ’Beleeue  me,  I  fpeake  as  my  vnderftanding  in- 
ftrufils  me,  and  as  mine  honeftie  puts  it  to  vtterance. 

Cam.  Sicilia  cannot  fhew  himfelfe  ouer-kind  to  Bohe¬ 
mia  :  They  were  trayn’d  together  in  their  Child-hoods  \  25 

and  there  rooted  betwixt  them  then  fuch  an  affe6lion, 
which  cannot  chufe  but  braunch  now.  Since  their  more 
mature  Dignities, and  Royall  Neceffities,made  feperati- 
on  of  their  Societie,  their  encounters(though  not  Perfo- 
nall)  hath  been  Royally  attornyed  with  enter-change  of  30 

22.  '  Beleeue]  F2. 

25.  Child-hoods ]  Child  hoods  F+. 
childhoods  Rowe. 

28.  feperation]  F2. 

29.  Societie, ]  Society  ;  Rowe,  Pope. 

30.  hath ]  have  Ff  et  seq. 

Royally ]  so  royally  Coll.  ii.  (MS). 

placed  here  in  the  first  sentence,  it  conveys  the  idea  of  a  conversation  of  which  we 
hear  only  the  closing  portion. — Ed. 

ii.  shame  vs]  Johnson:  Though  we  cannot  give  you  equal  entertainment,  yet 
the  consciousness  of  our  good-will  shall  justify  us. 

25,  26.  trayn’d  .  .  .  rooted]  Possibly,  by  the  association  of  ideas  the  training  of 
vines  and  young  trees  suggested  rooted. — Ed. 

26,  27.  such  .  .  .  which]  Abbott  (§  278) :  Such  was  by  derivation  the  natural 
antecedent  to  which  ;  such  meaning  ‘  so-like,’  ‘  so-in-kind which  meaning  ‘  what- 
like,’  ‘ what-in-kind.’  See  also  IV,  iv,  844,  “such  secrets  .  .  .  which.’ 

30.  hath]  An  instance  of  the  third  person  plural  in  th,  which,  in  this  instance, 
did  not  survive  the  First  Folio.— Abbott  (§  334)  gives  two  other  instances :  Mer.  of 
Yen.  Ill,  ii,  33  ;  HI,  ii,  270. 

30.  attornyed]  Johnson  :  Nobly  supplied  by  substitution  of  embassies,  etc. 


II.  vs  .•]  us,  Theob.  et  seq. 

13.  'Befeech]  Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Wh.  i,  Ktly. 

14.  Verely]  F2. 

16.  fay — Wee']  say.  We  Cap.  et  seq. 
(subs.). 

20.  to  dears']  too  deare  Ff. 


8 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  x,  sc.  i. 


Gifts,  Letters,  lotting  Embaffies,  that  they  haue  feem’d  to  31 
be  together,  though  abfent:  fhooke  hands,  as  ouer  a  Vaft; 
and  embrac’d  as  it  were  from  the  ends  of  oppofed  Winds. 

The  Heauens  continue  their  Loues. 

Arch.  I  thinke  there  is  not  in  the  World,  either  Malice  35 
or  Matter,  to  alter  it.  You  haue  an  vnfpeakable  comfort 
of  your  young  Prince  Mamillius:  it  is  a  Gentleman  of  the 
greateft  Promife,  that  euer  came  into  my  Note. 

Cam.  I  very  well  agree  with  you,  in  the  hopes  of  him  : 
it  is  a  gallant  Child  ;  one,  that  (indeed)Phyficks  the  Sub-  40 


31.  Gifts ]  Gift  F. 

32.  Vaft ]  Vaft  Sea  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 

34.  Heauens']  Head  ns  Rowe  +  . 
heaven's  Johns. 


34.  Loues]  love  Han.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

37.  Mamillius]  Mamillus  Rowe  ii, 
Pope,  Han. 

40.  one,  that]  one  that  Ff. 


31.  Vast]  Walker  {Crit.  ii,  38)  devotes  an  article,  with  many  examples,  to  the 
peculiar  use  of  vast,  Lat.  vastus,  empty,  waste.  ‘  This  use  of  vast,  and  in  like  manner 
of  vasty,  is  common  in  the  poets  of  Shakespeare’s  age.’ — Steevens  called  attention 
to  its  use  as  applied  to  the  sea,  in  Per.  III.  i,  1  :  ‘  Thou  god  of  this  great  vast,  rebuke 
these  surges.’ — Henley  suggests,  with  probability,  that  there  is  a  reference  here  to 
‘  a  device,  common  in  the  title  pages  of  old  books,  of  two  hands  extended  from 
opposite  clouds,  and  joined  as  in  token  of  friendship  over  a  wide  waste  of  country.’ 
Vast  is  applied  to  time  as  well  as  space  in  Temp.  I,  ii,  327;  Ham.  I,  ii,  198. 

34.  Loues]  Walker  {Crit.  i,  233):  The  interpolation  of  an  s  at  the  end  of  a 
word, — generally,  but  not  always,  a  noun  substantive, — is  remarkably  frequent  in  the 
Folio.  Those  who  are  conversant  with  the  MSS  of  the  Elizabethan  age  may  perhaps 
be  able  to  explain  its  origin.  Were  it  not  for  the  different  degree  of  frequency  with 
which  it  occurs  in  different  parts  of  the  Folio, — being  comparatively  rare  in  the  Com¬ 
edies  (except  perhaps  in  The  Winter's  Tale),  appearing  more  frequently  in  the  His¬ 
tories,  and  becoming  quite  common  in  the  Tragedies, — I  should  be  inclined  to  think 
it  originated  in  some  peculiarity  of  Shakespeare’s  hand-writing.  [In  the  present 
passage  Walker  (p.  252)  would  read  Love,  and  rightly,  inasmuch  as  in  the  next 
speech  Archidamus  says :  ‘  I  thinke  there  is  not  .  .  .  Malice  ...  to  alter  it.'  See 
also  ‘hands,’  II,  iii,  99, post.] 

35-38.  Lady  Martin  :  In  this  speech  two  notes  are  struck  which  reverberate  in 
in  the  heart,  when  these  bright  anticipations  are  soon  afterward  turned  to  anguish  and 
dismay  by  the  wholly  unexpected,  jealous,  frenzy  of  Leontes. 

40.  Subiect]  Johnson  :  Affords  a  cordial  to  the  state;  has  the  power  of  assuaging 
the  sense  of  misery.  [‘  The  Subject  ’  is  plural  in  sense,  like  the  wicked,  the  elect. 
Cf.  Lear,  IV,  vi,  no:  ‘see  how  the  subject  quakes,’  or  Ham.  II,  ii,  416:  ‘ ’twas 
caviare  to  the  general.’  Staunton,  while  conceding  that  this  may  be  the  meaning, 
thinks  that  ‘  from  the  words  which  immediately  follow — “  makes  old  hearts  fresh  ” 
— it  has  a  more  particular  meaning :  The  sight  and  hopes  of  the  princely  boy  were 
cordial  to  the  afflicted  and  invigorating  to  the  old.’  A  distinction  which  I  cannot 
say  is  quite  clear. — Ed.] 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


9 


ie£l,  makes  old  hearts  frefh  :  they  that  went  on  Crutches  41 
ere  he  was  borne,  defire  yet  their  life,  to  fee  him  a  Man. 

Arch.  Would  they  elfe  be  content  to  die  ? 

Cam.  Y es;if  there  were  no  other  excufe,  why  they  fhould 
defire  to  liue.  45 

Arch.  If  the  King  had  no  Sonne,  they  would  defire  to 
liue  on  Crutches  till  he  had  one.  Exeunt.  47 


Sccena  Secunda. 


Enter  Leontes,Hermione,Mamillius,  Polixenes,  Camillo. 

Pol.  Nine  Changes  of  the  Watry-Starre  hath  been 
The  Shepheards  Note,  fince  we  haue  left  our  Throne 
Without  a  Burthen  :  Time  as  long  againe  5 


47.  had  one]  had  on  F  . 

1.  Sccena]  Scena  F4- 

[Scene  opens  to  the  Presence. 
Theob.  A  Room  of  State  in  the  same. 
Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.). 

2.  Mamillius]  Mamillins  F  . 
Polixenes,  Camillo]  Polixenes,  and 

Attendants.  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 


3.  Watry-Starre ]  watry  star  Rowe 
et  seq. 

hath ]  have  Cap.  S  eev.  Var.  Knt, 
Sing.  Coll.  Dyce. 

4.  The  Shepheards  Note']  In  paren¬ 
thesis,  Warb. 

5.  Burthen]  burden  Johns. 


3.  Nine  Changes]  John  Hunter:  That  is,  nine  quarters  of  the  moon;  nine 
weeks. — Hudson  correctly  understands  these  ‘  nine  changes  ’  as  meaning  nine  lunar 

months ;  and  adds  justly  and  delicately  ‘  if  the  time  had  been  but  nine  weeks,  it  is 
not  likely  that  Leontes  would  speak,  as  he  afterward  does,  touching  Perdita.’ 

3.  Watry-Starre]  Dyer  (p.  74) :  The  moisture  of  the  moon  is  invariably  noticed 
by  Shakespeare.  Cf.  Ham.  I,  i,  118,  ‘the  moist  star  upon  whose  influence  Neptune’s 
empire  stands  ’ ;  Mid.  N.  D.  II,  i,  103, * * 3  4  the  moon,  the  governess  of  floods  ’ ;  Rom. 
and  Jut.  I,  iv,  62,  4  the  moonshine’s  watery  beams.’  The  same  idea  is  frequently 
found  in  old  writers. 

3.  hath]  This  may  be  the  singular  by  attraction  after  4  Starre  ’ ;  it  may  be  a  3d 
pers.  plu.  in  th ;  and,  lastly,  its  nominative  may  be  4  Note.’ 

4.  Shepheards]  Hunter  (i,  418) ;  Why  Shepherds  ?  It  is  because  there  was  an 
opinion  abroad  that  the  shepherds  feeding  their  flocks  by  night  were  great  observers 
of  the  heavenly  bodies.  In  an  old  book,  entitled  The  Shepherd' s  Calendar,  a  trans¬ 
lation  from  the  French,  there  is  much  relating  to  the  sciences,  and  especially  astronomy ; 
the  first  chapter  has  this  title  :  4  A  great  question  asked  between  the  Shepherds  touch¬ 
ing  the  stars,  and  an  answer  made  to  the  same  question.’  Again,  another  chapter  is 
entitled  :  4  How  Shepherds,  by  calculation  and  speculation,  know  the  Twelve  Signs  in 
their  course.’ 

4.  Note]  Schmidt  and  others  draw  a  distinction  between  note  here  and  note  in 
1.  38  of  the  preceding  scene.  It  is  hardly  necessary.  Both  are  adequately  interpreted 
by  observation. — Ed. 


IO 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 

6 


Would  be  fill’d  vp(my  Brother)with  our  Thanks, 

And  yet  we  fhould,  for  perpetuitie, 

Goe  hence  in  debt  :  And  therefore,  like  a  Cypher 
(Yet  ftanding  in  rich  place)  I  multiply 
With  one  we  thanke  you,  many  thoufands  moe,  io 

That  goe  before  it. 

Leo.  Stay  your  Thanks  a  while, 

And  pay  them  when  you  part. 

Pol.  Sir,  that’s  to  morrow  : 

I  am  queftion’d  by  my  feares,  of  what  may  chance,  15 

Or  breed  vpon  our  abfence,  that  may  blow 
No  fneaping  Winds  at  home,  to  make  vs  fay, 


7.  perpetuitie]  pepetuity  F  . 

10.  one  we  thanke  you]  one ,  we  thank 
yoti,  Rowe  i.  one.  we  thank  you,  Rowe 
ii.  one  we-thank-you  Cap.  Steev.  Var. 
Knt,  Sing.  Coll.  Dyce. 

moe]  Ff,  Cam.  Wh.  ii.  more 
Rowe,  et  cet. 

\2.  a  while]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Steev. 
Var.  Wh.  Cam.  awhile  Var.  ’03,  et 
cet. 

14.  to  morrow]  to-morrow  Cap. 


15.  I  am]  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

feares,]  fears  Rowe,  Pope. 

16.  abfence,]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Sing.  ii.  absence :  Han. 
et  cet. 

that. ..No]  there  may  blow  Some 
Han.  Cap.  may  there  blow  No  Warb. 
Coll.  (MS). 

16,  17.  blow  No... to  make]  grow  To 
...and  make  Cartwright. 


10.  moe]  Koch  ( Grammatik,  ii,  292) :  The  difference  seems  to  be  firmly  established 
that  more  is  used  with  the  singular  and  mo  with  the  plural;  whence  it  comes  that  the 
oldest  grammarians,  like  Gil  and  Wallis,  maintain  that  mo  is  the  comparative  of  many, 
and  more  the  comparative  of  much. — W.  A.  Wright:  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  there  is  but 
one  instance  in  Shakespeare  where  moe  is  not  immediately  followed  by  a  plural,  and 
that  is  in  Temp.  V,  i,  234  (First  Folio)  :  ‘And  mo  diuersitie  of  sounds.’  But  in  this 
case  also  the  phrase  *  diversity  of  sounds  ’  contains  the  idea  of  plurality.  [See  IV,  iv, 
301 ;  V,  ii,  127,  post ;  and  As  You  Like  It,  III,  ii,  257  ;  V,  i,  34,  in  this  edition.] 

16.  that  may  blow,  etc.]  Farmer:  Dr.  Warburton  calls  this  ‘nonsense’;  and 
Dr.  Johnson  tells  us  it  is  a  ‘  Gallicism.’  It  happens,  however,  to  be  both  sense  and 
English.  <  That’  for  Oh,  that,  is  not  uncommon.  In  an  old  translation  of  the  famous 
Alcoran  of  the  Franciscans  :  ‘  St.  Francis  observing  the  holiness  of  friar  Juniper,  said 
to  the  priors,  “  That  I  had  a  wood  of  such  Junipers  !”  ’  And,  in  The  Two  Noble 
Rinsmcn  :  “In  thy  rumination,  That  I,  poor  man,  might  eftsoones  come  between!” 
[Ill,:,  12.  In  accordance  with  this  note  Steevens  (1778)  adopted  as  his  text: 
‘  upon  our  absence :  That  may  blow  No  .  .  .  say,  This  ...  too  truly  /’  and  he  was 
followed  substantially  by  all  subsequent  editors.] — Hanmer,  clearly  influenced  by  the 
‘  sneaping  winds,’  interprets  *  put  forth  ’  as  referring  to  buds ;  hence  his  change  of 
‘truly’  to  early.  Capell,  who  adopts  Hanmer’s  reading  (see  Text.  Notes),  interprets 
‘  Put  forth  ’  as  referring  to  ‘  putting  forth  towards  home,’  and  rejects  Hanmer’s 
‘  gard’ning,  sense,’  as  he  calls  it— Collier  (ed.  ii)  does  not  adopt  his  MS  corrections, 
which  are  partly  Warburton’s  and  partly  Hanmer’s.  *  The  poet’s  meaning  is  clear,’ 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


1 1 


This  is  put  forth  too  truly :  befides,  I  haue  ftay’d  18 

To  tyre  your  Royaltie. 

Leo.  We  are  tougher  (Brother)  ,  20 

Then  you  can  put  vs  to’t. 

18.  This...truly\  As  a  quotation,  18.  I  haue ]  I've  Dyce  ii,  iii, 

Theob.  Warb.  et  seq.  Huds. 

truly\  early  Han.  Coll.  (MS).  21.  Then\  Than  Rowe. 

tardily  Cap. 


he  adds,  ‘  though  the  wording  of  the  passage  may  be  defective.’ — R.  G.  White 
(ed.  i)  considers  the  whole  sentence  from  ‘that  may  blow’  to  ‘too  early’  as  paren¬ 
thetical.  ‘  Polixenes,’  he  says,  ‘  gives  his  fears  as  one  reason  of  his  departure,  and 
before  assigning  the  other  pauses  to  ejaculate  a  prayer  that  his  apprehensions  may  not 
have  been  put  forth,  i.  e.  uttered,  too  truly.’ — John  Hunter,  Hudson,  and  Rolfe 
refer  ‘  put  forth  ’  to  ‘  fears.’  Hudson,  therefore,  changes  ‘  fears  ’  to  fear,  so  as  to  make 
it  the  grammatical  antecedent  to  ‘  This  is  ’;  he  also  reads,  with  Warburton,  ‘  may  there 
blow  ’ ;  and  says  he  does  not  see  how  ‘  the  last  clause  can  be  understood  otherwise 
than  as  referring  to  fear .’  Abbott  (§425)  says  the  passage  is  explained  by  the 
omission  of  there :  ‘  that  (there)  may  blow  No  ’  etc. — Staunton  ( Athenceum ,  April, 
1874,  p.  461)  :  How  the  words  ‘  that  may  blow  ’  can  be  made  equivalent  to  may  there 
blow  surpasses  my  power  of  perception.  I  have  very  little  doubt  the  passage  is  cor¬ 
rupt,  and  that  we  should  get  much  nearer  Shakespeare’s  meaning  by  reading  : — ‘  that 
may  blow  In  sneaping  .  .  .  too  early.’  Th<5  sense  being,  ‘  that  may  be  developed 
under  untoward  circumstances  which  may  make  me  say  “  this  was  too  premature.”  ’ 
Does  not  the  expression  ‘  put  forth  ’  point  rather  to  something  blossoming  than  to  the 
blowing  of  the  winds  ?  [Hereupon  follow  several  quotations  from  Shakespeare  to 
show  that  ‘  put  forth  ’  may  mean  to  put  forth  leaves.  These  examples  are  somewhat 
superfluous ;  the  phrase  is  quite  familiar  to  us  in  the  Bible.  Cf.  Matt,  xxiv,  32.] — 
Deighton  :  This  is  generally  taken  as  a  wish.  But  the  expression  may  be  elliptical, 
and  as  ‘  fears  ’  that  a  thing  may  happen  necessarily  involves  ‘  hopes  ’  that  it  may  not, 
the  full  expression  would  be,  ‘  I  am  questioned  by  my  fears  as  to  what  may  happen, 
and  only  hope  that  no  sneaping  winds,’  etc.  [This  is  one  of  those  sentences,  whereof 
there  are  others  in  this  play,  from  which  we  obtain  at  once  a  meaning,  but  which 
cannot  be  reconciled  to  grammar  without  some  change  or  addition.  I  prefer  to  make 
no  change.  None  can  be  now  proposed  which  will  be  acceptable  to  every  one,  or  it 
would  have  occurred  to  every  one  long  ago ;  in  general,  Shakespeare’s  obscurity  is 
quite  as  clear  as  any  emendation.  The  interpretation  which  makes  Polixenes  inter¬ 
ject  a  prayer  for  protection  against  sneaping  winds  at  home  is  not  in  character ;  more¬ 
over,  ‘  sneaping  ’  is  not  strong  enough  to  elicit  a  prayer,  or  even  a  perfervid  wish. 
Deighton’s  explanation  seems  to  be  the  best. — Ed.] 

17.  sneaping]  Holt  White:  That  is,  nipping  winds.  So,  in  Gawin  Douglas’s 
Translation  of  Virgils  Eneid,  Prologue  of  the  seuynth  Booke :  ‘  Scharp  soppis  of 
sleit,  and  of  the  snyppand  snaw.’ 

19.  Royaltie]  I  doubt  that  this  is  here  the  title.  I  think  it  refers  to  the  royal 
dignity  or  state,  as  in  ‘  Royalties  repayre  ’  V,  i,  40. 

21.  put  vs  to  ’t]  Schmidt  (Lex.)  has  collected  many  instances  of  this  phrase 
where  it  is  used,  as  here,  in  the  sense  of  to  drive  to  extremities. 


12 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Pol. 

No  longer  ftay. 

22 

Leo. 

One  Seue’night  longer. 

Pol. 

Very  footh,  to  morrow. 

Leo. 

Wee’le  part  the  time  betweene’s  themand  in  that 

25 

lie  no  gaine-faying. 

Pol.  Preffe  me  not  (’befeech  you)  fo  : 

There  is  no  Tongue  that  moues;none,none  i’th’World 
So  foone  as  yours, could  win  me:  fo  it  fhould  now, 

Were  there  neceffitie  in  your  requeft,  although 
’Twere  needfull  I  deny’d  it.  My  Affaires 
Doe  euen  drag  me  home-ward  :  which  to  hinder, 

Were  (in  your  Loue)  a  Whip  to  me  ;  my  ftay, 

To  you  a  Charge,  and  Trouble  :  to  faue  both, 

Farewell  (our  Brother.) 

Leo.  Tongue-ty’d  our  Queene  ?  fpeake  you. 

Her.  I  had  thought  (Sir)  to  haue  held  my  peace, vntill 
You  had  drawne  Oathes  from  him,  not  to  ftay:  you(Sir) 
Charge  him  too  coldly.  Tell  him,  you  are  fure 
All  in  Bohemia’s  well  :  this  fatisfaftion, 


30 


35 


23.  Seue’ night\  fev'night  F  .  sev'n 
night  Rowe,  seven-night  Var.  ’73,  Hal. 
Cam.  s’ en-night  White  ii. 

25,  26.  Prose,  Rowe  i,  Hal. 

27.  ( ’befeech  you )  fo]  'beseech  you ,  so 
Rowe,  'beseech  you  !  Han.  Coll,  ii  (MS). 
so,  ’ beseech  you  :  Cap. 

28.  moues  ;]  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Cap.  moves. 
Johns,  moves,  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 


28.  World  ]  Would  F2.  world,  Theob. 
Warb.  et  seq. 

29.  yours]  your's  Coll.  ii. 

36.  Tongue-ty’d]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Dyce,  Cam.  Wh.  ii.  Tongue-ty’d, 
Theob.  et  cet. 

37.  to  haue]  to  ’ ve  Pope,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns. 

38.  You  had]  You  'ad  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns. 


28,  29.  Coleridge  (p.  254) :  How  admirably  Polixenes’  obstinate  refusal  to  Leontes 
to  stay,  prepares  for  the  effect  produced  by  his  afterwards  yielding  to  Hermione. 

28.  World]  The  comma  which  almost  all  editors  have  placed  after  ‘world’  is,  I 
think,  needless.  The  semicolon  after  ‘  moues  ’  is,  of  course,  wrong ;  a  dash  would  be 
better,  to  be  repeated  after  ‘  yours.’ — Ed.] 

30.  Abbott  (§  499)  calls  this  line  an  ‘  apparent  Alexandrine  followed  by  a  foot, 
more  or  less  isolated,  containing  one  accent.’ 

32>  33'  which  ...  to  me]  Deighton  thus  paraphrases  :  To  hinder  which  (»'.  e.  my 
return  home)  would  be  to  make  your  love  to  me  a  punishment.  [I  think  it  rather 
means  •  To  hinder  which  would  be  a  punishment  to  me,  although  you  inflicted  it  out 
of  love. — Ed.] 

38.  drawne  oathes]  That  is,  so  as  to  make  her  success  the  greater. — Ed. 

40.  this  satisfaction]  Johnson  :  We  had  satisfactory  accounts  yesterday  of  the 
state  of  Bohemia. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  1 3 

The  by-gone-day  proclaym’d,  fay  this  to  him,  41 

He’s  beat  from  his  beft  ward. 

Leo.  Well  faid,  Hermione. 

Her.  To  tell,  he  longs  to  fee  his  Sonne,  were  ftrong: 

But  let  him  fay  fo  then,  and  let  him  goe  ;  45 

But  let  him  fweare  fo,  and  he  fhall  not  flay, 

Wee’l  thwack  him  hence  with  Diftaffes. 

Yet  of  your  Royall  prefence,  lie  aduenture 

The  borrow  of  a  Weeke.  When  at  Bohemia 

You  take  my  Lord,  lie  giue  him  my  Commiflion,  50 

To  let  him  there  a  Moneth,  behind  the  Geft 


41.  by-gone-day\  Ff,  Rowe  i.  by- 
-gone  day  Rowe  ii  et  seq. 

proclaym' d,  fay\  proclaim'd  fay 
F  .  proclaim' d;  say  Rowe  etseq.  (subs.) 

47.  witk\  whith  F  . 

48.  [To  Polixenes.  Rowe  etseq.  Om. 
Cam.  Wh.  ii. 


50.  hiin\  you  Han.  Warb.  John.  Cap. 
Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

51.  lef\  set  Ktly. 

Moneth]  Month  F4. 

Gejl~\  Guejl  F3F4.  geste  Han. 
giste  Cap.  list  Heath,  Rann.  gest-day 
Ktly. 


42.  best  ward]  A  continuation  of  the  figure  of  a  ‘  charge  ’  in  line  39. — Ed. 

43.  Collier  (ed.  ii)  adopts  the  stage-direction  of  his  MS :  ‘  He  walks  apart,’  and 
remarks  that  it  ‘  shows,  most  likely,  the  custom  of  the  actor  of  the  character  of  Leontes 
to  turn  away  while  Hermione  urges  her  suit  to  Polixenes.  This  course  seems  very 
judicious.  [It  may  have  been  ‘  very  judicious,’  but,  when  Hermione  addresses 
Leontes  personally,  as  she  does  at  1.  52,  it  was  at  least  awkward  to  have  her  speak 
to  the  empty  air.  That  Leontes  retires  is  certain ;  in  no  other  way  can  we  under¬ 
stand  his  question,  ‘  Is  he  won  yet  ?’  except  by  supposing  that  he  has  not  heard  what 
Polixenes  has  said  to  Hermione.  Just  when  he  retires  it  is  not  easy  to  determine ; 
most  probably,  I  think,  after  Hermione’s  ‘  What  lady  she  her  lord.’ — Ed.] 

46.  he  shall  not  stay]  Lady  Martin  (p.  341) :  Note  how  the  mother,  to  whom 
her  own  boy  was  inexpressibly  dear,  speaks  in  her  allusion  to  the  son  of  Polixenes,  of 
whom  no  word  has  hitherto  been  said. 

51.  To  let  him]  Malone:  This  may  be  used,  as  many  other  reflexive  verbs  are 
used  by  Shakespeare,  for  to  let  or  hinder  himself ;  then  the  meaning  will  be  :  ‘  I’ll 
give  him  my  permission  to  tarry  a  month,’  etc. — Abbott  (§  223) :  Him,  her,  me,  them, 
etc.  are  often  used  in  Elizabethan,  and  still  more  in  early  English,  for  himself,  her¬ 
self,  etc.  [To  the  examples  given  by  Abbott,  there  may  be  added,  besides  the  present 
line;  •  More  hideous  when  thou  show’st  thee  in  a  child.’ — Lear  I,  iv,  254;  ‘  Would 
shut  the  book  and  sit  him  down  to  die.’ — 2  Hen.  IV:  III,  i,  56 ;  ‘  Wherein  I  confess 
me  much  guilty.’ — As  You  Like  It,  I,  ii,  196.] 

51.  Gest]  Peck  ( Mem .  of  Milton,  239)  :  This  word  is  derived  from  the  French, 
‘ giste,  a  bed,  a  couch,  a  lodging,  a  place  to  lie  on,  or  to  rest  in  ’  ( Cotgrave ).  And,  to 
come  to  the  point,  ‘  Droict  de  giste,  power  to  lie  at  the  house  of  a  tenant,  vassal,  or 
subject,  in  passing  along  by  it;  due  to  the  King  onely,  not  to  the  Queene.’ — Id.  s.  v. 
Droict.  So  here  in  England  formerly,  whenever  the  King  went  a  progress,  his  gests 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


H 

Prefix’d  for’s  parting  :  yet(good-deed)  Leontes ,  52 

I  loue  thee  not  a  Iarre  o’th’Clock,  behind 

What  Lady  the  her  Lord.  You’le  ftay  ?  54 


$2.  for’ s~\  for  his  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
good  deed  ]  good-heed  Fa.  good 
heed  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 
Johns. 


53.  Iarre ]  jar  F,. 

54.  Lady  fhe~\  lady  should  Coll.  Dyce 
ii,  iii.  lady-she  Sta.  Dtn.  lady  soe'er 
Ktly. 


(or  the  several  places  where  he  was  to  be  received  and  lodged  in  that  journey)  were 
first  settled.  The  ‘gests,’  then,  is  a  writing  containing  the  names  of  the  houses  or 
towns  where  it  is  intended  the  King  shall  lie  or  rest  every  night  of  his  journey. 
Thus  Edward  VI.  in  his  Journal  of  his  own  reign-.  ‘8  June,  1549.  The  Gests  of 
my  progress  were  set  forth,  which  were  these.  From  Greenwich  to  Westminster. 

I  rom  Westminster  to  Hampton  Court.  From  Hampton  Court  to  Windsor,’  etc. _ 

Theobald:  I  have  suspected  the  poet  wrote,  ‘the  just,  i.e.  the  just,  precise  time ; 
the  instant  (where  time  is  likewise  understood)  by  an  ellipsis  practised  in  all  tongues. 
— Heath  (p.  202)  :  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  word  is  list ;  ‘beyond  the  list’ 
is  beyond  the  limit.— Steevens  :  Cranmer,  in  a  letter  to  Cecil,  entreated  him  ‘to 
let  him  have  the  new  resolved  upon  gests,  from  that  time  to  the  end,  that  he  might 
from  time  to  time  know  where  the  King  was.’ — Staunton  :  But  gest,  or  jest,  also 
signified  a  show  or  fevelry,  and  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  sense  intended  was, — he 
shall  have  my  permission  to  remain  a  month  after  the  farewell  entertainment. 

52.  good  deed]  Steevens:  That  is,  indeed,  in  very  deed,  as  Shakespeare  in 
another  place  expresses  it.  ‘  Good-deed  ’  is  used  in  the  same  sense  by  the  Earl  of 
Surrey,  Sir  John  Hayward,  and  Gascoigne. 

Coleridge  (p.  244)  :  The  yielding  of  Polixenes  to  Hermione  is  perfectly  natural 
from  mere  courtesy  of  sex,  and  the  exhaustion  of  the  will  by  former  efforts  of  denial, 
and  well  calculated  to  set  in  nascent  action  the  jealousy  of  Leontes.  This,  when 
once  excited,  is  unconsciously  increased  by  Hermione’s  speech  [here  follow  the  lines 
which  Hermione  addresses  to  Leontes],  accompanied,  as  a  good  actress  ought  to  repre¬ 
sent  it,  by  an  expression  and  recoil  of  apprehension  that  she  had  gone  too  far. 
[Coleridge  must  have  trusted  to  his  memory ;  he  could  hardly  have  had  the  text 
before  him,  or  he  would  have  seen  that  when  Hermione  thus  speaks  to  Leontes, 
Polixenes  had  given  no  sign  of  yielding. — Ed.] 

53.  Iarre  o’  th’  clock]  Steevens:  A  ‘jar’  is,  I  believe,  a  single  repetition  of  the 
noise  made  by  the  pendulum  of  a  clock,  what  children  call  the  ticking  of  it.  So  in 
Rich.  II:  V,  v,  51 :  ‘My  thoughts  are  minutes;  and  with  sighs  they  jar  Their 
watches  on  unto  mine  eyes.’— Holt  White:  To  ‘jar’  certainly  means  to  tick;  as  in 
T.  Heywood’s  Troia  Britannica,  cant,  iv,  st.  107;  ed.  1609:  ‘He  hears  no  waking- 
clocke,  nor  watch  to  jarre.’— Malone  :  So,  in  The  Spanish  Tragedy,  1601  :  ‘the  owls 
shrieking,  the  toads  croaking,  the  minutes  jarring,  and  the  clocke  striking  twelve  ’ 
[—Act  IV.] 

54.  What]  Abbott  (§  255) :  ‘  What  ’  in  elliptical  expressions  assumes  the  meaning 
any  -  as  in  the  present  phrase,  ‘  less  than  any  lady  whatsoever  loves  her  lord.’ 

54-  Lady  she]  The  earlier  editors  found  nothing  worthy  of  comment  in  this 
phrase.  They  recalled  doubtless  the  many  instances  in  Shakespeare  where  ‘  she  ’  is 
used  as  a  noun,  albeit  there  is  none  of  them  exactly  parallel  to  the  present  phrase. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 

Pol.  No,  Madame. 

Her.  Nay,  but  you  will  ? 


55 


15 


55,  etc.  Madame]  Rfadarn  F3F4> 


e.g.  ‘Lady,  you  are  the  cruell’st  she  alive.’ — Twel.  Night,  I,  v,  259;  ‘Make  him 
swear  The  she’s  of  Italy  should  not  betray,’ — Cym.  I,  iii,  29 ;  ‘  Doctor  She,’ — All's  Well, 
II,  i,  32 ;  again,  there  are  the  familiar  lines  of  Robert  Crashaw  :  ‘  Whoe’er  she  be,  That 
not  impossible  she,’  etc.  (other  examples  are  also  given  by  Abbott,  §  224).  It  was  not 
until  Collier  published  his  Reasons  for  a  New  Edition  of  Shakespeare,  in  1842,  that 
a  discussion  arose.  In  this  pamphlet  Collier  stated  that  in  a  copy  of  the  First  Folio, 
belonging  to  Lord  Francis  Egerton,  a  number  of  MS  corrections  had  been  found,  and 
among  them  was  the  substitution  of  should  for  ‘  she  ’  in  the  present  passage.  ‘  “  What 
lady  she  her  lord,”  Collier  says,  reads  ‘  very  like  nonsense  ’  and  terms  it  a  ‘  decided 
error’;  but  with  should  ‘  the  whole  difficulty  is  removed,’  and  ‘  probably  in  the  MS 
from  which  the  First  Folio  was  printed  should  was  written  with  an  abbreviation,  which 
might  easily  be  misread  by  the  compositor.’  This  plausible  substitution  Walker 
(Crit.  ii,  63)  approved,  and  pronounced  ‘the  true  reading.  (See  note  on  ‘acknow¬ 
ledge,’  IV,  iv,  468.)  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  adheres  to  the  reading  of  F,  as  having 
‘  a  quaint  fascination  which  is  lost  in  the  proposed  emendation.’  Staunton  con¬ 
siders  should  ‘prosaic  enough.’  ‘The  difficulty  in  the  expression  arises,’  he  appre¬ 
hends,  ‘  solely  from  the  omission  of  the  hyphen  in  ‘  lady-she  ’ ;  that  restored,  the 
sense  is  unmistakable — I  love  thee  not  a  tick  of  the  clock  behind  whatever  high-born 
woman  does  her  husband.  So  in  Massinger’s  Bondman,  I,  iii, — “  I’ll  kiss  him  for 
the  honour  of  my  country,  With  any  she  in  Corinth  ”  ’ ;  which  is  by  no  means  the 
same  as  ‘  What  Lady  she  her  lord,’  unless  Staunton  supposes  that  ‘  any  ’  and  ‘  she  ’ 
are  to  be  as  closely  connected  as  ‘  lady  ’  and  ‘  she,’  and  can  be  joined  by  a  hyphen; 
otherwise  the  example  falls  into  the  same  category  with  the  others  given  above. — 
Abbott  (§  224)  adopts  the  hyphen  proposed  by  Staunton,  and  says  that  ‘  “  lady- 
she  ”  means  a  well-born  woman,' — a  meaning  which  Ingleby  (Sh.  Hermeneutics,  p. 
1 16),  not  always  a  safe  guide  in  matters  of  interpretation,  says  ‘verges  on  the  ridic¬ 
ulous,’  ‘as  if  “a  well-born  woman”  was  something  more  than  a  lady.'  Ingleby  ap¬ 
parently  approved  of  Staunton’s  hyphen ;  and  he  certainly  overlooked  the  fact  that 
Abbott  adopted  both  the  hyphen  and  Staunton’s  paraphrase,  merely  changing  ‘  high¬ 
born  ’  to  well-born, — a  fair  translation  of  Lady. — Hudson  thinks  that  should  ‘  misses 
the  right  sense.  Not  how  any  lady  ought  to  love,  but  how  any  lady  does  love  her 
husband.’  He  accordingly  reads  in  his  text  ‘  What  lady  e'er  her  lord.’ — Deighton 
suggests  that  possibly  ‘  she  ’  is  merely  redundant,  as  in  ‘  The  skipping  King  he  ambled 
up  and  down.’ — 1  Hen.  IV:  III,  ii,  60;  ‘  For  God  he  knows.’ — Rich.  Ill :  III,  vii, 
236.  To  make  ‘  What  lady  she  ’  exactly  parallel,  a  verb  should  follow  ‘  she  ’ :  ‘  What 
lady  she  loves  her  lord,’  and,  perhaps,  this  may  be  the  grammatical  solution, — the 
‘  she  ’  is  redundant  and  the  verb  ‘  love  ’  is  not  repeated.  Hudson’s  objection  to 
should  is,  I  think,  just.  We  must  doggedly  adhere  to  the  original  text  as  long  as  it 
conveys  any  good  intelligible  meaning.  Dr  Johnson  says  the  compositors  who  had 
Shakespeare’s  MS  before  their  eyes  are  more  likely  to  have  read  it  correctly  than  we 
who  read  it  only  in  imagination ;  which  is  true,  if  we  grant  that  they  had  Shake¬ 
speare’s  MS,  or  any  other,  before  their  eyes — this,  I  think,  is  more  than  doubtful. 
Cf.  ‘I  was  wont  to  load  my  shee  with  knackes.’ — IV,  iv,  377. — Ed.] 


i6 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 
5  7 


Pol.  I  may  not  verely. 

Her.  Verely  ? 

You  put  me  off  with  limber  Vowes:  but  I, 

Though  you  would  feek  t’vnfphere  the  Stars  with  Oaths,  60 
Should  yet  fay,  Sir,  no  going  :  Verely 
You  fhall  not  goe  ;  a  Ladyes  Verely  ’  is 
As  potent  as  a  Lords.  Will  you  goe  yet  ? 

Force  me  to  keepe  you  as  a  Prifoner, 

Not  like  a  Gueft  :  fo  you  fhall  pay  your  Fees  65 

When  you  depart,  and  faue  your  Thanks.  How  fay  you  ? 

My  Prifoner  ?  or  my  Gueft  ?  by  your  dread  Verely, 

One  of  them  you  fhall  be. 

Pol.  Your  Gueft  then,  Madame  :  69 


57,  58.  verely]  verily  Ff. 

60.  t'vnsphere]  to  unsphere  Cap.  Rann, 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Cam. 

61.  Sir,  no  going ]  As  a  quotation, 
Cap.  et  seq. 

61,  62.  Sir. ..goe]  As  a  quotation, 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap. 


61,  62,  67.  Verely]  F,.  verily  F3F4. 

62.  Verely ’  w]  F2.  verily  ’s  White, 
Walker,  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Cam.  verily 
is  F3F4  et  cet. 

65.  Guejl .]  Guest?  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  i,  Han. 

67.  your ]  our  Gould. 


57.  verely]  May  we  not  infer  from  this  spelling  that  the  Elizabethan  pronun¬ 
ciation  of  very  was  veery  ? — Ed. 

60.  vnsphere]  A  reference  to  the  Ptolemaic  system,  wherein  the  moon  and  the 
stars  were  supposed  to  be  fixed  in  hollow  crystalline  spheres,  which  were  made  to 
revolve  by  the  highest  sphere,  the  pnmum  mobile,  and,  in  their  revolutions  of  varying 
velocity,  made  music.  See  notes  in  this  edition  on  Mid.  N.  Dream,  II,  i,  7 ;  Mer. 
of  Ven.,  V,  i,  74. — Ed. 

62.  Verely’]  The  apostrophe  here  is  not  purposeless.  It  is  a  warning,  not  fully 
carried  out  by  the  compositor,  to  be  sure,  that  the  i  of  the  following  ‘  is  ’  is  elided  in 
pronunciation ;  and  it  has  been  so  indicated  in  the  text  by  White  and  others. _ Ed. 

64,  65.  Force  .  .  .  Guest :]  The  interrogative  turn  given  to  this  sentence  by 
Rowe  has  hardly  received  the  attention  by  subsequent  editors  which  it  deserves. 
The  Cam.  Ed.  does  not  even  record  it.  Deighton  alone  has  suggested  that  it  is 
spoken  ‘  possibly  interrogatively  ’ ;  he  was  not  aware  that  Rowe  had  adopted  it.  It 
adds  a  certain  vivacity  to  the  next  sentence  :  Will  you  force  me  to  keep  you  as  a 
prisoner?  Then  all  you  will  gain  will  be  in  saving  your  thanks. _ Ed. 

64-66.  Prisoner  .  .  .  depart]  Lord  Campbell  (p.  71):  There  is  here  an 
allusion  to  a  piece  of  English  law  procedure,  which,  although  it  might  have  been 
enforced  till  very  recently,  could  hardly  be  known  to  any  except  lawyers,  or  those 
who  had  themselves  actually  been  in  prison  on  a  criminal  charge, — that,  whether 
guilty  or  innocent,  the  prisoner  was  liable  to  pay  a  fee  on  his  liberation.  I  remember 
when  the  Clerk  of  Assize  and  the  Clerk  of  the  Peace  were  entitled  to  exact  their  fee 
from  all  acquitted  prisoners,  and  were  supposed  in  strictness  to  have  a  lien  on  their 
persons  for  it.  I  believe  there  is  now  no  tribunal  in  England  where  the  practice 
remains,  excepting  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


1 7 


To  be  your  Prifoner,fhould  import  offending  ;  70 

Which  is  for  me,  leffe  eafie  to  commit, 

Then  you  to  punifh. 

Her.  Not  your  Gaoler  then, 

But  your  kind  Hofteffe.  Come,  lie  queftion  you 

Of  my  Lords  Tricks,  and  yours,  when  you  were  Boyes :  75 

You  were  pretty  Lordings  then  ? 

Pol.  We  were  (faire  Queene) 

Two  Lads,  that  thought  there  was  no  more  behind, 

But  fuch  a  day  to  morrow,  as  to  day, 

And  to  be  Boy  eternall.  80 

Her.  Was  not  my  Lord 
The  veryer  Wag  o’th’  two  ? 

Pol. We  were  as  twyn’d  Lambs,  that  did  frisk  i’th’Sun, 

And  bleat  the  one  at  th’other:  what  we  chang’d, 

Was  Innocence, for  Innocence  :  we  knew  not  85 

The  Doftrine  of  ill-doing,  nor  dream’d 

81,  92.  Her.]  Hel.  Fa. 

86.  ill-doing ]  ill-doingness  Bulloch. 
nor  dream' d]  no,  nor  dream' d 
Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll, 
ii,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  nor  dream' d  even 
Ktly.  nor  dream'd  we  even  Id.  conj. 
neither  dream'd  Spedding  ap.  Cam. 

75.  yours ]  your' s  Coll. 


70.  Prifoner,~\  prisoner  Knt,  et  seq. 
71  .forme,]  Fz. 

72.  etc.  Then ]  Than  F4. 

73.  Gaoler\  jailer  Cap.  Sing. 

74.  HoJleJJe.  Come"]  Hojlejje,  ComeF 2. 
Hojlejje,  come  F  F^.  Hostess;  come 
Rowe,  Pope. 


70.  should]  Here  used  in  the  sense  of  must,  like  the  German  sollen. 

74.  Come,  etc.]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  91):  She  sees  Polixenes  in  a  state  of  unea¬ 
siness,  such  as  is  natural  to  a  person  who  has  just  given  up  his  better  reason  (or  what 
seems  to  be  such)  to  importunity;  and  endeavors  to  divert  his  thoughts. 

75.  etc.  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia  in  Appendix. 

76.  You  were]  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  203)  gives  this  as  an  example  under  his 
Article:  Thou  wert  (sometimes  written  in  the  old  poets  Th'  wert)  you  were,  I  was, 
etc.  occur  frequently,  both  in  Shakespeare  and  in  contemporary  dramatists,  in  places 
where  it  is  clear  they  must  have  been  pronounced  as  one  syllable,  in  whatever  manner 
the  contraction  was  effected. 

76.  Lordings]  Steevens  :  The  diminutive  of  lord  is  often  used  by  Chaucer. 

86.  The  Dodtrine  .  .  .  dream’d]  Malone:  ‘Doctrine’  is  here  used  as  a  trisyl¬ 
lable.  So  children,  tickling,  and  many  others.  The  editor  of  F2  inserted  no,  to  sup¬ 
ply  a  supposed  defect  in  the  metre.  [This  note  Lettsom  (ap.  Dyce)  pronounces  ‘a 
splendid  specimen  of  perverted  learning  ’ ;  whereby  Lettsom  means,  I  suppose,  that 
with  the  just  emendation  of  F2  before  his  eyes,  Malone  needlessly  resorted  to  a  length¬ 
ening  of  syllables.  Indeed,  the  reading  of  F2  {‘no,  nor  dream’d’)  is  so  clearly  the 
true  one  that  further  attempts  to  scan  the  line,  as  it  stands  above,  seem  superfluous ; 


i8 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 

87 


That  any  did  :  Had  we  purfu’d  that  life, 

And  our  weake  Spirits  ne’re  been  higher  rear’d 
With  ftronger  blood,  we  fhould  haue  anfwer’d  Heauen 
Boldly,  not  guilty  ;  the  Impofition  clear’d,  90 

Hereditarie  ours. 

Her.  By  this  we  gather 
You  haue  tript  fince. 

Pol.  O  my  moft  facred  Lady, 

Temptations  haue  fince  then  been  borne  to’s :  for  95 

In  thofe  vnfledg’d  dayes,was  my  Wife  a  Girle  ; 

Your  precious  felfe  had  then  not  crofs’d  the  eyes 
Of  my  young  Play-fellow. 

Her.  Grace  to  boot  :  99 


90.  the  Impofition ]  th'  imposition 
Pope+,  Cap.  Dyce  ii. 

90,  91.  the...  outs']  the  inquisition 
clear’d  Heaven  would  be  ours  Gould. 
95.  borne']  born  FH^. 


95.  to’s]  to  us  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Knt,  Sta.  Ktly. 

99.  Grace]  Oh  !  Grace  Han.  God's 
grace  Walker,  Huds.  Good  grace  Ktly. 
Heaven's  Grace  Sta.  conj.  (Athenaeum 
4  Apr.  1874). 


see  Abbott,  §  505.  If,  however,  the  line  must  remain  intact,  then  the  missing  syl¬ 
lable  can  be  supplied  by  the  pause  after  ‘  doing.’  An  omission,  exactly  similar  to  the 
present,  occurs  in  IV,  iv,  497,  where  Ft  reads  ‘  Lookes  on  alike  ’  instead  of  1  Lookes 
on  all  alike.’ — Ed.] 

90,91.  the  Imposition  .  .  .  ours.]  Theobald:  That  is,  setting  aside  original 
sin  ;  bating  the  imposition  from  the  offence  of  our  first  parents,  we  might  have  boldly 
protested  our  innocence  to  Heaven.  [This  interpretation,  which  has  been  generally 
followed,  is,  I  think,  wrong.  The  meaning  is  not  that  original  sin  is  excepted,  but 
that,  even  inherited  as  it  was,  it  was  swept  clean  away.  The  boys  were  so  innocent 
that  they  were  cleared  of  even  hereditary  sin. — Ed.] 

94.  my  most  sacred  Lady]  Lady  Martin  (p.  342) :  Polixenes’  first  words  in 
reply  show  the  reverence  with  which  the  serene  purity  of  Hermione  had  inspired 
him.  [We  may  be  quite  sure  that  before  this  point,  at  least,  Leontes  had  retired. 
Had  he  heard  Hermione  thus  addressed  by  Polixenes,  his  jealousy  could  not  have 
started  into  life. — Ed.] 

99.  Grace  to  boot]  Warburton  :  That  is,  ‘  though  temptations  have  grown  up, 
yet  I  hope  grace  too  has  kept  pace  with  them.’  ‘  Grace  to  boot,’  was  a  proverbial 
expression  on  these  occasions.  Steevens  :  I  have  no  great  faith  in  the  existence  of 
such  proverbial  expressions.  Heath:  This  gentleman  [Warburton]  seems  to  think 
the  coining  of  proverbs,  which  no  man  besides  ever  heard  of,  is  one  of  his  own 
peculiar  privileges.  We  have  had  several  instances  of  it.  When  he  meets  with  an 
expression  which  he  can  make  nothing  of,  he  instantly  calls  it  a  proverbial  one ;  and 
then,  thinking  he  hath  done  the  business,  he  assigns  it  a  meaning,  whether  the  words 
will  bear  it  or  no,  which  he  can  best  fit  to  the  context.  In  the  present  case  I  will 
venture  to  say  no  such  proverb  ever  existed.  The  text  is  certainly  corrupt,  and  I 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


19 


Of  this  make  no  conclufion,  leaft  you  fay 
Your  Queene  and  I  are  Deuils  :  yet  goe  on, 
Th’offences  we  haue  made  you  doe,wee’le  anfwere, 
If  you  firfl  finn’d  with  vs  :  and  that  with  vs 
You  did  continue  fault;  and  that  you  dipt  not 
With  any,  but  with  vs. 

Leo.  Is  he  woon  yet  ? 

Her.  Hee’le  ftay  (my  Lord.) 

Leo.  At  my  requeft,he  would  not  : 

Hernnone  (my  dearefl)  thou  neuer  fpoak’ft 
To  better  purpofe. 

Her.  Neuer  ? 


100.  leajT\  lejl  F  . 

103.  vs  .*]  us,  Rowe. 

106.  [Coming  forward.  Coll.  ii. 

woon]  wonne  F2F3.  won  F+. 
108.  As  an  aside,  Cap. 


109.  deareji]  dear’st  Cap.  Hal.  Wh. 
Walker,  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

neuer]  ne'er  Pope  + . 
fpoak'Jl]  spokest  Ktly,  Cam. 


believe  we  ought  to  read  : — ‘  Grace  to  both  !'  that  is,  Pray  spare  your  reflections  on  us 
both,  your  queen  as  well  as  myself.  Capell  (p.  162) :  A  popular  exclamation  of  old, 
in  some  parts,  that  may  not  have  got  into  print,  and  so  wants  examples ;  equivalent  to 
Grace  befriend  us !  Grace  be  merciful !  in  which  sense  it  agrees  perfectly  with  the 
context.  [One  of  those  exclamations  from  which  we  at  once  gather  a  meanihg,  dim 
but  satisfactory,  and  elusive  when  we  come  to  analyze  it,  like  Rosalind’s,  ‘  Good  my 
complection !’  But  I  think  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  sb.1,  c.)  gives,  on  the  whole,  the 
best  explanation  when  he  calls  it,  like  the  exclamation,  ‘  St.  George  to  boot !’  an 
‘apprecatory  phrase,’  meaning  here  ‘Grace  to  my  help!’ — Ed.] 

X03,  104.  and  that]  For  other  instances  of  that  used  as  a  conjunctional  affix,  see, 
if  necessary,  Abbott  §  287. 

104.  continue  fault]  See  the  similar  construction  :  ‘you  have  made  fault,’  III,  ii, 
235,  analogous  to  ‘  to  find  fault.’ 

106.  Any  stage-direction  here  informing  us  that  Leontes  comes  forward  is  need¬ 
less  and  obtrusive. 

108.  Coleridge  :  The  first  working  of  the  jealous  fit. 

109.  dearest]  Walker  (  Vers.  168)  notes  that  the  e  here,  as  often  in  superlatives, 
is  suppressed.  Similar  ‘  suppressions  ’  are  noted  by  him  in  lines  166  and  278  of  this 
scene;  III,  ii,  2x6;  IV,  iv,  95;  lb.  132  (where,  indeed,  the  Folio  has  ‘  fairst  ’)  j 
lb.  589;  V,  i,  no.  ‘  Suppression’  is,  I  think,  too  strong  a  word.  Apart  from  the 
circumstances  under  which  it  (III,  ii,  216)  is  uttered,  can  there  be  a  more  strident 
line  than,  ‘  The  sweetst,  dearst  creature’s  dead  ?’ — ‘  a  dry  wheel  grating  on  the  axle- 
tree  ’  is  hardly  less  harsh ;  and  when  we  think  how  Paulina  shrieked  forth  the  words, 
every  syllable  is  needed  to  din  the  superlatives  in  the  ears  of  Leontes.  When  need 
is,  the  e  in  superlatives  may  be  slurred,  but  surely  not  suppressed. — Ed. 

ill.  Neuer?]  Lady  Martin  (p.  343) :  In  acting,  how  much  should  be  indicated 
in  the  tone  of  Hermione’s  ‘  Never  ?’  Have  you  forgotten,  it  asks,  your  long  wooing, 


20 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Leo.  Neuer,  but  once.  112 

Her. What?  haue  I  twice  faid  well?  when  was’t  before? 

I  prethee  tell  me  :  cram’s  with  prayfe,  and  make’s 

As  fat  as  tame  things:  One  good  deed,  dying  tongueleffe,  1 1 5 

Slaughters  a  thoufand,  wayting  vpon  that. 

Our  prayfes  are  our  Wages.  You  may  ride’s 
With  one  foft  Kiffe  a  thoufand  Furlongs,  ere 
With  Spur  we  heat  an  Acre.  But  to  th’  Goale  : 

My  laft  good  deed,  was  to  entreat  his  flay.  120 

What  was  my  firftf  it  ha’s  an  elder  Sifter, 

Or  I  miftake  you:  O,  would  her  Name  were  Grace.  122 


1x3.  was’t]  'twas  Steev.  ’78,  ’85. 
was  it  M.  Mason. 

II4i  lI7-  cram's  ...  make' s  ...  ride' s ] 
cram  us. ..make  us. ..ride  us  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Hal.  Sta.  Ktly. 

1 15.  deed]  Om.  Anon.  (Fras.  Mag. 
1853)  ap.  Cam. 

1x9.  heat]  heat  us  Ktly.  beat  Cart¬ 
wright. 


1 1 9.  we  heat  an  Acre.  But  to  th' 
Goale  .•]  we  heat  an  acre,  but  to  th.'  goal. 
Warb.  Johns,  the  heat,  an  acre,  but  to 
the  goal.  Nichols,  we  heat  us  an  acre  : 
but  to  the  goal  Ktly. 

120.  deed]  Om.  Var.  ’03;  ’13;  ’21 
(misprint). 

122.  Grace.]  Grace,  Rowe  i.  Grace  ! 
Theob. 


and  the  consent  it  at  last  won  from  me  ?  Will  not  the  words  I  then  spoke  rank  for 
ever  the  highest  in  your  regard  ?  Leontes,  quite  taking  her  meaning,  but  liking  to  be 
entreated,  only  says,  ‘  Never  but  once.’  Then  comes  her  charming  rejoinder, — so 
pretty,  so  coaxing,  something  like  Desdemona’s  to  Othello  when  pleading  for  a 
gentle  answer  to  Cassio’s  suit. 

119.  heat  .  .  .  Goale]  Warburton :  Editors  have  imagined  that  ‘But  to  the 
goal,’  meant,  ‘but  to  come  to  the  purpose’;  but  the  sense  is  different,  and  plain 
enough  when  the  line  is  printed  thus : — ‘  ere  With  spur  we  heat  an  acre,  but  to  the 
goal.’  That  is,  good  usage  will  win  us  to  anything;  but,  with  ill,  we  stop  short,  even 
there  where  both  our  interest  and  our  inclination  would  otherwise  have  carried  us. — 
Capell  (p.  162)  :  The  expressions,  ‘  But,  to  the  goal’  answer  to  these  at  present  in 
use  with  us — But,  to  come  to  the  point ;  and  are  highly  proper  in  the  mouth  of  one 
who  has  wandered  from  it  some  four  or  five  lines ;  her  phrase  immediately  before  it, 
‘heat  an  acre,’  has  not  been  trac’d  anywhere;  yet  it  is  not  therefore  false,  and  an 
object  for  alterers,  implying  clearly — o’er  run  it. — Collier  (ed.  ii),  following  his 
MS,  reads:  ‘With  spur  we  clear  an  acre.  But  to  the  good' :  ‘Hermione,’  he 
explains,  ‘  reverts  from  her  simile  to  the  “  good”  Leontes  had  imputed  to  her.  The 
compositor  misread  “  good  ”  goal,  erroneously  thinking  that  the  figure  derived  from 
horsemanshiD  was  still  carried  on.’  A.  C.  C.  (. Stratford-on-Avon  Herald,  Jan.  21  ? 
1887) :  ‘Acre’  as  a  measure  of  length  is  in  constant  use  in  the  Midlands;  the  cus¬ 
tomary  acre  is  about  three  roods,  but  it  varies  very  much  on  actual  survey.  [Shake¬ 
speare  in  the  present  passage]  probably  meant  an  acre  of  thirty-two  yards  (instead  of 
twenty-eight  as  in  Nottinghamshire). — Murray  {N.  E.  D.)  recognizes  ‘acre’  as  a 
lineal  measure,  and  gives  an  ‘  acre  length,  40  poles  or  a  furlong  (i.  e.  furrow-length) ; 
an  acre  breadth,  4  poles  or  22  yards.’  [In  the  last  edition  of  his  Lexicon,  Schmidt 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


21 


But  once  before  I  fpoke  to  th’  purpofe  ?  when  ?  123 

Nay,  let  me  haue’t  :  I  long. 

Leo.  Why,  that  was  when  125 

Three  crabbed  Moneths  had  fowr’d  themfelues  to  death, 

Ere  I  could  make  thee  open  thy  white  Hand: 

A  clap  thy  felfe  my  Loue  ;  then  didft  thou  vtter, 

I  am  yours  for  euer. 

Her.  ’Tis  Grace  indeed.  130 

Why  lo-you  now;I  haue  fpoke  to  th’  purpofe  twice : 


123.  J 'poke ]  fpake  F3F4,  Rowe+. 
speak  Var.  ’73. 

purpofe  ?]  purpose  :  Cap.  et  seq. 

128.  A  clap]  Fj.  And  clepe  Rowe 
ii  + ,  Cap.  Var.  ’73.  And  clap  Ff  et  cet. 
felfe ]  self  Rowe. 


130.  ’  Tis]  This  is  Han.  It  is  Cap.. 
Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Dyce.  That  was 
Lettsom  ap.  Dyce. 

131.  lo-you]  lo  you  Rowe  ii,  et  seq. 

I  haue]  I've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iir 
iii. 


suggests  hent  for  ‘  heat.’  We  are  under  lasting  obligations  to  Dr  Schmidt  as  a  Lexi¬ 
cographer,  if  only  for  his  division  into  verbs  and  nouns  where  a  word  is  used  in  bothi 
senses.  But  ne  sutor,  etc.  ‘  Heat  ’  is  right,  and  ‘  to  the  goal  ’  meaning  ‘  to  the  point  ’ 
is  right,  and  ‘  goal  ’  follows  ‘  heat  ’  by  the  association  of  ideas. — Ed.] 

126.  Three  crabbed  Moneths,  etc.]  This  protracted  wooing,  extraordinarily  long, 
for  Elizabethan  days,  is  a  noteworthy  indication  of  Hermione’s  character. — Ed.] 

128.  A  clap]  Steevens  :  She  opened  her  hand  to  clap  the  palm  of  it  into  his,  as. 
people  do  when  they  confirm  a  bargain.  Hence  the  phrase — ‘  to  clap  up  a  bargain,’ 
i.  e.  make  one  with  no  other  ceremony  than  the  junction  of  hands.  So  in  Ram- Alleys 
or  Merry  Tricks,  161 1 : — ‘  Speak,  widow,  is’t  a  match  ?  Shall  we  clap  it  up  ?’  [IV,  i.]l 
Again,  in  Henry  V :  V,  ii,  133  : — ‘  and  so  clap  hands,  and  a  bargain.’ — Malone  r 
This  was  a  regular  part  of  the  ceremony  of  troth-plighting,  to  which  Shakespeare- 
often  alludes.  So  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  V,  i,  209 :  ‘  This  is  the  hand,  which,  with  a. 
vow’d  contract,  Was  fast  belock’d  in  thine.’  Again  in  King  John,  II,  i,  532 

‘  Command  thy  son  and  daughter  to  join  hands.  K.  Phi.  It  likes  us  well;  young: 
princes,  close  your  hands.’  So  also  in  Middleton’s  No  Wit  Like  a  Woman's : — 
‘  There  these  young  lovers  shall  clap  hands  together’  [IV,  i],  I  should  not  have 
given  so  many  instances  of  this  custom,  but  that  I  know  Mr  Pope’s  reading — ‘  And’ 
clepe]  etc.  has  many  favourers. 

129.  I  am  yours  for  euer]  Hudson:  There  is,  I  think,  a  relish  of  suppressed 
bitterness  in  this  last  speech,  as  if  her  long  reluctance  had  planted  in  him  a  germ  of 
doubt  whether,  after  all,  her  heart  was  really  in  her  words  of  consent.  For  the  Queen 
is  a  much  deeper  character  than  her  husband.  It  is  true,  these  notices,  and  various 
others,  drop  along  so  quiet  and  unpronounced,  as  hardly  to  arrest  the  reader’s  atten¬ 
tion.  Shakespeare,  above  all  other  men,  delights  in  just  such  subtile  insinuations  of 
purpose ;  they  belong,  indeed,  to  his  usual  method  of  preparing  for  a  given  issue,  yet 
doing  it  so  slyly  as  not  to  preclude  surprise  when  the  issue  comes.  [I  cannot  agree 
with  Hudson  in  detecting  any  ‘suppressed  bitterness  ’  here. — Ed.] 

130.  ’Tis  Grace]  Malone:  Referring  to  what  she  had  just  said, — ‘would  her 
name  were  Grace  !’ 


22 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


The  one,  for  euer  earn’d  a  Royall  Husband  ;  132 

Th’other,for  fome  while  a  Friend. 

Leo.  Too  hot,  too  hot  : 

To  mingle  friendfhip  farre,is  mingling  bloods.  135 

I  haue  Tremor  Cordis  on  me  :  my  heart  daunces, 

But  not  for  ioy  ;  not  ioy.  This  Entertainment 
May  a  free  face  put  on  :  deriue  a  Libertie 
From  Heartineffe,  from  Bountie,  fertile  Bofome, 

And  well  become  the  Agent:  ’t  may;  I  graunt :  140 

But  to  be  padling  Palmes,  and  pinching  Fingers, 

As  now  they  are,  and  making  pra£tis’d  Smiles  142 


x33-  Th ’  other']  The  other  Cap.  Rann, 
Steev.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

[Giving  her  hand  to  Pol.  Cap. 
134.  [Aside.  Rowe  et  seq. 

Too  hot,  too  hot]  Too  hot  Han. 

137.  me:. ..ioy;  not  ioy.]  me — ...joy 
— not  joy. —  Rowe+.  me; — ...joy,  not 
joy.  Cap. 

138.  deriue]  derives  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 


139.  Bountie,  fertile  bofome]  bounty's 
fertile  bosom  Han.  Rann,  Coll,  ii  (MS), 
Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Rife. 

140.  well]  we' l  F  F  .  wee'lY..  we'll 
Rowe  i. 

become]  becomes  Rowe  ii,  Pope. 

’t  may;]  F2F3.  it  may,  Var. 
’73.  ’78,  Mai.  Steev.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

’ t  may,  F4  et  cet. 


!34-  Too  hot]  Coleridge:  The  morbid  tendency  of  Leontes  to  lay  hold  of 
the  merest  trifles,  and  his  grossness  immediately  afterwards,  ‘ — paddling  palms,’ 
etc.,  followed  by  his  strange  loss  of  self-control  in  his  dialogue  with  the  little 
boy. 

*38,  x43-  Abbott  (§§  503,  499)  suggests  expedients  whereby  these  lines,  of 
twelve  syllables  each,  may  be  reduced  to  regular  iambic  pentameters.  But  such 
attempts  are  futile,  not  only  in  impassioned  dialogue,  but  in  soliloquies  like  the  pres¬ 
ent.  While  this  jealous  mania  possesses  Leontes,  it  is  noticeable  that  his  speech 
is  disconnected,  disjointed,  with  many  repetitions — a  characteristic  of  madness.  It 
is  sufficient  that  each  sentence,  or  fragment  of  a  sentence,  is  in  itself  rhythmical. 
The  ear  is  satisfied,  and  to  arrange  these  sentences  into  set  lines  of  a  certain  length 
is  merely  for  the  eye.  It  is  not  clear  that  in  a  modem  text  many  of  these  lines  in  this 
soliloquy  should  not  be  printed,  for  the  eye,  with  dashes ;  it  would  then  be  apparent, 
I  think,  that  Hanmer’s  change  of  ‘bounty’s  fertile  bosom’  is  needless,  the  ‘from’ 
being  understood  : — ‘  But  not  for  joy,— not  joy. — This  entertainment — may  a  free 
face  put  on, — derive  a  liberty  From  heartiness— from  bounty,— fertile  bosom ;— And 
well  become  the  agent ; — it  may — I  grant,’  etc. — Ed. 

139.  fertile  Bosome]  Steevens  :  By  this,  I  suppose,  is  meant  a  bosom  like  that 
of  the  earth,  which  yields  a  spontaneous  produce.  In  the  same  strain  is  the  address 
of  Timon :  ‘  Common  mother,  thou,  Whose  womb  immeasurable,  and  infinite  breast, 
Teems,  and  feeds  all.’ — IV,  iii,  179. 

141.  padling]  Used  by  Shakespeare  in  an  evil,  wanton  sense. — Ed. 

142.  pradtis’d  Smiles]  Cf.  ‘  There  was  never  yet  fair  woman  but  she  made 
mouths  in  a  glass.’— Lear,  III,  ii,  35.— Ed. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


23 


As  in  a  Looking-Glaffe  ;  and  then  to  figh,as  ’twere  143 

The  Mort  o’th’Deere  :  oh,  that  is  entertainment 

143.  Glaffe  ,•]  glass —  Rowe  +  . 


143.  Looking-Glasse]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  91),  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  two 
extra  syllables  in  this  line,  suggested  :  ‘  Perhaps,  “  As  in  a  glass  ”  ;  but  it  is  dangerous 
to  alter  without  stronger  reason  than  there  appears  to  be  in  the  present  case ;  and 
glass  for  looking-glass  is  not  perhaps  sufficiently  clear.’ — Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  In  IV,  iv,  18, 
we  have  ‘  To  show  myself  a  glass,’  i.  e.  a  looking-glass. 

144.  Mort  o’  th’  Deere]  Theobald:  To  blow  a  Mort  is  a  hunting  phrase,  signi¬ 
fying  to  sound  a  particular  air,  called  ‘  a  Mort,’  to  give  notice  that  the  deer  is  run 
down  or  killed. — Steevens  :  So,  in  Greene’s  Carde  of  Fancie  [1587]:  ‘He  that 
bloweth  the  Mort  before  the  fall  of  the  Buck,  may  verie  well  misse  of  his  fees  ’ 
[vol.  iv,  p.  83,  ed.  Grosart],  Again,  in  the  oldest  copy  of  Chevy  Chase  :  ‘  The  blewe 
a  mort  vppone  the  bent.’  [To  these  quotations  Nares  adds  :  ‘  “  Directions  at  the 
death  of  a  buck  or  hart. — The  first  ceremony,  when  the  huntsmen  come  in  at  the 
death  of  a  deer,  is  to  cry  Ware  haunch ,  etc. — then  having  blown  the  mort,  and  all 
the  company  come  in,  the  best  person,  that  hath  not  taken  say  before,  is  to  take  up 
the  knife.” — Gentl.  Recreat.,  Hart.  Hunt.,  3,  p.  75.  Some  of  the  books  give  the 
notes  that  are  to  be  sounded  on  this  occasion.’] — Collier  (ed.  iii) :  The  ‘  mort  ’  is 
the  death  of  the  deer,  when  it  heaves  its  last  sigh. — Skeat  ( The  Academy,  29 
Oct.,  1887),  to  whom  Collier’s  third  edition  was  evidently  unknown,  attacked  the 
interpretation  as  given  by  Theobald,  Steevens,  and  Nares,  and  asserted  that  thus 
interpreted  no  simile  could  be  worse.  ‘  We  might  as  well  liken  the  sound  of  weep¬ 
ing  to  the  joyful  shout  of  victory.  The  fact  is,’  continues  Skeat,  1  that  “  mort  ”  just 
means  death,  neither  more  nor  less — la  mort,  sans  phrase.  The  sigh  is  that  of  the 
exhausted  and  dying  deer ;  and  the  simile  is  natural  and  easy.  The  commentators 
wanted  to  air  their  learning.  .  .  .  [The  line  from  the  oldest  copy  of  Chevy  Chase 
appears  in  Percy’s  Relics,  as  Steevens  quotes  it,  and]  I  regret  to  say  that  ...  I  have 
so  printed  the  line  in  my  Specimens  of  English.  But  I  honestly  collated  the  text 
with  the  MS,  and  duly  made  a  note  that  the  MS  reading  is  mot.  And  mot  happens 
to  be  quite  right.  The  careful  Cotgrave  duly  explains  the  French  mot  as  “  the  note 
winded  by  a  huntsman  on  his  home,”  and  it  is  the  true  and  usual  word.  We  have 
Chaucer’s  authority  for  it  in  the  Book  of  the  Duchesse,  1.  376.  In  the  Treatise  on 
Venery,  by  Twety,  printed  in  Reliquice  Antiques,  i,  153,  we  read  :  “  And  when  the  hert 
is  take,  ye  shall  blowe  foure  motys.”  It  is  clear  that  the  phrase  to  blow  a  mot  was 
turned  into  to  blow  a  mort.'  [A  mot  is  a  single  blast,  and  if  ‘  thre  motes  ’  were  blown 
at  the  ‘  uncouplynge  of  the  houndys  ’  as  we  learn  from  Chaucer,  and  ‘  foure  motys  ’ 
when  the  deer  was  taken,  as  we  learn  from  the  Treatise  on  Venery,  it  is  not  an  undue 
assumption  to  say  that  the  last  four  notes  were  called  the  *  mort,’  when  we  have  evi¬ 
dence  as  good  as  in  the  Carde  of  Fancie  and  as  in  that  supplied  by  Nares.  As  for 
the  line  in  Chevy  Chase,  no  great  stress  can  be  laid  on  it,  either  one  way  or  the  other. 
Skeat  himself  has  elsewhere  said  of  the  MS  that  it  is  ‘  a  mere  scribble,  and  the  spell¬ 
ing  very  unsatisfactory.’  I  confess  that  my  own  preference  is  for  the  supposition  that 
Leontes  refers  to  the  dying  sighs  of  the  deer  rather  than  to  the  raucous  sound  of  a 
horn ;  and  it  is  possible  that  Shakespeare,  in  using  a  technical  term,  referred  not  to  a 
process,  but  to  what  that  process  represented. — Ed.] 


24 


THE  WINTERS  TALE  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


My  Bofome  likes  not,  nor  my  Browes.  Mamillius, 

Art  thou  my  Boy  ? 

Mam.  I,  my  good  Lord. 

Leo.  I’fecks : 

Why  that’s  my  Bawcock:what?has’t  fmutch’d  thy  Nofe? 
They  fay  it  is  a  Coppy  out  of  mine.  Come  Captaine, 

We  muft  be  neat  ;  not  neat,  but  cleanly,  Captaine  : 

And  yet  the  Steere,  the  Heycfer,  and  the  Calfe, 

Are  all  call’d  Neat.  Still  Virginalling 
Vpon  his  PalmePHow  now  (you  wanton  Calfe ) 


152.  Heycfer]  Fa.  Heyfer  F  .  Heifer 

F4* 

*53-  all]  all  alike  Lettsom  (ap. 
Dyce). 

[Observing  Pol.  and  Herm. 

Rowe. 

Still]  Still,  still  Sta.  conj. 
(Athen.  4  Apr.  1874). 

153,  154.  Still... Palme]  Aside.  Cap. 

145.  Browes]  Othello  makes  the  same  allusion  when  he  complains  (III,  iii,  283) 
of  the  pain  upon  his  forehead.  Here  Leontes  is  led  to  it,  by  having  just  spoken  of 
a  ‘  deer.’ — Ed.] 

148.  I’fecks]  Bradley  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Pegs,  where  many  forms,  such  as  feckins, 
fackins,  fac,  facks,  etc.,  are  given)  :  A  distortion  of  Fay,  Faith,  perhaps  with  suffix 
-kin{s  frequent  in  such  trivial  quasi-oaths ;  cf.  bodykins,  by' r la  kin. 

149-  Bawcock]  Murray  (N.  E.  IX)  :  From  the  French,  beau  coq.  A  colloquial 
or  burlesque  term  of  endearment :  =  Fine  fellow,  good  fellow. 

149.  smutch’d]  Cowden-Clarke  :  It  is  reserved  for  such  a  poet  as  Shakespeare 

fearlessly  to  introduce  such  natural  touches  as  a  passing  black,  a  flying  particle  of 
smut  resting  upon  a  child’s  nose,  and  to  make  it  turn  to  wonderfully  effective  account 
in  stirring  a  father’s  heart,  agitating  it  with  wild  thoughts,  and  prompting  fierce  plays 
upon  words  and  bitter  puns. 

150.  Coppy  out]  In  this  phrase  ‘out’  can  hardly  be  the  preposition  of  origin  or 
source,  as  Schmidt  (Lex.)  interprets  it— an  interpretation  which  almost  provokes  a 
smile.  With  ‘  copy,’  it  forms  one  composite  idea,  and  the  two  words  might  be  joined 
without  offence  by  a  hyphen. — Ed. 

151.  neat]  Johnson:  Leontes,  seeing  his  son’s  nose  smutch’d,  cries,  ‘  We  must 
be  neat  ’ ;  then  recollecting  that  ‘  neat  ’  is  the  ancient  term  for  horned  cattle,  he  says 
‘  not  neat,  but  cleanly.’ 

153-  Virginalling]  Johnson:  Still  playing  with  her  fingers,  as  a  girl  playing  on 
t  e  virginals.— Chappell  (p.  103) :  The  virginals  (probably  so  called  because  chiefly 
played  upon  by  young  girls)  resembled  in  shape  the  ‘  square  ’  pianoforte  of  the  present 
day,  as  the  harpsichord  did  the  ‘  grand.’  The  sound  of  the  pianoforte  is  produced 
by  a  hammer  striking  the  strings,  but  when  the  keys  of  the  virginals  or  harpsichord 
were  pressed,  the  ‘jacks’  (slender  pieces  of  wood,  armed  at  the  upper  end  with 


149.  has  ’ t ]  hast  Cap.  et  seq. 

150.  it  is]  it's  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns. 
Var.  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Dyce,  Ktly. 

Come  Captaine]  One  line.  Cap. 
Coll.  White  i. 

[Pulling  the  Boy  to  him,  and 
wiping  him.  Cap. 

151.  but  cleanly]  cleanly  Ff. 

[Wipes  the  boy’s  face.  Han. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


25 


Art  thou  my  Calfe  ?  155 

Mam.  Yes,  if  you  will  (my  Lord.) 

Z^.Thou  want’ft  a  rough  path,  &  the  (hoots  that  I  haue 
To  be  full,  like  me  :  yet  they  fay  we  are 
Almoft  as  like  as  Egges  ;  Women  fay  fo, 

(That  will  fay  any  thing.)  But  were  they  falfe  160 

As  o’re-dy’d  Blacks,  as  Wind,  as  Watersjfalfe 

158.  full,  like ]  full  like  Pope,  et  seq.  161.  o're-dy'd~\  o’re  di’d  F^. 

160.  thing.))  thing;  Rowe  et  seq.  Wind ]  winds  Rowe  ii  + ,  Var. 

(subs.).  ’73,  ’78,  ’85,  Rann,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 


quills)  were  raised  to  the  strings,  and  acted  as  plectra,  by  impinging,  or  twitching 
them.  These  jacks  were  the  constant  subject  of  simile  and  pun.  (P.  486)  During 
the  great  fire  of  London  in  1666,  Pepys,  who  was  an  eye-witness,  tells  us  [2d  of 
September]  that  the  river  Thames  being  full  of  lighters  and  boats  taking  in  goods, 
he  ‘  observed  that  hardly  one  lighter  or  boat  in  three  that  had  the  goods  of  a  house 
in,  but  there  was  a  pair  of  Virginalls  in  it.’  .  .  .  The  virginalls,  spinet,  and  harpsi¬ 
chord  (or  harsichow,  as  it  was  about  this  time  more  generally  called)  were  the  pre¬ 
cursors  of  the  pianoforte ;  and  although  differing  from  one  another  in  shape,  and 
somewhat  in  interior  mechanism,  were  essentially  the  same  instrument. 

154.  wanton]  That  is,  frolicsome. 

155.  Calfe]  Mackay  ( Gloss,  s.  v.)  :  It  is  perhaps  useless  to  inquire,  after  the  lapse 
of  three  centuries,  whether  ‘  calf’  was  a  term  of  endearment  to  a  child  among  the 
English  people ;  but  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  to  the  present  day,  among  the  people 
of  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  and  of  the  Gaelic-speaking  population  of  Ireland, 
laogh,  which  means  a  calf  or  a  fawn,  is  the  very  fondest  epithet  that  a  mother  can 
apply  to  her  boy-baby. 

157.  pash]  Jamieson  (Scot.  Diet.  s.  v.)  defines  ‘  Pash,  The  head,  a  rather 
ludicrous  term.  A  bare  pash,  a  bare  or  bald  head,  S.  “  A  mad  pash,  a  mad-brains, 
Chesh.”  Gl.  Grose.’  Henley  in  the  Var.  1821  paraphrases  the  sentence  :  to  make 
thee  a  calf,  thou  must  have  the  tuft  on  thy  forehead  and  the  young  horns  that  shoot 
up  in  it,  as  I  have.’  But  he  gives  no  authority  for  his  explanation  of  ‘  pash  ’  by  tuft. 
Dyce  (Gloss.)  quotes  him  without  comment,  and  also  Jamieson’s  definition,  as  well 
as  the  following  remark  by  Malone:  ‘  You  tell  me  (says  Leontes  to  his  son)  that  you 
are  like  me  ;  that  you  are  my  calf.  I  am  the  horned  bull ;  thou  wantest  the  rough 
head  and  the  horns  of  that  animal,  completely  to  resemble  your  father.’  Mackay 
( Gloss.)  says  that  ‘  pash  ’  is  the  Gaelic  rendering  of  the  word  for  forehead  :  bathais 
pronounced  bash  or  pash,  and  that  Leontes’  ‘  rough  pash  ’  means  •  a  brow  furrowed 
by  care.’  [‘  Shoots  ’  probably  means  horns,  and  for  ‘  rough  pash  ’  we  need  seek  no 
deeper  meaning  than  rough  or  shaggy  head. — Ed.] 

161.  o’re-dy’d  Blacks]  Hanmer  :  A  black  dye  being  used  in  too  great  quantity 
doth  not  only  make  the  cloth  to  rot  upon  which  it  is  put,  but  the  colour  itself  to  fade 
and  grow  rusty  much  sooner. — Steevens  :  It  may  mean  those  stuffs  which  have 
received  a  dye  over  their  former  colour.  There  is  a  passage  in  The  Old  Law  of 
Massinger,  which  might  lead  us  to  offer  another  interpretation : — ‘  Blacks  are  often 
such  dissembling  mourners,  There  is  no  credit  given  to ’t,  it  has  lost  All  reputation 


26 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 
1 62 


As  Dice  are  to  be  wifh’d,by  one  that  fixes 
No  borne  ’twixt  his  and  mine  ;  yet  were  it  true, 

163.  borne ]  born  F3F4,  Rowe  i.  bourne  Rowe  ii.  bourn  Cap.  et  seq. 


by  false  sons  and  widows.’  [ — II,  i.  Steevens  continues  the  quotation  with  ‘  I  would 
not  hear  of  blacks  ’ — a  line  which  I  cannot  find  in  Gifford’s  ed.  of  the  play.  I  should 
not  have  mentioned  the  circumstance,  but  have  made  the  correction  silently  as  in  so 
many  other  quotations,  had  not  Collier  and  Halliwell  also  given  the  line.  Either  they 
did  not  verify  Steevens  or  the  line  is  to  be  found  in  some  edition  other  than  Gifford’s.] 
It  seems  that  blacks  was  the  common  term  for  mourning.  Thus  in  A  Mad  World, 
My  Masters  :  ‘  I’ll  pay  him  when  he  dies  in  so  many  blacks ;  I’ll  have  the  church 
hung  round  with  a  noble  a  yard’  [II,  ii].  Black,  however,  will  receive  no  other 
colour  without  discovering  itself  through  it.  See  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  viii. — Malone  : 
1  he  following  passage  in  a  book  which  our  author  had  certainly  read,  inclines  me  to 
believe  that  the  last  is  the  true  interpretation.  ‘  Truly  quoth  Camilla,  my  Wooll  was 
blacke,  and  therefore  it  could  take  no  other  colour.’— Lyly’s  Euphues  and  his  Eng¬ 
land,  1580  [p.  408,  Arber.]. — Collier  (ed.  ii)  adopts  and  upholds  the  emendation 
of  his  MS:  ‘our  dead  blacks;’  which,  he  says,  means  ‘only  our  blacks  worn  for 
the  dead ;  Leontes  emphatically  calls  this  mourning  false,  inasmuch  as  it  often  does 
not  represent  the  real  state  of  feeling  of  the  wearer.’  [When  Collier  published  this 
emendation  in  his  Notes,  etc.  five  years  before  his  second  edition  appeared,  he  said 
that  it  means  ‘blacks  worn  for  the  deaths  of  persons  whose  loss  was  not  at  all 
lamented.’  This  phrase  Lettsom  ( Blackwod's  Maga.,  Aug.,  1853)  selected  as  his 
only  criticism  of  the  change,  in  the  remark  :  ‘  But  surely  all  persons  who  wear 
mourning  are  not  hypocrites ;  and  therefore  this  new  reading  falls  ineffectual  to  the 
ground,’  which  is,  I  am  afraid,  feeble ;  Collier  successfully  answered  this  criticism  in 
his  edition  by  saying  that  mourning  ‘  often  does  not  represent,’  etc.  If,  as  Collier 
acknowledges,  ‘“blacks”  was  the  ordinary  term  for  mourning  in  Shakespeare’s 
time’  (I  quote  his  words),  an  argument  against  the  phrase  ‘dead  blacks’  lies  in  its 
pleonasm. — Staunton  calls  Collier’s  change  ‘  absurd ;’  which  is  no  argument.  ‘  The 
phrase  meant,’  he  says,  ‘  Such  garments  as  had  become  rotten  and  faded  by  frequent 
immersion  in  the  dye.’  Is  a  garment  which  is  frequently  immersed  apt  to  look 
faded  ?  It  may  be  ‘  rotten,’  but  it  would  look  fresh,  not  faded.  ‘  If,’  continues 
Staunton,  ‘  any  change  in  the  text  be  admissible,  we  should  read  “  oft- dyed  blacks.” 
Thus,  in  Webster’s  Dutchess  of  Malfi,  V,  ii :  “I  do  not  think  but  sorrow  makes  her 
look  Like  an  oft  dy’d  garment.”  ’  Leontes’  primary  idea  is  falseness,  and  ‘o’re-dy’d 
Blacks  ’  are,  I  think,  blacks  rendered  false  by  o’er-dyeing,  which  falseness,  since 
black  is  black,  must  refer  to  the  texture. — Ed.] 

161.  Wind]  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  The  context  evidently  requires  the  plural  winds 
(as  in  Rowe  ii).  [  Winds  are  not  false.  The  North  wind  remains  for  ever  the 
North  wind ;  the  instant  it  veers,  it  ceases  to  be  the  North  wind.  But  the  <  Wind  ’ 
may  be  as  false  as  there  are  hours  in  the  day. — Ed.] 

163.  borne]  Halliwell  quotes  Warton  :  That  is,  any  noted  cheat,  who  would  as 
readily  convert  my  possessions  to  his  own  use  and  purposes  as  his  own,  and  trick  me 
of  them  all.  In  the  wraste  and  open  countries,  ‘  bourns  ’  are  the  grand  separations, 
or  divisions,  of  one  part  of  the  country  from  another,  and  are  natural  limits  of  districts 
and  parishes.  For  ‘  bourn  ’  is  simply  nothing  more  than  a  boundary. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


2  7 


To  fay  this  Boy  were  like  me.  Come(Sir  Page) 

Looke  on  me  with  your  Welkin  eye  :  fweet  Villaine,  165 

Moft  dear’ ft,  my  Collop  :  Can  thy  Dam,may’t  be 

Affe6lion?  thy  Intention  ftabs  the  Center.  167 


164.  were]  is  Han. 

165.  welkin ]  welking  Rowe  ii,  Pope, 
Han.  welkin-eye  Theob. +  ,  Var.  Steev. 

eye  .•]  eye,  Rowe  + . 

Villaine ,]  Villaine.  Ff.  villain! 

Cap. 

166.  dear'Jl,  my  Collop  .•]  dearest,  my 
Collop —  Rowe. 

thy  Dam,~\  they  dam,  F^.  thy 
dam  ?  Rowe,  thy  dam —  Johns. 


166.  may' t  be~\  Ff,  Coll,  i,  Sta.  may't 
be —  Rowe  +  .  may  ’t  be ?  Han.  Cap.  et 
seq.  (subs.). 

167,  175.  Affection. ..Browes]  Erased 
by  Coll.  (MS). 

167.  Affection  ?  ...the]  Imagination! 
thou  dost  stab  to  th'  Rowe  + .  Affection, 
...to  the  Cap.  Coll.  ii.  Affection,. ..the 
Coll.  i.  Affection... the  Sta.  Affection! 
...the  Steev.  et  cet.  (subs.). 


164.  to  say  .  .  .  were]  For  other  examples  of  the  subjunctive  in  subordinate 
clauses,  see  Abbott,  §  368. 

165.  Welkin]  Johnson:  Blue  eye;  an  eye  of  the  same  colour  with  the  welkin, 
or  sky. 

166.  Collop],  Dyce  (Gloss.)  Used  metaphorically,  as  being  a  portion  of  his 
flesh. 

167—175.  AffeiHon  .  .  .  Browes]  Capell:  The  meaning  must  be  this  or 
nothing :  ‘  Affection,’  the  thing  apostrophised,  is  told — that  when  full  bent  is  given  it, 
full  intentiveness,  man  often  receives  a  stab  in  his  centre,  i.  e.  his  heart ;  meaning, 
that  he  is  in  that  case  subject  to  jealousy;  thou  (this  full-bent  affection)  mak’st 
possible,  says  the  speaker,  things  which  others  hold  not  so ;  hast  fellowship  with 
dreams,  with  what’s  unreal,  nay,  even  with  nothing,  art  that  nothing’s  co-agent  in 
working  out  thy  own  torment ;  And  having  said  this,  suddenly  (by  a  wonder-full,  but 
natural  turn  in  so  sick  a  mind  as  this  speaker’s),  out  of  these  reflections,  which  make 
the  passion  ridiculous  and  are  of  force  to  have  cur’d  it,  matter  is  drawn  by  him  to 
give  his  madness  sanction ;  by  saying, — that  since  nothings  were  a  foundation  for  it, 
somethings  might  be,  and  were ; — ‘  Then,  ’tis  very  credent,  Thou  may’st  co-join  with 
something;  and  thou  dost;’  subjoining  to  this  assertion — ‘And  that  to  the  infection 
of  my  brains,  And  hard’ning  of  my  brows’ — for  this  only  should  follow  it;  [line  175] 
.  being,  in  the  editor’s  judgment,  a  first  draft  of  the  poet’s,  corrected  by  what  comes 
after,  and  meant  by  him  for  rejection. — Steevens  :  ‘  Affection,’  I  believe,  signifies 
imagination.  Thus  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  IV,  i,  50 :  ‘  Affection,  Mistress  of  passion,  sways 
it,’  etc.,  i.  e.  imagination  governs  our  passions.  ‘  Intention  ’  is,  as  Locke  expresses  it, 
‘  when  the  mind  with  great  earnestness,  and  of  choice,  fixes  its  view  on  any  idea, 
considers  it  on  every  side,  and  will  not  be  called  off  by  the  ordinary  solicitations  of 
other  ideas.’  This  vehemence  of  the  mind  seems  to  be  what  affects  Leontes  so 
deeply,  or  in  Shakespeare’s  language, — ‘stabs  him  to  the  centre.’ — M.  Mason 
(p.  124):  ‘Affection,’  in  this  place,  seems  to  be  taken  in  its  usual  acceptation  and 
means  the  passion  of  love,  which,  from  its  possessing  the  powers  which  Leontes  here 
describes,  is  often  called  in  Shakespeare  by  the  name  of  Fancy.  ...  In  answer  to 
the  question,  ‘  may 't  be  ?’  and  to  show  the  possibility  of  Hermione’s  falsehood,  he 
begins  to  descant  upon  the  power  of  love,  but  has  no  sooner  pronounced  the  word 
‘  affection,’  than,  casting  his  eyes  on  Hermione,  he  says  to  her,  or  rather,  of  her  in  a 


28 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


[167-175.  Affection?  thy  Intention  .  .  .  Browes] 
low  voice,  ‘  thy  intention  stabs  the  centre  !’  After  that,  he  proceeds  again  in  his 
argument  for  a  line  and  a  half,  when  we  have  another  break — ‘  How  can  this  be  ?’ 
He  then  proceeds  with  more  connection,  and  says  *  if  love  can  be  co-active  with  what 
is  unreal,  and  have  communication  with  non-entities,’  it  is  probable  that  it  may  conjoin 
with  something  real  in  the  case  of  Hermione,  and  having  proved  it  possible,  he  con¬ 
cludes  that  ‘  it  certainly  must  be  so.’  .  .  .  ‘  Intention  ’  in  this  passage  means  eagerness 
of  attention,  or  of  desire,  and  is  used  in  the  same  sense  in  The  Merry  Wives,  I,  iii, 
73L  where  Falstaff  says:  *  She  did  so  course  o’er  my  exteriors,  with  such  a  greedy 
intention,  that  the  appetite  of  the  eye  did  seem  to  scorch  me  up  like  a  burning  glass.’ 

Malone  :  I  think,  with  Mr.  Steevens,  that  ‘  affection  ’  means  here  imagination,  or 
perhaps  more  accurately  :  ‘  the  disposition  of  the  mind  when  strongly  affected  or 
possessed  by  a  particular  idea.’  And  in  a  kindred  sense  at  least  to  this,  it  is  used  in 
the  passage  quoted  from  the  Mer.  of  Ven. — Collier,  in  his  first  edition,  having 
unwisely  adopted  the  punctuation  of  the  Ff  in  <  may ’t  be  Affection  ’  ?  was  justly 
criticised  by  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  etc.  p.  79),  who  concludes  his  criticism  as  follows : — 
‘  Leontes,  after  saying,  “Can  thy  dam?  may ’t  be?” — (so  again,  three  lines  after, 
“  how  can  this  be  ?”)  breaks  off  in  an  apostrophe  to  “  affection,”  which  is  continued 
to  the  end  of  the  speech, — “  Affection,  thy  intention  stabs  the  centre,”  ’  etc.  Dyce 
here  quotes  with  approval  Malone’s  note  just  given  above. — Singer  (ed.  ii) :  ‘  Affec¬ 
tion  ’  here  means  sympathy.  ‘  Intention  ’  is  intenseness.  The  ‘  centre  ’  is  the  solid 
globe  conceived  as  the  centre  of  the  universe.  (See  II,  i,  126.)  The  allusion  is  to 
the  powers  ascribed  to  sympathy  between  the  human  system  and  all  nature,  however 
remote  or  occult.  Hence  Leontes,  like  Othello,  finds  in  his  very  agitation  a  proof 

that  it  corresponds  not  with  a  fancy  but  a  reality.  [Which  is  obscurely  expressed. _ 

R.  G.  W  hite  (ed.  i) :  That  is,  the  mind,  when  it  is  powerfully  excited  or 
affected,  intuitively  pierces  the  very  heart,  hits  the  white,  touches  the  root  of  the 
matter.  For  a  similar  use  of  ‘  affection,’  see  Mer.  of  Ven.  [above  quoted].— Collier, 
in  his  second  edition,  returned  substantially  to  the  punctuation  of  Capell,  and  has  the 
following  sensible  note  :  ‘  In  all  likelihood  “  affection  ”  is  to  be  taken  for  imagination, 
and  “intention,”  not  for  design  or  purpose,  but  for  intentness,  or  vehemence  of  passion. 
Not  one  of  the  commentators,  ancient  or  modern,  has  concurred  with  another  on  the 
poet’s  meaning,  and  there  can  be  little  hesitation  in  coming  to  the  conclusion  that 
mishearing,  misrecitation,  and  misprinting  have  contributed  to  the  obscuration  of  what, 
possibly,  was  never  very  intelligible  to  common  readers  or  auditors.  All  that  is  clear 
is  that  Leontes,  watching  the  conduct  of  Polixenes  and  Hermione,  misinterprets  their 
action,  and  feeds  his  own  jealousy,  concluding  that  their  object  was  criminal  and 
that  he  was  to  be  the  sufferer.  This  notion  he  gives  vent  to  in  various  abrupt  sen¬ 
tences,  the  connexion  of  which  is  entirely  mental,  but  their  general  import  is  sufficiently 
clear.’ — Staunton  :  ‘  Affection  ’  here  means  imagination  ;  ‘  intention  ’  signifies  inten- 
cion  or  intensity ;  and  the  allusion,  though  the  commentators  have  all  missed  it,  is- 
plainly  to  that  mysterious  principle  of  nature  by  which  a  parent’s  features  are  trans¬ 
mitted  to  the  offspring.  Pursuing  the  train  of  thought  induced  by  the  acknowledged 
likeness  between  the  boy  and  himself,  Leontes  asks,  ‘  Can  it  be  possible  a  mother’s 
vehement  imagination  should  penetrate  even  to  the  womb,  and  there  imprint  upon  the 
embryo  what  stamp  she  chooses  ?  Such  apprehensive  fantasy,  then,’  he  goes  on  to 
say,  *  we  may  believe  will  readily  co-join  with  something  tangible,  and  it  does,’  etc. 
etc.  [Are  we  to  believe  that  the  betossed  soul  of  Leontes  is  here  interested  in  a 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


29 


[167-175.  Affection  ?  thy  Intention  .  .  .  Browes] 
recondite  physiological  speculation?  Staunton’s  punctuation  of  the  passage  is,  I 
think,  better  than  that  of  any  other  editor.  Every  clause  is  a  question  until  the 
answer  begins  :  ‘  Then,  ’tis  very  credent,’  etc. — Ed.] — Keightley  ( Expositor , 
p.  198)  thinks  the  whole  passage  ‘rather  obscure,’  and  that  the  meaning  seems  to  be 
that  “  affection,”  which  is  imagination,  fancy ,  stretches  to  (expressed  by  “  intention”), 
and  stabs,  or  pierces,  even  the  centre  of  the  earth.’ — Joseph  Crosby  (Am.  Bibliopolist, 
Dec.  1876,  p.  1 21)  interprets  ‘affection’  by  lust,  and  thus  paraphrases  the  first  line: 
‘  O  lust !  thy  intensity, — the  lengths  thou  wilt  go  to  satiate  thyself, — stabs  the  centre, — 
penetrates  to,  and  permeates,  every  foot  of  the  habitable  globe.’  The  rest  of  Crosby’s 
paraphrase  may  be  here  omitted;  the  difficulty  lies  in  line  167;  with  the  exception 
of  ‘beyond  commission’  in  line  173,  there  is  no  diversity  of  opinion  as  regards  the 
meaning  of  the  remainder  of  the  speech. — Hudson  has  ‘  little  doubt  that  amidst  so 
many  ands,  that  word  got  repeated  out  of  place  [in  line  1 73H»  an<f  that  in  [line  174] 
“  And  that  ”  crept  in,  for  the  same  cause  from  the  line  above.’  Accordingly  he 
changed  the  former  into  ‘  as  I  find  it,’  and  the  latter  into  ‘  Ay,  even  to  the  infection,’ 
etc.  He  doubts,  moreover,  ‘  whether  “  affection  ”  ever  bears  the  sense  of  imagination 
in  Shakespeare ;  though  he  certainly  uses  it  with  considerable  latitude,  not  to  say 
looseness,  of  meaning.’  He  then  gives  the  foregoing  notes  from  M.  Mason  and  from 
Singer.  As  to  the  word :  ‘  centre,’  Hudson  does  not  see  how  it  can  bear  any  other 
sense  than  that  which  it  has  in  the  next  scene.  Before  quoting  a  paraphrase  of  the 
whole  passage  by  Joseph  Crosby,  Hudson  concludes  : — ‘  Perhaps,  after  all,  the  passage 
in  hand  was  not  meant  to  be  very  intelligible ;  and  so  it  may  be  an  apt  instance  of  a 
man  losing  his  wits  in  a  rapture  of  jealousy.  For  how  can  a  man  be  expected  to 
discourse  in  orderly  sort  when  his  mind  is  thus  all  in  a  spasm  ?’ 

A  critic  of  Grant  White’s  second  edition  having  taken  that  editor  to  task  for  not 
having  in  his  notes  explained  the  passage  in  hand,  Grant  White  defended  himself 
(Atlantic  Monthly,  June,  1884,  p.  817)  as  follows: — ‘If  I  know  anything  of  the 
syntactical  construction  of  the  English  language,  this  passage  is  as  simple  and  clear 
in  its  arrangement  as  the  simplest  and  clearest  in  the  writings  of  Oliver  Goldsmith, 
or  of  Arthur  Helps.  .  .  .  There  is  in  it  not  even  an  involution  or  an  inversion ;  unless 
the  very  simple  “thou  coactive  art  ”  for  thou  art  coactive,  is  to  be  so  regarded.  The 
thoughts  follow  each  other  in  the  natural,  logical  order.  Nor  is  there  a  single  strained 
or  perverted  word  in  all  the  seven  lines.  Every  word  is  used  in  its  plain,  and  it  might 
almost  be  safely  said  its  primary,  sense.  I  say  this  advisedly,  after  careful  consideration. 
What,  then,  is  the  reason  of  that  sense  of  incomprehensibleness  which  led  to  its 
selection  as  an  example  of  Shakespeare’s  characteristic  overstraining  of'  language, 
sense,  and  syntax  ?  Good  reader  and  good  critic,  it  is  simply  the  thought.  Master 
that,  and  you  will  see  that  the  expression  is  as  clear  as  the  empyrean  atmosphere.’ 
[Doubtless  Grant  White  was  honest  in  the  belief  that  he  spoke  ‘  advisedly,  after  care¬ 
ful  consideration,’  but  his  words  smack  a  little  of  an  exaggeration  due  to  the  defense 
of  a  weak  point.  Assuredly,  if  explanatory  notes  be  ever  needed,  here  is  the  occasion. 
It  is  easy  to  say,  ‘  master  the  thought,’  but  it  will  hardly  do  to  impute  to  every  editor 
of  Shakespeare  a  failure  therein.  And  what  is  to  be  thought  of  Grant  White’s  own 
mastery  of  it,  when  in  transferring  the  passage  from  his  Riverside  Edition  to  the 
pages  of  The  Atlantic,  which  he  presumably  read  with  extremest  care  before  pro¬ 
nouncing  judgement,  he  transferred  a  misprint,  and  substituted  in  the  text  a  word 
which  Shakespeare  did  not  here  use  ?  Instead  of  ‘  Affection  !  thy  intention  stabs  the 


30 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 

1 68 


Thou  do’ft  make  poffible  things  not  fo  held, 

Communicat’d:  with  Dreames(how  can  this  be?) 

With  what’s  vnreall  :  thou  coa6tiue  art, 

And  fellow’ft  nothing.  Then  ’tis  very  credent, 

Thou  may’ ft  co-ioyne  with  fomething,  and  thou  do’ft, 

(And  that  beyond  Commiffion)  and  I  find  it,  173 


168.  not  fo\  not  be  fo  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 
not  to  be  so  Han. 

168, 169.  held,. ..Dreames  (how]  held ? 
...Dreams  ?  How!  Sta. 

169,  170.  Dreames . . .  vnreall :]  F, 
Cap.  Var.  ’73,  ’78,  ’85  (subs.).  Dreams 
... unreal l,  F3F4  Rowe.  dreams — how 
...be  With  what' s  unreal  ?  Pope,  dreams 
— (how  ...  be  ?)  With  what's  unreal, 


Theob.-)-  dreams, — How. ..be?  With 

what's  unreal  Rann  et  seq.  (subs.). 

170.  coadliue]  co-active  Theob.  ii  +  , 
Cap.  (errata). 

1 71.  fellow ’/?]  follow' st  Rowe  ii. 
nothing]  nothings  Han.  noth¬ 
ing  ?  Sta. 

173  in  brackets.  Cap. 
it,]  it;  Theob.  + . 


centre,’  the  Riverside  Edition  and  The  Atlantic  Monthly  both  read  :  ‘  Affection  !  thy 
invention  stabs  the  centre,’ — a  typographical  error,  which  Grant  White  afterwards 
acknowledged  (see  Notes  and  Qu.  VII,  i,  235).  Possibly  had  he  had  the  true  text 
before  him,  he  would  not  have  been  so  tickle  o’  the  sere  in  pronouncing  the  passage 
as  ‘  clear  as  the  empyrean  atmosphere  ’ ;  something  found  is  very  different  from  some¬ 
thing  intended. 

The  difficulty,  to  me,  lies  not  in  ‘  affection  ’  but  in  ‘  intention.’  It  is  possible  to  take 
‘  affection  ’  as  meaning  lust,  but  it  is  not  necessary  here ;  Shakespeare  in  many  places 
draws  the  distinction  between  ‘  affections  ’  and  ‘  passions.’  Leontes  begins  with  the 
thought  merely  of  affection  or  love,  and  then  reflects  that  this  love  carried  to  an 
extreme,  or  becoming  to  the  last  degree  intense,  pierces  to  the  very  soul.  The 
only  other  instance  where  Shakespeare  uses  the  word  ‘  intention  ’  is  in  the  passage 
from  The  Merry  Wives,  quoted  by  M.  Mason;  both  there  and  here  it  means,  I  think, 
intenseness,  or,  as  Staunton  spells  it,  intencion.  In  the  rather  puzzling  phrase  :  ‘  fellow’st 
nothing  ’  and  in  what  follows,  I  think  the  reasoning  of  Leontes  is  :  if  this  intensest  love 
can  live  in  dreams  and  go  hand  in  hand  with  what  is  actually  nothing,  <t  fortiori,  it 
can  mate  with  what  is  actually  real.  If,  however,  all  explanations  prove  unsatisfac¬ 
tory,  then  the  student  must  seek  covert  under  Collier’s  sensible,  prosaic  note. — Ed.] 

168.  possible  things]  Johnson:  That  is,  thou  dost  make  those  things  possible, 
which  are  conceived  to  be  impossible. — Malone:  To  express  the  speaker’s  meaning, 
it  is  necessary  to  make  a  short  pause  after  the  word  ‘  possible.’  I  have  therefore  put 
a  comma  there,  though  perhaps,  in  strictness,  it  is  improper. 

170.  vnreall :  thou]  All  modern  editors,  without  exception  I  believe,  since  Rann 
in  1787,  have  printed  this  line  without  any  punctuation  between  ‘  unreal  ’  and  ‘  thou.’ 
Theobald,  in  his  correspondence  with  Warburton,  proposed  this  erasure  of  all  punc¬ 
tuation,  but  in  his  edition  he  inserted  a  comma. 

173.  beyond  Commission]  M.  Mason  (p.  125)  :  This  alludes  to  the  commission 
he  had  given  Hermione  to  prevail  on  Polixenes  to  defer  his  departure. — Singer  : 
That  is,  it  is  very  credent  that  sympathy  shall  betray  a  crime  to  the  injured  person, 

not  only  at  the  time  of  commission,  but  even  after — beyond  the  time  of  commission. _ 

Staunton  :  It  means  here,  as  in  line  50,  warrant,  permission,  authority.  [This 
seems  to  be  conclusive. — Ed.] 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


31 


(And  that  to  the  infection  of  my  Braines, 


And  hardning  of  my  Browes.) 

Pol.  What  meanes  Sicilia  ? 

Her.  He  fomething  feemes  vnsetled. 

Pol.  How?  my  Lord  ? 

Leo. What  cheere?  how  is’t  with  you,  beft  Brother  ? 


175 


1 79 


178.  How?  my  Lord?]  Now,  my 
lord  ?  Cap.  How  now ,  my  lord  ?  Sing. 
(MS).  Ho,  my  lord !  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
How,  my  lord ?  Mai.  et  seq.  (subs.). 


is' t...bejl  Brother]  is  it. ..my  best 
brother  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 


179.  What. . .  Brother  ?]  Continued  to 
Pol.  Han. 


174.  And  that]  Dyce  (ed.  ii) :  ‘The  printer,’  says  Mr  W.  N.  Lettsom,  ‘has 
repeated  “  And  that  ”  instead  of  Find  it.'  [?] 

178.  How]  Dyce  (ed.  ii) :  I  here  alter  ‘How’  to  Ho,  for  Leontes  is  evidently 
standing  apart  from  Polixenes  and  Hermione ;  and  ‘  how  ’  was  frequently  the  old 
spelling  of  ho. 

179.  Knight,  Collier,  and  Halliwell  are  the  only  modern  editors,  I  think, 
who  adhere  to  this  distribution  of  speeches ;  all  the  rest  follow  Hanmer  in  giving 
this  line  to  Polixenes.  Knight  observes :  ‘  It  is  impossible,  we  think,  for  any 
alteration  to  be  more  tasteless  [than  Hanmer’s]  and  more  destructive  of  the  spirit 
of  the  author.  Leontes,  even  in  his  moody  reverie,  has  his  eyes  fixed  upon  his 
queen  and  Polixenes ;  and  when  he  is  addressed  by  the  latter  with  “  How,  my 
lord?”  he  replies,  with  a  forced  gaiety,  “What  cheer?  how  is ’t  with  you?”  The 
addition  of  “  best  brother  ”  is,  we  apprehend,  meant  to  be  uttered  in  a  tone  of  bitter 
irony.  All  this  is  destroyed  by  making  the  line  merely  a  prolongation  of  the  inquiry 
of  Polixenes. — Collier  (ed.  ii) :  There  is  no  reason  for  taking  this  line  from  Leontes. 
The  old  copies  are  uniform  in  the  present  distribution  of  the  dialogue ;  Leontes  is 
endeavoring  to  recover  himself,  and  breaks  from  a  fit  of  abstraction  with  the  line, 
‘  What  cheer  ?’  etc. — Halliwell  :  In  acting  the  play,  the  arrangement  of  the 
original  is  greatly  to  be  preferred.  Polixenes  calls  Leontes,  who  is  standing  aside, 
and,  being  thus  interrupted  in  his  abstraction,  hides  the  agony  of  his  thoughts  by  an 
assumption  of  cheerfulness. — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  I  cannot  doubt  that  Hanmer 
was  right.  Otherwise,  not  only  does  Leontes  express  a  solicitude  not  in  keeping  with 
his  mood,  but  Polixenes  does  not  put  the  very  question  which  the  situation  required 
from  him.  It  is  clearly  intended,  too,  that  Hermione  should  continue  the  enquiry 
which  her  companion  begins ;  but  this  natural  course  of  the  dialogue  is  broken  by  the 
old  arrangement.  [White  is  the  only  editor  who  gives  any  reason  for  deserting  the 
Folio.  Dyce  says  of  Collier’s  return  to  the  original  text  merely  that  it  is  ‘  very 
injudicious,  I  think,’  and  Staunton  quotes  Dyce.  To  make  as  radical  a  change  as  a 
re-distribution  of  speeches  demands  an  incontrovertible  reason,  especially  when  deal¬ 
ing  with  a  text  printed,  as  is  acknowledged,  with  unusual  care.  Shakespeare  may 
have  intended  this  line,  ending  with  ‘best  Brother,’  as  a  flash  of  Leontes’  old-time 
self, — a  struggle  to  shake  off  the  insane  delusion  which  was  beclouding  his  mind. 
There  is  certainly  need  of  some  words  or  speech  from  him,  to  span  the  gap  from 
his  turbulent  soliloquy  to  the  gay  memories  of  his  boyhood.  It  is  hard  to  say  what 
is  ‘  natural  ’  under  unnatural  conditions,  and  I,  for  one,  prefer  to  accept  nature  under 
what  is  presumably  Shakespeare’s  lead,  than  under  Hanmer’s. — Ed.] 


32 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Her.  You  look  as  if  you  held  a  Brow  of  much  diftradtion:  180 

Are  you  mou’d  (my  Lord?,) 

Leo.  No,  in  good  earned:. 

How  fometimes  Nature  will  betray  it’s  folly? 

It’s  tenderneffe  ?  and  make  it  felfe  a  Paftime 

To  harder  bofomes  ?  Looking  on  the  Lynes  185 

Of  my  Boyes  face,  me  thoughts  I  did  requoyle 


180.  You. ..held']  You  seem  to  hold 
Han. 

as  if...diJlraction]  One  line. 
Theob.  et  seq. 

181.  Are  you]  Are  not  you  Theob.  + . 
Are  you  not  Han. 

182.  earnejl]  earnest,  no. —  Cap. 
183-185.  How... bofomes]  Aside.  Cap. 

Mai.  Steev.  Sta. 

183.  184.  it’s  ...  It's]  F2.  its...  It' s 


183, 184,  185.  folly  ? ...tenderneffe  ? ... 
bofomes?]  Ff.  folly  !  ...tenderness  ! ... 
bosoms  !  Rowe. 

186.  me  thoughts]  methoughls  F  , 
Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Dyce  i, 
Cam.  Dtn.  my  thoughts  Coll.  (Egerton 
MS),  Sing.  Wb.  methought  Sta.  Ktly, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Rife. 

requoyle]  recoyl  F3  recoil  F  . 
recall  Grey  (i,  246). 


178-182.  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  91)  would  arrange  these  lines  ‘nearly  as  follows:’ 
‘  What  cheer?  how  is’t  with  you,  |  Best  brother?  You  look,  as  if  you  held  a  brow  | 
Of  much  distraction  :  are  you  mov’d,  my  lord  ?’  |  But  all  these  divisions  of  lines, 
much  affected  by  Germans,  are  for  the  eye  only,  the  ear  has  no  need  of  them. — Ed. 

183,  184,  189.  it’s  .  .  .  It’s  .  .  .  it’s]  See  Notes  on  Temp.  I,  ii,  1 13 ;  Lear,  I,  iv, 
209;  Ham.  I,  ii,  216  of  this  edition,  or  see  Abbott,  §  228.  According  to  the  Bible 
Word-book  (Eastwood  and  Wright),  its  occurs  ten  times  in  the  First  Folio,  as  follows : 
Temp.  I,  ii,  113;  lb.  I,  ii,  457 ;  Mens,  for  Meas.  I,  ii,  4;  Wint.  Tale,  I,  ii,  183,  184, 
189,  310;  lb.  Ill,  iii,  53;  2  Hen.  VI:  III,  ii,  393;  Hen.  VIII:  I,  i,  18.  Yt  or  ii 
is  used  for  ‘its’  fourteen  times,  as  follows:  Temp.  II,  i,  170 ;  Wint.  Tale,  II,  iii,  214; 
lb.  Ill,  ii,  107;  King  John,  II,  i,  160;  2  Hen.  IV:  I,  ii,  131 ;  Hen.  V:  V,  ii,  40; 
Rom.  Jul.  I,  iii,  52;  Timon,  V,  i,  150;  Ham.  I,  ii,  216;  V,  i,  244;  Lear,  I,  iv, 
236;  Ant.  Cleop.  II,  vii,  49,  53;  Cym.  Ill,  iv,  160.  The  possessive  pronoun  ‘its’ 
does  not  occur  in  the  Authorised  Version  of  the  Bible  of  1611.  Levit.  xxv,  5,  has 
‘it’  in  place  of  its.  [From  these  lists  it  appears  that  its  is  more  frequently  used  in 
A  Winter’s  Tale  than  in  any  other  play, — a  possible  indication  that  it  was  written 
later  than  the  others,  and  at  a  time  when  the  adoption  of  the  anomalous  its  was 
becoming  prevalent.  It  is  merely  a  possible  indication.  For  aught  we  know,  in 
every  case  where  we  find  ‘  its  ’  in  the  printed  text,  Shakespeare  may  have  written 
it,  and  we  owe  the  ‘  its  ’  to  a  compositor  who,  as  we  see  in  every  column,  was  a 
careful  workman.  See  line  310  infra;  and  II,  iii,  214. — Ed.] 

186.  me  thoughts]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  A  MS  correction  in  Lord  Ellesmere’s  copy 
shows  that  ‘  me  ’  has  been  inserted  for  my. — Dyce  (ed.  ii)  :  ‘  Methoughts  ’  is,  no  doubt, 
a  form  which  we  occasionally  meet  with ;  but  since,  a  few  lines  after,  the  Folios  have 
‘  me  thought,’  the  variation  was  evidently  introduced  by  the  scribe  or  the  printer,  not 
by  Shakespeare.  ...  Mr  Knight  too  has  eagerly  adopted  [Collier’s]  alteration  ‘  my 
thoughts,’  wrong  as  it  indubitably  is.  [This  must  refer  to  an  edition  of  Knight  which 
I  have  not  seen.  Knight’s  first  edition  has  ‘  methoughts,’  his  second  ‘  methought,’ 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


Twentie  three  yeeres,  and  faw  my  felfe  vn-breech’d, 
In  my  greer.e  Veluet  Coat  ;  my  Dagger  muzzel’d, 
Lead:  it  fhould  bite  it’s  Matter,  and  fo  proue 
(As  Ornaments  oft  do’s)  too  dangerous  : 

How  like(me  thought)  I  then  was  to  this  Kernell, 
This  Squafh,  this  Gentleman.  Mine  honeft  Friend, 
Will  you  take  Egges  for  Money  ? 


33 

187 

190 

193 


189.  Leajl~\  Lejl  F4. 
iV’j]  Ff,  Cap.  White. 

190.  Ornaments  oft  do' s~\  Ff  {does  F4, 
Ktly).  ornament  oft  does  Cap.  Rann. 
ornaments  oft  do  Rowe  et  cet. 


191.  me  thought ]  Ff.  methought 
Rowe  et  seq. 

193.  Egges  for  Money\  aches  from 
any  Bulloch  (p.  116). 


and  his  ‘  Second  Revised  ’  returns  to  ‘  methoughts.’ — Ed.]  Walker  (  Vers.  284)  sug¬ 
gests  that  ‘  methoughts  ’  is  formed  by  contagion  from  methinks.  He  refers  to  Rich¬ 
ard  III :  I,  iv,  where  the  Folios  have  ‘  Me  thoughts  that  I  had  broken  from  the 
Tower,’  etc.  Then  presently :  ‘  Me  thought  that  Gloster  stumbled,’  etc.  And  again, 
■within  the  next  twenty  lines,  ‘  Me  thoughts  I  saw  a  thousand  fearfull  wrackes,’  etc.— 
‘all  these,’  Dyce  adds,  ‘  in  the  same  speech.' — W.  A.  Wright  [Cam.  Ed.  ii) :  ‘  Me¬ 
thoughts  ’  is,  of  course,  a  form  grammatically  inaccurate,  suggested  by  the  more  famil¬ 
iar  methinks.  It  occurs,  however,  sufficiently  often  in  the  old  editions  to  warrant  us 
in  supposing  that  it  came  from  the  author’s  pen.  We  therefore  retain  it.  [See  Mer. 
of  Ven.  I,  iii,  71 :  ‘Me  thoughts  you  said,’  etc.] 

187.  Twentie  three  years]  An  ingenious  way  of  disclosing  to  us  the  present  age 
of  Leontes,  and  incidentally  of  differentiating  his  jealousy  from  that  of  Othello,  a 
much  older  man,  who  in  Desdemona’s  fall  bade  farewell  to  all  that  made  up  life  for 
him.  Whereas,  the  younger  Leontes  hopefully  imagines  that  after  Hermione’s  death 
at  least  a  moiety  of  the  zest  of  life  will  return  to  him. — Ed. 

190.  Ornaments]  See  I,  i,  34,  where  is  given  Walker’s  note  on  the  interpolated 
s  at  the  end  of  a  word.  Interesting  as  Walker’s  speculation  may  be  that  we  have 
herein  a  peculiarity  of  Shakespeare’s  handwriting,  the  difference  in  the  degree  of 
frequency,  in  the  various  plays,  points,  I  am  afraid,  to  the  different  rules  governing 
the  several  printing  offices  where  the  Folio  was  set  up.  The  uncertainty  as  to  the 
source  of  this  interpolated  s  in  no  wise  affects  the  value  of  Walker’s  article.  In  the 
present  case  it  is  not  easy  to  say  whether  the  s  was  interpolated  after  ornament  or 
after  do. — Ed. 

192.  Squash]  The  meaning  of  this  word  is  amply  explained  in  Twelfth  Night,  I, 
v,  166 :  ‘  Not  yet  old  enough  for  a  man,  nor  young  enough  for  a  boy ;  as  a  squash  is 
before  ’tis  a  peasecod,  or  a  codling  when  ’tis  almost  an  apple.’  Our  American  word 
‘  squash,’  applied  to  an  edible  gourd,  is  the  latter  half  of  the  Indian  name  for  it.  See 
note  in  Mid.  N.  Dream,  III,  i,  193. — Ed. 

193.  Egges  for  Money]  Capell:  Who  shall  trace  this  expression?  the  answer 
gives  us  its  import, —  that  Mamillius  is  bid  to  stand  and  deliver  by  it ;  nor  is  it  wholly 
chimerical  to  suppose  that  some  robber  in  early  time  made  this  his  expedient  to  keep 
clear  of  the  law ;  we  have  heard  of  methods  resembling  it. — Johnson  :  This  seems 
to  be  a  proverbial  expression,  used  when  a  man  sees  himself  wronged  and  makes  no 


3 


34 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


[193.  Egges  for  Money] 

resistance.  Its  original,  or  precise  meaning,  I  cannot  find,  but  I  believe  it  means, 
will  you  be  a  cuckold  for  hire.  The  cuckow  is  reported  to  lay  her  eggs  in  another 
bird’s  nest;  he,  therefore,  that  has  eggs  laid  in  his  nest  is  said  to  be  cucullatus, 
cuckowed,  or  cuckold. — Smith  (ap.  Grey,  i,  246)  :  The  meaning  of  this  is,  ‘  will  you 
put  up  affronts  ?’  The  French  have  a  proverbial  saying,  A  qui  vendez-vous  vos 
coquilles  ?  i.  e.  whom  do  you  design  to  affront  ?  Mamillius’s  answer  plainly  proves 
it.  ‘  No,  my  lord,  I’ll  fight.’  [There  might  be  some  appositeness  in  this  reference 
to  the  French  phrase,  if  coquilles  therein  meant  egg  shells,  in  the  first  place,  and  if 
it  bore  the  meaning  Smith  gives  to  it,  in  the  second.  Cotgrave  shows  that  coquillc 
here  refers  to  the  cockle  shells  (the  same  word)  worn  by  pilgrims  coming  from  the 
shrine  of  St.  Michel  in  Normandy  or  from  that  of  St.  James  of  Compostella.  Thus 
Cotgrave  :  ‘  A  qui  vendez  votes  vos  coquilles  ?  followed  by  h  ceux  qui  viennent  de  S. 
Michel  ?  Why  should  you  thinke  to  cousen  vs,  that  are  as  cunning  as  your  selues  ? 
tis  ill  haulting  before  a  criple.’  The  idea  conveyed  by  the  phrase,  still  current  in 
France,  is  not  of  ‘  affronting  ’  but  of  overreaching.  This  note  of  Smith  would  not 
have  been  worth  repeating  had  not  several  editors  accepted  it  without  investiga¬ 
tion. — Ed.] — Steevens:  See  A  Match  at  Midnight ,  1633: — ‘I  shall  have  eggs 
for  my  money ;  I  must  hang  myself.’  [Dodsley,  in  a  note  on  this  passage  (vii,  370, 
ed.  1825),  remarks  that  ‘  it  seems  intended  to  express  the  speaker’s  fears  that  he  shall 
receive  nothing,  or  only  trifles,  in  return  for  his  money.’ — Ed.] — Reed:  Leontes 
seems  only  to  ask  his  son  if  he  would  fly  from  an  enemy.  In  the  following  passage 
the  phrase  is  evidently  taken  in  that  sense :  ‘  The  French  infantery  skirmisheth 
bravely  afarre  off,  and  cavallery  gives  a  furious  onset  at  the  first  charge ;  but  after 
the  first  heat  they  will  take  eggs  for  their  money.’ — Relations  of  the  most  famous  King- 
domes  and  Commonwealths  thorowout  the  World,  1630,  p.  154.  Mamillius’s  reply  to 
his  father’s  question  appears  so  decisive  as  to  the  true  explanation  of  this  passage,  that 
it  leaves  no  doubt  with  me  even  after  I  have  read  the  following  note  [by  Boswell], 

The  phrase  undoubtedly  sometimes  means  what  Mr  Malone  asserts,  but  not  here. _ 

Boswell  :  In  A  Method  for  Travell.  Shewed  by  taking  the  view  of  France  as  it  stoode 
in  the yeere  of  our  Lord  ijipj,  by  Robert  Dallington,  no  date,  we  meet  with  the  very 
sentence  quoted  by  Mr  Reed,  given  as  a  translation  from  the  French.  This  is  the 
original :  ‘  L’infanterie  Frangoise  escaramouche  bravement  de  loin  et  la  Cavallerie  a 
une  furieuse  brutee  a  1’affront,  puis  apres  q’elle  s'accomode.' — Malone  :  This  phrase 
seems  to  me  to  have  meant  originally, — ‘  Are  you  such  a  poltroon  as  to  suffer  another 
to  use  you  as  he  pleases,  to  compel  you  to  give  him  your  money,  and  to  accept  of  a 
thing  of  so  small  a  value  as  a  few  eggs  in  exchange  for  it  ?’  This  explanation  appears 
to  me  perfectly  consistent  with  the  passage  quoted  by  Mr  Reed.  He  who  will  take 
eggs  for  money,  seems  to  be  what,  in  As  You  Like  It,  and  in  many  old  plays,  is 
called  a  ‘tame  snake.’  The  following  passage  in  Campion’s  History  of  Ireland, 
i633>  Mly  confirms  my  explanation  of  this  passage,  and  shows  that  it  means,  ‘  Will 
you  suffer  yourself  to  be  cajoled,  or  imposed  upon  ?’ — ‘  What  my  cousin  Desmond 
hath  compassed,  as  I  know  not,  so  I  beshrew  his  naked  heart  for  holding  out  so  long. 
— But  go  to,  suppose  hee  never  be  had ;  what  is  Kildare  to  blame  for  it,  more  than 
my  good  brother  of  Ossory,  who,  notwithstanding  his  high  promises,  having  also  the 
king’s  power,  is  glad  to  take  eggs  for  his  money,  and  to  bring  him  in  at  leisure.’ 
These  words  make  part  of  the  defense  of  the  Earl  of  Kildare  in  answer  to  a  charge 
brought  against  him  by  Cardinal  Wolsey,  that  he  had  not  been  sufficiently  active  in 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 

Mam.  No  (my  Lord)  lie  fight. 

Leo.  You  will: why  happy  man  be’s  dole.My  Brother 
Are  you  fo  fond  of  your  young  Prince,  as  we 
Doe  feeme  to  be  of  ours? 

Pol.  If  at  home  (Sir) 

He’s  all  my  Exercife,  my  Mirth,  my  Matter  ; 

Now  my  fworne  Friend,  and  then  mine  Enemy  ; 

My  Parafite,  my  Souldier:  Statef-man;  all : 

He  makes  a  Iulyes  day,  fhort  as  December, 

And  with  his  varying  child-neffe,  cures  in  me 
Thoughts,  that  would  thick  my  blood. 

Leo.  So  ftands  this  Squire 


35 

195 


200 


205 


194.  (my  Lord')']  Om.  Han. 

195.  will:]  Ff.  will !  or  will ?  Rowe 
et  seq. 

bis]  Ff,  Dyce,  Wh.  Sta.  Cam. 
Huds.  be  his  Cap.  et  cet. 

198-204.  Marked  as  mnemonic,  Pope. 
199.  He’s]  Hee's  F2.  Here’s  F3F4. 
all  my]  all  Rowe  i. 


201.  Statef-man;]  statesman,  Rowe. 

202.  December]  December's  Ktly, 
Huds. 

203.  childness]  childishness  Pope, 
Han. 

204.  would]  Jhould  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 
thick]  think  F^. 


endeavoring  to  take  the  Earl  of  Desmond,  then  in  rebellion.  In  this  passage  ‘  to  take 
eggs  for  his  money  ’  undoubtedly  means  ‘  to  be  trifled  with,  or  to  be  imposed  upon.’ 
*  For  money  ’  means  in  the  place  of  money.  [It  is  not  likely  that  at  this  late  day  the 
origin  of  the  phrase  can  be  discovered.  Its  connection  in  the  context  must  be  our 
guide  to  its  meaning.  Possibly,  many  Americans  would  be  puzzled  now-a-days  to 
give  the  origin  of  a  similar  current  phrase  :  ‘  he  paid  too  dear  for  his  whistle,’  and 
yet  this  latter  is  but  a  little  over  a  hundred  years  old. — Ed.] 

195.  dole]  Johnson:  May  his  ‘dole’  or  share  in  life  be  to  be  a  happy  man. — 
Nichols  :  The  alms  immemorially  given  to  the  poor  by  the  Archbishops  of  Canterbury 
is  still  called  the  ‘  dole.’  [Cotgrave  gives :  ‘  Donnde  :  f.  A  dole,  gift  or  distribution, 
a  donatiue.’] 

199,  etc.  Deighton  compares  these  lines  with  All's  Well,  I,  i,  180-189. 

201.  Parasite]  Cotgrave’s  vigorous  definition  of  this  word  gives  an  air  of  greater 
exaggeration  when  applied  to  a  little  boy  than  even  its  present  and  somewhat 
milder  use;  it  is  as  follows:  ‘a  trencher-friend,  or  bellie-friend ;  a  smell-feast, 
and  buffoone  at  feasts;  a  clawback,  flatterer,  soother,  smoother  for  good  cheare 
sake.’ — Ed. 

202.  Iulyes]  Note  the  accent  on  the  first  syllable.  I  think  Walker  has  some¬ 
where  noticed  this. — Ed. 

204.  thick  my  blood]  In  Batman  vppon  Bartholome,  lib.  iv,  cap.  11,  p.  33,  it  is 
stated  that  there  is  a  ‘  kindly  melancholy  ’  that  ‘  needeth  that  it  be  meddeled  with 
bloude,  to  make  the  bloude  apte  and  couenable  to  feede  the  melancholye  members; 
for  it  thickeneth  the  bloude,  that  it  fleete  not  from  digestion,  by  cleemesse  and  thin- 
nesse;’  where,  apparently,  thick  blood  is  a  blessing. — Ed. 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 

206 


36 

Offic’d  with  me  :  We  two  will  walke(my  Lord) 

And  leaue  you  to  your  grauer  fteps.  Hermione , 

How  thou  lou’ft  vs,  fhew  in  our  Brothers  welcome  ; 

Let  what  is  deare  in  Sicily,  be  cheape  : 

Next  to  thy  felfe,and  my  young  Rouer,  he’s  210 

Apparant  to  my  heart. 

Her.  If  you  would  feeke  vs, 

We  are  yours  i’th’Garden  :  fhall’s  attend  you  there  ? 

Leo.  To  your  owne  bents  difpofe  you  :  you’le  be  found, 

Be  you  beneath  the  Sky :  I  am  angling  now,  2 1 5 

(Though  you  perceiue  me  not  how  I  giue  Lyne) 

Goe  too,  goe  too. 

How  fhe  holds  vp  the  Neb  ?  the  Byll  to  him  ?  218 


207.  Hermione,]  Hermione.  F  F  . 
209.  deare]  deer  F  . 

21 1.  Apparant ]  Apparent  F4  et  seq. 

212.  would ]  wt7/Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Var.  ’73. 


214-221.  you'  le...one~\  Aside.  Cap. 
214.  you'le~\  you'd  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 

217.  [Aside,  observing  Her.  Rowe, 
eying  them,  as  they  go  out.  Cap. 

218.  Neb  .?]  nib  !  Rowe  ii. 


206.  Offic’d]  Deighton  :  In  ‘  squire  ’  and  ‘  officed  ’  there  is  an  allusion  to  the 
duties  of  an  attendant  upon  a  knight. 

206.  walke]  See  Lear  III,  iv,  in:  ‘  He  begins  at  curfew  and  walks  at  first 
cock,’  lb.  IV,  vii,  83;  Oth.  IV,  iii,  9  (in  this  ed.),  where  ‘walk’  means,  as  here,  to 
•withdraw  or  retire. 

210.  Rouer]  Halliwell:  Literally,  an  archer;  but  the  term  seems  here  to  be 
used  as  one  of  familiarity  applied  to  a  frolicsome  child.  In  Cynthia's  Revels  [I,  i], 
Mercury  calls  Cupid,  ‘  my  little  rover.’  [Unquestionably  ‘  rover  ’  may  mean  an 
archer,  but  it  not  easy  to  see  the  force  of  this  meaning  in  the  present  passage.  As 
applied  to  Cupid,  who  immediately  after  (in  Cynthia's  Revels')  refers  to  his  quiver,  it 
has  a  propriety  which  is  lacking  in  the  case  of  Florizel.  ‘  Rover  ’  refers  quite  as 
much  to  one  who  wanders  as  to  one  who  shoots  with  a  bow.  Sherwood  translates 
‘  Rouer  ’  by  Ribleur,  which  in  turn  is  defined  by  Cotgrave  as  ‘  A  disorderlie  roauer, 
ietter,  swaggerer,  outragious  reakes-player ;  a  robber,  ramsacker,  boot-haler,  preyer 
upon  passengers,  etc.’  Again,  a  terrible  array  of  epithets  to  apply  to  little  Florizel. 
Clearly  ‘  rover,’  when  not  applied  to  an  archer,  was  formerly  a  more  forcible  epithet 
than  it  is  now,  and  in  the  present  passage  marks  the  playful  affection  of  Leontes. 
There  is  no  hint  of  archery  in  Cotgrave. — Ed.] 

21 1.  Apparant]  Johnson:  That  is,  heir  apparent,  or  the  next  claimant. 

212.  etc.  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

213.  shall’s]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  ii) :  That  is,  shall  us,  that  is,  shall  we.  It 
occurs  elsewhere.  This  play  is  full  of  such  reckless  writing.  Much  of  it  must  be 
left  to  the  reader’s  own  disentanglement. 

218.  Neb]  It  cannot  be  said  with  positiveness  whether  this  is  the  mouth,  the 
nose,  or  the  face, — for  each  one  there  is  authority.  Steevens  asserts  that  it  refers 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


37 


And  armes  her  with  the  boldneffe  of  a  Wife 

To  her  allowing  Husband.  Gone  already,  220 

Ynch-thick,  knee-deepe;ore  head  and  eares  a  fork’d  one. 

Goe  play  (Boy)  play  :  thy  Mother  playes,  and  I 

Play  too; but  fo  difgrac’d  a  part,  whofe  iffue 

Will  hiffe  me  to  my  Graue:  Contempt  and  Clamor 

Will  be  my  Knell.  Goe  play  (Boy)  play,  there  haue  been  225 

(Or  I  am  much  deceiu’d)  Cuckolds  ere  now, 

And  many  a  man  there  is(euen  at  this  prefent, 

Now,  while  I  fpeake  this)  holds  his  Wife  by  th’Arme, 

That  little  thinkes  the  ha’s  been  fluyc’d  in’s  abfence, 

And  his  Pond  fifh’d  by  his  next  Neighbor  (by  230 


219.  [Exeunt  Polix.  Her.  and  Attend¬ 
ants.  Manent,  Leo.  Mam.  and  Cam. 
Rowe. 

221.  Ynch-thick ,  knee-deepe]  Inch 
thick,  knee  deep  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 


221.  eares  a J  ears, — a  Var.  ’73. 

228.  Arme,~\  Arm.  F,. 

229.  in  .r]  in  his  Cap.  Rann,  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Ktly,  Wh.  ii. 


to  the  mouth,  and  cites  from  Painter’s  Palace  of  Pleasure,  1566: — ‘the  amorous 
wormes  of  loue  did  bitterly  gnaw  and  teare  his  heart  with  the  nebs  of  their  forked 
heades.’ — Anne  of  Hungarie  [vol.  ii,  p.  229,  ed.  Haslewood],  where,  assuredly, 
‘  gnaw  ’  cannot  apply  to  noses.  Halliwell  says  that  the  ‘  neb,’  in  early  English, 
was  generally  used  for  the  nose,  and  that  ‘  this  appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  word 
in  the  text.  Leontes  speaks  afterwards  of  their  “  meeting  noses.”  Hence  to  kiss. 
“  Shal’s  not  busse,  knight?  shal’s  not  neb,” — Two  Maids  of  Moreclacke,  1609.’ 
Dycf.  follows  Halliwell  and  refers  to  Jamieson,  where  the  word  is  defined  as  ‘  the 
nose ;  now  used  rather  in  a  ludicrous  sense  ;  as  long  neb,  a  long  nose.  Hence  Lang- 
nebbit,  Sharp-nebbit,’  etc.  in  Middle  English,  ‘  neb  ’  meant  the  face,  as  in  The 
Ancren  Riwle  :  ‘  He  com  him  siilf  a-last,  and  scheawede  hire  his  feire  neb,  ase  pe 
pet  was  of  alle  men  veirest  for  to  biholden.’ — p.  35,  Middle  English  Primer,  ed. 
Sweet.  It  may  be  readily  surmised  that  the  confusion  between  mouth  and  nose  arises 
in  the  case  of  a  bird  from  the  fact  that  its  bill  is  certainly  its  mouth,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  it  may  be  supposed,  as  the  most  prominent  feature,  to  be  the  nose.  In  the  pres¬ 
ent  line,  I  prefer  to  understand  ‘  neb  ’  as  the  mouth,  especially  since  ‘  Byll  ’  immedi¬ 
ately  follows.  When  ‘  doves  sit  a-billing '  (V.  <E"  A.  366)  it  is  hardly  to  be  supposed 
that  they  do  so  with  their  noses. — Ed. 

220.  allowing]  Johnson:  ‘Allowing’  in  old  language  is  approving. — R.  G. 
White  (ed.  i)  :  That  is,  to  her  accordant  husband;  or  rather,  perhaps,  to  her  hus¬ 
band,  with  whom  it  is  allowable  that  she  should  be  so  bold. — Staunton  :  That  is, 
probably,  her  allowed,  her  lawful  husband. 

224.  Clamour]  Walker  has  an  Article  ( Crit .  i,  156)  on  the  meaning  of  ‘clam¬ 
our  ’  in  Shakespeare,  which  he  finds  in  many  places  means  wailing.  I  doubt  that 
the  present  can  be  added  to  his  list.  ‘  Clamour  ’  here  is  rather  the  derisive  shouts  of 
Leontes’s  subjects.  Its  use  as  a  verb  in  IV,  iv,  277  has  given  rise  to  much  discus¬ 
sion. — Ed. 


38 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  I,  SC.  ii. 


Sir  Smile,  his  Neighbor:)  nay,  there’s  comfort  in’t,  23 1 

Whiles  other  men  haue  Gates,  and  thofe  Gates  open’d 

(As  mine)againft  their  will.  Should  all  defpaire 

That  haue  reuolted  Wiues,the  tenth  of  Mankind 

Would  hang  themfelues.  Phyfick  for’t,  there’s  none  :  235 

It  is  a  bawdy  Planet,  that  will  ftrike 

Where  ’tis  predominant;and  ’tis  powrefull:  thinke  it  : 

From  Eaft,  Weft,  North,  and  South,  be  it  concluded, 

No  Barricado  for  a  Belly.  Know’t, 

It  will  let  in  and  out  the  Enemy,  240 

With  bag  and  baggage  :  many  thoufand  on’s 
Haue  the  Difeafe,and  feele’t  not.  How  now  Boy? 

Mam.  I  am  like  you  fay.  243 


231.  Smile]  Smil  F3F4. 

235.  there’s ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Wh.  Sta. 
Cam.  there  is  Pope  et  cet. 

237-241.  and 'tis... baggage]  In  mar¬ 
gin,  Han.  ‘  Cashiered,  as  infamous, 
senseless  ribaldry,  stuck  in  by  some  prof¬ 
ligate  player.’ — Warb. 

238.  Wef]  Weajl  F2. 

South,]  south :  Cap.  south. 
Var.  ’73. 

239.  Belly.  Know't,]  belly ;  know’t ; 


Cap.  Dyce,  Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  belly.  Know 
it  Rax.  ’73,  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Knt, 
Coll.  Ktly. 

241.  many  ...on's]  F2F3,  Cap.  Dyce, 
Ktly,  Cam.  Wh.  ii.  Rife,  Dtn.  many  a... 
one’s  F^.  Many  a...of’s  Rowe+.  many 
a. ..of  us  Var.  ’73,  Mai.  Steev.  Var. 
many. ..of  us  Knt.  many  a. ..on's  Coll. 
Wh.  i,  Sta. 

243.  you  fay]  you  they  fay  Ff  et 
seq. 


231.  Sir  Smile]  Possibly  suggested  by  a  smile  on  the  face  of  Polixenes,  whom 
Leontes  is  furtively  watching. — Ed. 

232.  Whiles]  The  temporal  genitive  of  while.  '  Gates  ’  is  carrying  out  the  simile 
of  ‘  fluyc’d.’ — Ed. 

236,  237.  Planet,  that  will  strike  Where  ’tis  predominant]  Cf.  Edmund’s 
speech  in  Lear,  I,  ii,  114 :  ‘we  make  guilty  of  our  disasters  the  sun,  the  moon,  and 
the  stars ;  as  if  we  were  villains  on  necessity,  fools  by  heavenly  compulsion,  knaves, 
thieves,  and  treachers,  by  spherical  predominance,  drunkards,  liars,  and  adulterers  by 
an  enforced  obedience  to  planetary  influence.’ 

241.  on’s]  Collier:  If  Malone  chose  to  alter  on  to  of,  he  ought,  for  the 
sake  of  the  verse,  to  have  read  of’s ;  *  on’s  ’  is  an  abbreviation  for  the  sake 
of  the  verse,  and  the  language  of  the  time ;  fidelity,  metre,  and  custom  require 
its  preservation.  [The  Textual  Notes  will  show  that  Malone  was  not  the  first  to 
make  the  change  to  of,  and  that  Rowe,  nigh  ninety  years  before  Malone,  had 
read  of’s. — Ed.] — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  ‘On’  is  now  commonly  used  in  New 
England  for  of. 

243’  you  say]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  It  may  possibly  be  doubted  whether  we  ought 
not  to  read,  ‘  I  am  like  you,  you  say,’  the  old  printer  having  omitted  the  repetition  of 
the  pronoun  you.  Leontes  has  previously  told  Mamillius  that  they  are  said  to  be 
alike,  *  Yet  they  say  we  are  Almost  as  like  as  eggs.’ 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


39 


Leo.  Why, that’s  fome  comfort. 

What  ?  Camillo  there  ?  245 

Cain.  I,  my  good  Lord. 

Leo.  Goe  play (Mamillius) thou’rt  an  honeft  man: 

Camillo,  this  great  Sir  will  yet  flay  longer. 

Cam.  You  had  much  adoe  to  make  his  Anchor  hold, 

When  you  caft  out,  it  ftill  came  home.  250 

Leo.  Didft  note  it? 

Qam.  He  would  not  flay  at  your  Petitions,  made 
His  Bufineffe  more  materiall. 

Leo.  Didft  perceiue  it  ? 

They’re  here  with  me  already; whifp’ring,  rounding  :  255 


245.  What ?]  What?  is  Han.  Johns. 
Cap. 

there?]  art  there?  Sta.  conj. 
(Athen.  4  Apr.  1874). 

247.  [Exit  Mam.  Rowe. 

Scene  III.  Pope,  Han. 

249.  his  Anchor ]  the  anchor  Han. 


252.  Petitions,  made ]  petitions  made  ; 
Pope  + .  petitions  ;  made  Cap,  et  cet. 

255.  [Aside.  Han.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Sta. 
Ktly,  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 

whifp'  ring,  rounding ]  whisp’- 
ring  round  Han. 


244,  245.  Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  91)  would  arrange  these  two  lines  as  one  of  verse, 
wherein  no  gain  is  perceptible  either  for  eye  or  ear;  moreover,  it  leaves  line  243 
a  hemistich,  while  at  present  it  forms  a  line  with  244. — Ed. 

247.  thou’rt]  Deighton  thinks  that  Leontes  here  compares  Mamillius  with  him¬ 
self,  and  means  that  ‘  thou  art  not  disgraced  as  I  am.’  The  comparison  is,  I  think, 
rather  with  Polixenes,  and  ‘  thou  ’  is  strongly  emphatic  :  ‘  thou,  at  least,  art  honest.’ 
—Ed. 

250.  came  home]  Steevens  :  That  is,  the  anchor  would  not  hold.  [Note  that 
‘still’  here  means,  as  usual,  continually .] 

252.  stay]  Heath  :  This  doth  not  mean,  in  this  place,  to  tarry,  but  to  put  off,  or 
delay, 

253.  more  materiall]  Steevens  :  That  is,  the  more  you  requested  him  to 
stay,  the  more  urgent  he  represented  that  business  to  be  which  summoned  him 
away. 

255.  They’re  here  with  me]  Thirlby:  Not  Polixenes  and  Hermione,  but 
casual  observers.  [Be  it  remembered  that,  as  in  Hanmer’s  text,  this  is  an  aside. — 
Ed.]  Collier:  This  means ‘they  are  aware  of  my  condition.’  [Staunton,  after 
quoting  both  of  these  observations,  exclaims,  ‘  Strange  forgetfulness  of  a  common  form 
of  speech!’  and  then  continues].  By  ‘They’re  here  with  me  already,’  the  king 
means, — the  people  are  already  mocking  me  with  this  opprobrious  gesture  (the 
cuckold’s  emblem  with  their  fingers),  and  whispering,  etc.  So  in  Cor.  Ill,  ii,  74, — 
‘  Go  to  them,  with  this  bonnet  in  thy  hand ;  And  thus  far  having  stretch’d  it  (here  be 
with  them).’  [Staunton  strangely  omits  the  next  line  wherein  lies  the  whole  point 
of  the  speech : — ‘  Thy  knee  bussing  the  stones.’  It  is  this  action  of  kneeling  to 
which  Volumnia  refers  when  she  says  to  Coriolanus :  ‘  here  be  with  them.’  In  his 


40 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  I,  sc.  ii. 


[255.  They’re  here  with  me] 

note  on  Cor.  ad  loc.  Staunton  aptly  cites  from  Brome’s  A  Jovial  Crew ,  or  the  Merry 
Beggars,  II,  i,  where  Springlove,  describing  his  having  solicited  alms  as  a  cripple, 
says, — ‘  “  For  here  I  was  with  him.”  [Halts.’  In  The  Athentsum  (4  April,  1874) 
Staunton  afterwards  adduced  more  examples  in  support  of  this  interpretation  of  his, 
which  is  clearly  the  right  one,  though  I  much  doubt  that  Leontes  goes  so  far  as  to 
make  openly  the  gesture  which  Staunton  says  was  the  popular  sign  of  derision ; — 
‘This  gesture  was  by  lifting  one  hand  to  the  forehead,  and  spreading  forth  two 
fingers  like  a  pair  of  horns.’  ‘Nothing,’  continues  Staunton,  ‘proves  the  incon¬ 
ceivable  zest  with  which  our  forefathers  enjoyed  every  allusion  to  conjugal  infidelity, 
especially  on  the  wife’s  side,  more  than  the  frequent  use  of  the  word  “  cuckold,”  and 
the  sign  which  was  its  typical  representative.  Owing  to  the  paucity  of  stage  directions 
in  our  early  plays,  the  extent  to  which  the  latter  practice  was  carried  can  only  be 
inferred  ;  but  it  must  have  been  as  common  nearly  as  the  word  it  supplied  or  accom¬ 
panied.  In  Chapman’s  Bussy  d’Ambots,  I,  i,  Monsieur,  the  brother  of  the  king 
desiring  to  insult  Mountsurry,  a  noble  of  the  Court,  asks,— “  What  if  one  should 
make  Horns  at  Mountsurry?  would  it  strike  him  jealous?”  etc.  He  presently 
suits  the  action  to  the  word,  and  the  dialogue  proceeds :  “  Mount.  How  mon¬ 
strous  is  this?  Mons.  Why?  Mount.  You  make  me  horns!”  The  wife  of 
Mountsurry  enters,  and  the  husband,  in  an  agony  of  rage,  exclaims, — “  The  man 
that  left  me  .  .  .  stabb’d  me  to  the  heart,  thus,  with  his  fingers.”  In  Decker’s  Old 
Fortunatus,  the  stage  direction  has  been  preserved,— “  Thus  shall  his  sawcie  browes 
adorned  be.  [Makes  horns.”  Even  so  late  as  Wycherly,  the  same  instruction  is 
sometimes  met  with.  In  his  Country  Wife,  I,  i,  ed.  1712  [is  an  example  which  it  is 
needless  to  repeat  here.  It  does  not  illustrate  the  phrase  in  hand,  but  merely  repeats 
the  stage  direction  Makes  Horns.  lor  the  same  reason  I  omitted  an  example  from 
Massinger’s  Fatal  Dowry,  V,  ii. — Ed.]  But  the  best  illustration  of  the  words  of 
Leontes,  and  a  remarkable  proof  how  prevalent  this  gesture  was,  occurs  in  Chapman’s 
May  Day,  where  at  the  end  of  Act  IV,  Faunio  says  of  his  Master,— “  As  often  as 
he  tumes  his  backe  to  me,  I  shall  be  here  V  with  him,  that’s  certaine.”  The  V  which 
no  commentator  has  understood,  representing  the  actor’s  fingers  in  making  horns.’ 
Staunton  then  goes  on  to  show  at  some  length  that  in  ‘  Webster  and  Decker’s  North¬ 
ward  Ho,  an  empty  parenthesis  ‘  (  )  ’  typified  a  pandar.’  Hogarth  has  given  a  rep¬ 
resentation  of  this  gesture  in  his  picture  of  ‘  The  Idle  Apprentice,’  on  his  way,  in  a 
boat,  to  the  Transport  Ship. — Ed. 

255.  rounding]  Deighton  quotes  from  Earle  (Phil,  of  the  Eng.  Tongue,  93,  94)  : 
The  name  Runic  was  so  called  from  the  term  which  was  used  by  our  barbarian  ances¬ 
tors  to  designate  the  mystery  of  alphabetic  writing.  This  was  Run,  sing.,  Rune,  pi. 

.  .  .  This  word  Run  signified  mystery  or  secret;  and  a  verb  of  this  root  was  in  use 
down  to  a  comparatively  recent  date  in  English  literature,  as  an  equivalent  for  the 
verb  ‘  to  whisper.  In  Chaucer’s  Friar's  Tale  (71 32)  the  Sompnour  is  described  as 
drawing  near  to  his  travelling  companion,—'  Ful  prively,  and  rouned  in  his  ere,’  i.  e. 
quite  confidentially,  and  whispered  in  his  ear.  It  was  also  much  used  in  mediaeval 
ballads  for  the  chirping  of  birds  (as  being  unintelligible  except  to  a  few  who  were 
wiser  than  their  neighbours) ;  and  again,  of  any  kind  of  discourse,  but  mostly  of  pri¬ 
vate  or  privileged  communication  in  council  or  conference.  .  .  .  This  rown  became 
rownd  and  round  on  the  principle  of  n  drawing  a  d  after  it.  .  .  .  As  in  The  Faery 
Queene,  III,  x,  30,  ‘And  in  his  eare  him  rownded  close  behinde.’ 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  4 1 

Sicilia  is  a  fo-forth  :  ’tis  farre  gone,  256 

When  I  fhall  guft  it  laft.  How  cam’t  ( Camillo ) 

That  he  did  flay  ? 

Cam.  At  the  good  Queenes  entreatie. 

Leo.  At  the  Queenes  be’t  :  Good  fhould  be  pertinent,  260 
But  fo  it  is,  it  is  not.  Was  this  taken 
By  any  vnderftanding  Pate  but  thine  ? 

For  thy  Conceit  is  foaking,  will  draw  in  263 


256.  is  a  fo-forth ]  is  a — so  forth  Han.  263.  thy  Conceit ]  the  conceit  F3F4, 

Rann,  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce  ii,  Rowe  i. 

Wh.  Sta.  is — and  so  forth  Mai.  conj.  is  foaking]  in  soaking  Grey. 


256.  Sicilia  is]  Collier’s  punctuation  of  this  phrase  :  ‘  “  Sicilia  is  a  ” — so-forth,’  so 
clearly  indicates  the  meaning,  and  the  aversion  of  Leontes  to  utter  an  abhorrent  word, 
that  the  long  notes  of  Steevens  and  of  Malone  are,  I  think,  quite  needless. — Ed. 

256.  so-forth]  Staunton  ( Athenceum ,  27  June,  1874) :  Neither  the  peculiar 
phrase  to  be  here,  with,  nor  the  expression  a  so-forth  immediately  following  it,  has 
any  right  to  come  under  the  category  of  corruptions ;  their  real  pregnancy  has  been 
hitherto  overlooked.  We  have  no  evidence  to  show  that  a  so-forth  was  ever  a  vox 
signata  for  a  dishonoured  husband.  When  Leontes  exclaims,  ‘  Sicilia  is  a  so-forth,’ 
his  meaning  appears  to  be  no  more  than  that  he  is  already  spoken  of  as  a  scorned 
and  disreputable  thing ;  and  how  the  expression  came  to  bear  this  sense  is  not  cer¬ 
tain.  It  may  have  been  derived,  as  the  late  Rev.  Joseph  Hunter  thought,  from  the 
abbreviations  adopted  by  Heralds  when  proclaiming  the  titles  of  eminent  personages, 
as  ‘  King  of  Great  Britain,  France,  Ireland,  and  so-forth.’  Or  the  evil  sense  may  have 
been  acquired  from  the  legal  proclamations  of  degraded  persons,  as  ‘  Rogues,  vaga¬ 
bonds,  sturdy  beggars,  and  so-forth.’  Or,  which  is  very  probable,  it  obtained  its  bad 
meaning  from  being  like — ‘  The  shrug,  the  “  hum,”  or  “  ha,”  ’ — one  of  the  petty 
brands  of  Calumny  to  sear  a  victim.  There  can  be  no  doubt  with  those  well  read  in 
our  old  drama  that  et  cetera  in  like  manner,  from  being  used  to  express  vaguely  what 
a  writer  or  speaker  hesitated  to  call  by  its  plain  name,  came  at  length  to  signify  the 
object  itself.  ‘  Yea,  forsooth,’  is  possibly  another  case  in  point.  The  Puritanical  cit¬ 
izens,  who  were  afraid  of  a  good  air-splitting  oath,  and  indulged  only  in  mealy- 
mouthed  protestations,  got  the  name  of  ‘  yea-forsooths.’  [For  a  continuation  of  this 
note,  see  Mid.  N.  Dream,  III,  ii,  419  in  this  edition.] 

257.  gust]  Steevens:  That  is,  taste  it. — Malone:  ‘Dedecus  ille  domus  sciet 
ultimus.’ — Juvenal,  Sat.  x.  [342]. 

261.  so  it  is]  Staunton  :  That  is,  But  as  you  apply  the  word,  it  is  not.  [Rather, 
I  think :  So  it  happens,  it  is  not. — Ed.] 

263.  Conceit]  That  is,  conception,  thought. 

263.  soaking]  Steevens  :  That  is,  thy  conceit  is  of  an  absorbent  nature,  will 
draw  in  more,  etc. 

263.  will  draw  in]  R.  G.  White:  The  omission  of  a  pronoun  or  conjunction 
here,  as  just  above,  ‘  made  his  business  more  material,’  is  a  characteristic  trait  of  the 
style  of  Elizabethan  dramatic  writers.  It  occurs  often  in  these  plays,  in  none  oftener 
than  in  this. 


42 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


More  then  the  common  Blocks.  Not  noted,  is’t, 

But  of  the  finer  Natures?  by  fome  Seueralls 
Of  Head-peece  extraordinarie?  Lower  Meffes 
Perchance  are  to  this  Bufineffe  purblind  ?  fay. 

Cam.  Bufineffe,  my  Lord  ?  I  thinke  moft  vnderftand 
Bohemia  ftayes  here  longer. 


265 


269 


264.  Blocks.  Not ]  Blocks,  Not  Fy  267 .purblind?]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt, 
Blocks,  not  F4,  Rowe  i.  Blocks;  not  Dyce,  Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  purblind :  Cap. 
Rowe  ii,  et  seq.  et  cet.  (subs.). 


264.  Blocks]  According  to  Nares,  the  wooden  mould  on  which  the  crown  of  a 
hat  is  formed.  Hence,  it  required  no  great  flight  of  imagination  to  transfer  the 
wood  from  the  mould  of  the  hat  to  the  head  which  the  hat  covered.  Murray 
(N  E.  D.)  gives  examples,  beginning  with  Ralph  Roister  Doister,  1553,  where 
‘ block  ’  is  used  for  blockhead;  and  Schmidt  gives  several  examples  from  Shake¬ 
speare,  among  them  the  present  passage ;  but  I  doubt  the  exact  propriety  of  this 
interpretation  here.  It  is  the  absorbent  quality  of  wooden  hat-blocks  which  Leontes 
has  in  mind  when  he  speaks  of  Camillo’s  conceit  as  ‘  soaking,’  and  that  ‘  blocks  ’  may 
mean  blockheads  is  only  a  subaudition. — Ed. 

265.  Seueralls]  For  examples  of  adjectives  used  as  nouns,  see  Abbott,  §  5. 

266.  Head-peece]  The  choice  of  the  word  was,  possibly,  still  influenced  by 
‘  block.’ — Ed. 


266.  extraordinarie]  The  sense  requires  that  both  extra  and  ordinarie  should 
have  full  expression,  but  at  the  cost  of  rhythm,  or,  rather,  of  an  iambic  pentameter. 
Under  the  influence  of  deep  emotion,  and  especially  in  this  play,  I  think  the  limit 
of  five  feet  gave  Shakespeare  but  little  concern,  as  long  as  an  iambic  measure  is  pre¬ 
served.  It  is  strange  that  Walker  has  not  noticed  this  word;  perhaps  fortunately; 
he  would  have  pronounced  it  ex trornary. — Ed. 


266.  Messes]  Steevens  :  I  believe  ‘  lower  messes  ’  is  only  used  as  an  expression 
to  signify  the  lowest  degree  about  the  court.  Formerly  not  only  at  every  great  man’s 
table  the  visitants  were  placed  according  to  their  consequence  or  dignity,  but  with 
additional  marks  of  inferiority,  viz.  of  sitting  below  the  great  salt-cellar  placed  in  the 
centre  of  the  table,  and  of  having  coarser  provisions  set  before  them.  Cf.  Beaumont 
&  Fletcher :  « nor  should  there  stand  .  .  .  uncut-up  pies  at  the  nether  end,  filled 
with  moss  and  stones,  partly  to  make  a  show  with,  and  partly  to  keep  the  lower  mess 
from  eating.’  Woman-Hater,  I,  ii.  Leontes  comprehends  inferiority  of  under¬ 
standing  in  the  idea  of  inferiority  of  rank.— Collier  (ed  ii)  :  Each  four  diners  at  an 
Inn  of  Court  are  still  said  to  constitute  a  mess. 

267.  purblind]  Skeat  ( Etym .  Diet.)  :  The  original  sense  was  wholly  blind,  as  in 
Rob.  of  Glouc.  p.  376  :  ‘  Me  ssolde  pulte  oute  bope  is  eye  and  makye  him  pur  blind  ’ 
=  they  should  put  out  both  his  eyes  and  make  him  quite  blind.  Sir  T.  Elyot  writes 
porebtind.  The  Governour ,  b.  ii,  c.  3.  .  .  .  Even  in  Shakespeare  we  have  both 
senses:  (1)  wholly  blind,  Love's  L.  L.  Ill,  i,  181  ;  Rom.  &  Jul.  II,  i,  12;  and  (2) 
partly  blind,  V  and  A.  679;  1  Hen.  VI:  II,  iv,  21.  It  is  clear  that  ‘  wholly  blind’ 
is  the  original  sense  .  .  .  whilst  <  partly  blind  ’  is  a  secondary  sense,  due  perhaps  to 
some  confusion  with  the  verb  to  pore,  as  shown  by  the  spelling  poreblind.  Purblind 
—  pure-blind,  1.  e.  wholly  blind.  [As  in  the  present  instance.] 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


43 


Leo .  Ha  ?  270 

Cam.  Stayes  here  longer. 

Leo.  I,  but  why  ? 

Cam.  To  fatisfie  your  Highneffe,and  the  Entreaties 
Of  our  moft  gracious  Miftresse. 

Leo.  Satisfie  ?  275 

Th’entreaties  of  your  Miftreffe?  Satisfie  ? 

Let  that  fuffice.  I  haue  trufted  thee(Camillo) 

With  all  the  neereft  things  to  my  heart,  as  well 
My  Chamber-Councels,  wherein(Prieft-like)thou  279 


271.  Continued  to  Leon.,  Han. 
Stayes]  Bohemia  stays  Cap. 

274.  Miflreffe~\  Mijlris  F2F3. 

275.  Satisfie  I]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Satisfy  !  Cam.  Wh.  ii.  Satisfy  Theob. 
et  cet. 


277.  /  haue\  I've  Pope-1- ,  Dyce  ii, 
iii. 

278.  neereft  things  to~]  nearft  things  to 
F3F4,  Sta.  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii.  things 
nearest  Pope  +  . 

as  well~\  with  all  Han. 


270.  Ha  ?]  Leontes  evidently  expected  a  different  conclusion  to  Camillo’s  sentence, 
after  mentioning  Bohemia. — Ed. 

270,  272.  Staunton  ( Athenceum ,  27  June,  1874) :  Here  the  blank  verse  halts 
sadly.  To  restore  its  integrity  we  might  read  :  ‘  Leo.  Ha  ?  Ha  ?  Cam.  Stays  here 
longer,  Sir.  Leo.  Ay,  but  why  ?  Why  stays  ?'  Dropped  words  and  letters  are  not 
unfrequent  in  this  play,  and  no  omissions  are  more  frequent  than  those  of  iterated 
words.  With  regard  to  the  addition  of  Sir  to  Camillo’s  curt — Stay  here  longer ;  it 
is,  perhaps,  not  more  called  for  by  the  verse  than  by  the  respect  due  from  the  speaker 
to  the  exalted  personage  addressed. — Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  145),  to  complete  the  metre 
of  line  272  would  read  : — ‘  Ay,  but  why,  but  why  ?'  ‘  Expressive  of  impatience  at 

Camillo’s  not  returning  the  answer  he  expected.’ 

278.  neerest]  See  Walker’s  note  on  ‘  dearest,’  line  109  supra.  Similar  trans¬ 
positions  of  the  adjective  (that  is  ‘  nearest  things  to  my  heart  ’  instead  of  ‘  things 
nearest  to  my  heart’)  are  numberless  in  Shakespeare.  Walker  has  gathered  many 
examples,  not  alone  from  Shakespeare,  but  from  the  Elizabethan  poets  generally.  If 
necessary,  see  his  Article  ( Crit .  i,  160). 

278.  as  well]  Capell  (164) :  As  after  ‘  well  ’  were  useful  to  give  clearness  to  the 
expression  ;  the  intended  sense  there  being  (as  ’tis  conceived) — as  well  as  with  all 
such  councils  as  are  entrusted  to  those  of  my  chamber,  meaning — cabinet.  [Keightley 
adopted  Capell’s  conjecture.] 

279.  Chamber-Councels]  Sufficient  importance  has  not  been  given  to  the  full 
meaning  of  this  passage.  Indeed,  I  do  not  know  that  attention  has  ever  been  called 
to  it,  or  to  the  bearing  which  it  has  on  the  sudden  jealousy  of  Leontes.  These  private 
chamber- councils  involved  no  questions  of  state,  or  government,  but  were  concerned 
with  the  private  life  of  Leontes,  with  impure  deeds  from  which  the  bosom  of  Leontes 
should  be  cleansed,  and  for  which  he  should  repent,  and  depart  a  penitent.  This 
reference  to  the  past  life  of  Leontes  brings  his  character  into  harmony  with  what  is 
known  to  experts  in  Mental  Diseases,  that  those  patients  who  are  victims  of  sudden 
attacks  of  insane  jealousy  are,  at  times,  not  free  from  the  reproach  which  they 
insanely  ascribe  to  the  objects  of  their  suspicion. — Ed. 


44 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i  sc.  ii. 

280 


Haft  cleans’d  my  Bofome:  I,  from  thee  departed 
Thy  Penitent  reform’d  :  but  we  haue  been 
Deceiu’d  in  thy  Integritie,deceiu’d 
In  that  which  feemes  fo. 

Cam .  Be  it  forbid  (my  Lord.) 

Leo.  To  bide  vpon’t  :  thou  art  not  honeft :  or  285 

If  thou  inclin’d;  that  way,  thou  art  a  Coward, 

Which  hoxes  honeftie  behind,  reftrayning 

From  Courfe  requir’d  :  or  elfe  thou  muft  be  counted 

A  Seruant,  grafted  in  my  ferious  Truft, 

And  therein  negligent  :  or  elfe  a  Foole,  290 

That  feeft  a  Game  play’d  home,  the  rich  Stake  drawne, 

And  tak’ft  it  all  for  ieafh 

Cam.  My  gracious  Lord ,  203 


280.  I. ..departed]  I  have  departed 
from  thee  Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  92). 

284.  (my  Lord!)]  Ff.  my  lord.  Rowe, 
Pope,  my  lord —  Tkeob.  Warb.  Johns. 
my  lord?  Han.  ii.  my  lord!  Han.  i  et  cet. 


285.  vpon’t  .‘I  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
upon't , —  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Cam. 
upon’t ; —  Theob.  et  cet.  (subs.). 

287.  hoxes]  hockles  Han. 

292.  ieaji]  jejt  F3F4. 


280.  I,  from  thee]  This  excellent  reading  of  the  Folio  :  ‘  Ay,  from  thee  departed  ’ 
has  remained  quite  unnoted.  It  would  not  have  escaped  Walker  had  the  Folio  ever 
been  before  him ;  he  felt  the  need  of  something  more  than  the  simple  aorist,  and 
would  not,  probably,  have  offered  his  conjecture  (see  Text.  Notes)  had  he  noticed 
that  ‘  I  have  ’  is  in  this  line  continued  from  line  277,  and  that  ‘  I  ’  is  in  reality  the 
intensive  affirmation  of  Leontes  that  not  only  had  Camillo  been  his  ghostly  con¬ 
fessor,  but  had  even  reformed  him. — Ed. 

283.  seemes  so]  That  is,  which  seems  like  integrity. 

285.  To  bide  vpon’t]  Dyce  (Notes,  79) :  This  is  here  equivalent  to— My  abiding 
opinion  is.  Compare  Beaumont  &  Fletcher’s  King  and  No  King,  IV,  iii ‘  Cap¬ 
tain,  thou  art  a  valiant  gentleman  ;  To  abide  upon’t,  a  very  valiant  man  ’ ;  and  Potts’s 
Discovene  of  Witches  in  the  Countie  of  Lancaster,  1613  : — ‘  the  wife  of  the  said  Peter 
then  said,  to  abide  upon  it,  I  thinke  that  my  husband  will  neuer  mend,’  etc. — Murray 

(N  E.  D.)  gives  the  present  passage,  with  the  meaning:  To  dwell  or  insist  upon 
(a  point). 


287.  hoxes]  Eastwood  &  Wright:  Hough  (Josh,  xi,  6,  9;  2  Sam.  viii,  4)  is  to 
cut  the  ham  strings  or  back  sinews  (A.-S.  hah)  of  cattle  so  as  to  disable  them.  In  the 
later  version  of  Wiclif  the  first  quoted  passage  is  given,—'  Thou  schalt  hoxe  the  horsis 
of  hem.’  While  in  the  earlier  version  it  is  ‘  The  hors  of  hem  thow  shall  kut  of  the 
synewis  at  the  knees.’  Box  is  the  form  found  in  Shakespeare.  The  Scotch  hoch  is 
used  in  the  same  way, 

287.  restrayning]  Staunton  ( Athenaum ,  27  June,  1874)  :  The  sense  apparently 
demands  that  we  should  read  ‘  restraining  it’  -  and  an  additional  unaccented  syllable 

or  even  more,  after  the  tenth,  which  bears  the  ictus,  violates  no  rule  of  English  heroic 
verse. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


45 


I  may  be  negligent,  foolifh,  and  fearefull, 

In  euery  one  of  thefe,  no  man  is  free,  295 

But  that  his  negligence,  his  folly,  feare, 

Among  the  infinite  doings  of  the  World, 

Sometimes  puts  forth  in  your  affaires  (my  Lord.) 

If  euer  I  were  wilfull-negligent, 

It  was  my  folly  :  if  induftrioufly  300 

I  play’d  the  Foole,it  was  my  negligence, 

Not  weighing  well  the  end  :  if  euer  fearefull 
To  doe  a  thing,  where  I  the  iffue  doubted, 

Whereof  the  execution  did  cry  out  304 


294.  fearefull j]  fearful ;  Rowe  ii  et 
seq. 

295.  thefe,]  thefe;  F  ,  Rowe  i.  these 
Pope  et  seq. 

297.  Among\  Mai.  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce, 
Ktly,  Sta.  Cam.  Wh.  ii.  Amongfl  Ff, 
Rowe  et  cet. 

doings ]  doing  Ff,  Rowe. 


298.  Sometime ]  Sometimes  F2,  Rowe  i, 
Knt,  Sta. 

forth  in]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  forth  : 
In  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Raun,  Steev. 
Knt,  Dyce  i.  forth.  In  Theob.  et  cet. 
Lord.]  lord,  Theob.  et  seq. 

299.  wilfull-negligent]  wilful  negli¬ 
gent  Rowe+. 

300.  induflriously]  injuriously  Han. 


298.  Much  careful  punctuation  is  needed  in  the  Folio  to  offset  the  absence  of  any 
at  all  in  this  line,  whereof  the  absurdity  neither  Rowe  nor  Pope  noticed. 

300,  if  industriously]  Capell  (165):  ‘Playing  the  fool  industriously’  seems 
unfitly  called — negligence ;  but  such  handling  of  an  affair,  though  with  industry,  is 
negligence  if  the  proper  means  of  conducting  it  have  not  been  well  consider’d,  if  it’s 
end  has  not  been  well  weighed. 

304.  the  execution]  Capell  thus  paraphrases :  The  execution  of  which  by 
another  did  cry  out  against  his  non-performance  who  should  have  done  it ;  meaning 
— cause  him  to  be  condemn’d,  when  his *  1  doubted  issue ’  prov’d  happy. — Johnson: 
This  is  one  of  the  expressions  by  which  Shakespeare  too  frequently  clouds  his  mean¬ 
ing.  This  sounding  phrase  means,  I  think,  no  more  than  a  thing  necessary  to  be  done. 

_ Heath  :  I  think  we  ought  to  read — ‘  the  wow-performance,’  which  gives  us  this 

very  reasonable  meaning  : — ‘  At  the  execution  whereof,  such  circumstances  discovered 
themselves,  as  made  it  prudent  to  suspend  all  further  proceeding  in  it.’ — Johnson  : 

I  do  not  see  that  this  attempt  does  anything  more  than  produce  a  harsher  word  with¬ 
out  an  easier  sense. — Malone:  I  think  [Heath’s]  note  gives  a  good  interpretation 
of  the  original  text.  I  have,  however,  no  doubt  that  Shakespeare  wrote  *  wow-per¬ 
formance,’  he  having  often  entangled  himself  in  the  same  manner ;  but  it  is  clear 
he  should  have  written,  either — 1  against  the  performance,'  or — ‘  for  the  non-perform¬ 
ance.’ _ M.  Mason  ( Addit .  Com.  p.  31)  :  I  do  not  perceive  the  obscurity  of  this 

passage,  as  Camillo’s  meaning  appears  to  be  this : — ‘  If  ever,  through  a  cautious 
apprehension  of  the  issue,  I  have  neglected  to  do  a  thing,  the  subsequent  successful 
execution  of  which  cried  out  against  my  former  non-performance,  it  was  a  species 
of  fear,’  etc.  If  the  text  had  read  as  Mr  Malone  says  it  should  have  read,  I  should 
not  have  attempted  to  extract  a  meaning  from  it,  because  I  cannot  discover  any  differ- 


46 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Againft  the  non-performance,  ’twas  a  feare 
Which  oft  infefts  the  wifeft  :  thefe  (my  Lord) 

Are  fuch  allow’d  Infirmities, that  honeftie 
Is  neuer  free  of.  But  befeech  your  Grace 
Be  plainer  with  me,  let  me  know  my  Trefpas 
By  it’s  owne  vifage  ;  if  I  then  deny  it, 

’Tis  none  of  mine. 

Leo.  Ha’  not  you  feene  Camillo  ? 

(But  that’s  paft  doubt :  you  haue,  or  your  eye-glaffe 
Is  thicker  then  a  Cuckolds  Horne)  or  heard? 


305 


310 


3H 


305.  performance ,]  performance.  Fa. 
performance ;  F  F^. 

308.  But  befeech ]  But ,  ’ beseech  Theob. 
ii  et  seq.  (subs.). 

310.  it  \r]  Ff,  Cap.  its  Rowe. 

312.  Ha’]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Dyce,  Wh. 
Cam.  Have  Cap.  et  cet. 


312.  Camillo  ? ]  Camillo,  Theob.  et 
seq.  (subs.). 

313.  doubt:]  doubt,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  doubt—  Knt,Wh. 

314.  heard?]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
heard  Dyce,  Wh.  heard,  Theob.  et  cet. 
(subs.). 


ence  between  the  execution  of  a  thing  and  the  performance  of  it.  [It  is  not  difficult 
to  paraphrase  a  passage  in  general  terms;  the  meaning  is  often  evident  at  a  glance. 
The  difficulty  is  to  harmonise  the  construction  and  the  meaning.  Here  Malone  is 
quite  right  according  to  modern  usage,  and  Shakespeare  is  not  wrong  Where  a 
negative  is  expressed  or  implied  in  the  verb,  as  here:  ‘cried  out  against,’  there  was 
not,  of  old,  any  harm  in  adding  an  additional  negative,  as  here  in  ‘  non-performance.’ 
Two  negatives  originally  strengthened  the  negation.  Thus  in  Macb  III  vi  8  •— 

‘  Wh°  Cannot  want  the  thought>’  etc-  ^d  in  Lear,  II,  iv,  140.— ‘  You  less  know  how 
to  value  her  desert  Than  she  to  scant  her  duty  ’ ;  Cymb.  I,  iv,  23  :  ‘  a  beggar  without 
less  quality.  Indeed,  there  is  another  excellent  instance  in  this  present  play;  III, 
n,  58 :  ‘  That  any  of  these  bolder  vices  wanted  Less  impudence,’  etc.,  where  ‘  Less  ’ 
adds  strength  to  the  negative  implied  in  ‘wanted.’] 

307.  such  .  .  .  that]  For  examples  of  such  used  with  relative  words  other  than 
which  see,  if  needful,  Abbott,  §  279. 

310.  it  s]  See  line  183  supra  ;  and  II,  iii,  214. 

310.  visage]  That  is,  give  me  a  particular  instance  of  my  trespass,  bring  me  face 
to  face  with  it.— Ed.  s 


312-320.  Of  this  passage  Hazutt  remarks  (p.  278)  :  Even  the  crabbed  and  tor- 
tuous  style  of  the  speeches  of  Leontes,  reasoning  in  his  own  jealousy,  beset  with 
ou  ts  and  fears,  and  entangled  more  and  more  in  the  thorny  labyrinth,  bears  every 
mark  of  Shakespeare’s  peculiar  manner  of  conveying  the  painful  struggle  of  different 
thoughts  and  feelings,  labouring  for  utterance,  and  almost  strangled  in  the  birth.  Here 
eon  es  is  con  ounded  with  his  passion,  and  does  not  know  w.hich  way  to  turn  him- 
f,  o  give  words  to  the  anguish,  rage,  and  apprehension  which  tug  at  his  breast 

possibiy7oe~gW 1 V-  S  dT  n0t  rCfer  t0  the  h°mely  °ptical  Instrurnent>  but 

be  au  e'  £  tl k  T*  ^  7  ^  Eye’  Calls  ‘  Humor  Vitrus, 

because  he  is  lyke  glasse  in  colour  very  clear el -(Anatomic,  E.  E.  Text  Soc  n 

3  )■  is  not  likely  that  there  is  any  reference  to  the  retina  or  to  the  cornea ;  these 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


47 


(For  to  a  Vifion  fo  apparant,  Rumor  315 

Cannot  be  mute)  or  thought?  (for  Cogitation 

Refides  not  in  that  man,  that  do’s  not  thinke)  317 


315.  apparant ]  apparent  F3F^. 

316.  thought?  ( for]  Ff,  Rowe  i. 
thought  ( for  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Dyce  i. 
thought ,  Theob.  et  cet.  (subs.). 


317.  thinke"]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Mai. 
Var.  Knt,  Coll,  i,  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  Cam. 
think't  Han.  Cap.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
think  it  Theob.  et  cet. 


were  then  regarded  merely  as  coats  or  ‘  tunikles  ’  to  contain  the  ‘  Humors  ’  wherein 
was  set  the  ‘  syght  of  the  Eye,’  ‘  principally  in  the  Crystalline  humour,’  to  which  it 
is  also  possible  that  ‘  eye-glass  ’  might  apply.  ‘  Thicker  ’  means  more  opaque,  and 
in  the  *  Cuckold’s  horn  ’  there  may  be  an  adumbration  of  the  horn  sides  of  a  lan¬ 
tern. — Ed. 

315,  316.  For  .  .  .  mute]  Deighton:  For  in  cases  where  the  fact  is  so  plain  to 
see,  there  is  sure  to  be  plenty  of  gossip  about  it. 

317.  thinke]  Malone  (1790) :  Theobald  in  a  Letter  subjoined  to  one  edition  of 
The  Double  Falsehood  has  quoted  this  passage  in  defence  of  a  well-known  line  in 
that  play  :  ‘  None  but  himself  [Itself]  can  be  his  [its]  Parallel  ’  [III,  i]. — ‘  Who  does 
not  see  at  once  (says  he)  that  he  who  does  not  think,  has  no  thought  in  him.’  In  the 
same  light  this  passage  should  seem  to  have  appeared  to  all  subsequent  editors,  who 
read  with  the  editor  of  the  Second  Folio  ‘  think  it.'  But  the  old  reading,  I  am  per¬ 
suaded,  is  right.  This  is  not  abstract  proposition.  The  whole  context  must  be  taken 
together.  Have  you  not  thought  (says  Leontes),  my  wife  is  slippery  (for  cogitation 
resides  not  in  the  man  that  does  not  think  my  wife  is  slippery )  ?  The  four  latter 
words,  though  disjoined  from  the  word  think  by  the  necessity  of  a  parenthesis,  are 
evidently  to  be  connected  in  construction  with  it;  and  consequently  the  seeming 
absurdity  attributed  by  Theobald  to  the  passage,  arises  only  from  misapprehension. — 
Steevens  (1793,  reading  ‘think  it')  :  The  it  is  supplied  from  the  Second  Folio. — 
Collier  (ed.  i) :  The  Second  Folio  adds  it  after  ‘  think,’  but  needlessly,  the  word 
being  clearly  understood. — Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Some  copies  of  the  Second  Folio  add 
it  after  ‘  think,’  but  in  other  copies  it  is  wanting;  and  had  we  not  found  it  inserted 
in  MS  in  the  corr.  fo.  1632,  we  should  have  been  of  the  opinion  that  it  was  need¬ 
less,  being  clearly  understood.  However,  as  it  is  printed  in  some  copies  of  the 
Folio,  1632,  and  as  it  is  written  into  that  before  us,  we  place  it  in  the  text.  It  cer¬ 
tainly  avoids  an  apparent  truism. — Dyce  (ed.  ii,  iii)  :  Some  copies  of  the  Second 
Folio  add  it. — Staunton  (reading,  ‘think  it') :  The  lection  of  the  Second  Folio,  at 
least  in  some  copies  of  that  edition. — W.  A.  Wright  (Cam.  Ed.  ii) :  I  have  been  un¬ 
able  to  find  any  copy  of  the  Second  Folio  which  justifies  [Collier’s]  statement,  and 
I  believe  it  was  entirely  due  to  the  note  of  Steevens  on  the  passage  [ ut  supra],  Mr 
Collier,  finding  in  his  annotated  copy  of  the  Second  Folio  ‘  it  ’  inserted  in  MS,  qual¬ 
ified  Steevens’s  statement  so  far  as  to  limit  it  to  ‘  some  copies.’  As  it  is  well  known 
that  in  books  printed  at  this  period,  there  are  variations  in  different  copies,  I  do  not 
undertake  to  say  that  no  copy  of  the  ed.  of  1632  has  ‘  it,’  but  I  very  much  doubt  it. 
Her  Majesty’s  Librarian  informs  me  that  Steevens’s  own  copy,  which  formerly  belonged 
to  Charles  I.,  and  is  now  in  the  Royal  Library  at  Windsor,  reads  ‘  thinke  ’  and  not 
‘  thinke  it.’  I  have  personally  examined  two  copies  here  in  Trinity  College  Library, 
two  in  the  British  Museum,  and  one  in  the  possession  of  Mr  J.  E.  Johnson,  Cam- 


48 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  I,  SC.  ii. 

313 


My  Wife  is  flipperie  ?  If  thou  wilt  confeffe , 

Or  elfe  be  impudently  negatiue, 

To  haue  nor  Eyes,  nor  Eares,nor  Thought, then  fay  320 

My  Wife’s  a  Holy-Horfe,  deferues  a  Name 
As  ranke  as  any  Flax-Wench,  that  puts  to 
Before  her  troth-plight  :  fay’t,and  iuftify’t. 

Cam.  I  would  not  be  a  ftander-by,  to  heare 
My  Soueraigne  Miftreffe  clouded  fo,  without  325 

My  prefent  vengeance  taken  :  ’threw  my  heart, 

You  neuer  fpoke  what  did  become  you  leffe 
Then  this  ,*  which  to  reiterate,  were  fin 
As  deepe  as  that,  though  true. 

Leo.  Is  whifpe ring  nothing?  330 


318.  wilt]  wilt,  Rowe  + ,  Cap. Var.  ’78. 

319,  320.  Or. ..Thought]  In  parenthe¬ 
sis  (subs.),  Theob.  et  seq. 

321.  Holy-Horfe]  Ff,  Rowe  i.  hoby- 
korse  Cap.  hobby-horse  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 


322.  puts  to]  puts-to  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

323.  fay' t,  and  iuflify't]  say  it  and 
justify  it  Var.  ’73,  Rann,  Mai.  Steev. 
Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

329.  though]  tho'  F4,  Rowe+. 


bridge  [Dr  Wright  then  proceeds  to  enumerate  sixteen  other  copies,  viz. :  in  Pem¬ 
broke  College  Library;  two  in  the  Bodleian;  in  the  Advocates’  Library;  in  the 
Signet  Library;  in  the  Edinburgh  Univ.  Library;  one  formerly  belonging  to  the  late 
Mr  Cosens;  Mr  Huth’s  copy;  the  Birmingham  Free  Library’s  copy;  those  of  Miss 
Blatchford  of  Cambridge,  U.  S.  A.;  Mr  L.  Z.  Leiter’s  copy;  that  in  the  Newberry 
Library,  Chicago;  Mr  FT.  G.  Denny’s  copy  (Boston,  Mass.) ;  and  those  owned  by  the 
present  editor;  to  these  may  be  added  two  copies  owned  by  Mr  H.  C.  Folger,  Jr., 
of  Brooklyn,  kindly  collated  for  this  note ;  in  all  twenty-four  copies  of  the  Second 
Folio],  including  the  annotated  volume  which  formerly  belonged  to  Mr  Collier,  now 
in  the  Library  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  and  it  appears  that  there  is  not  one  which 
bears  out  the  original  statement  of  Steevens  [Qu.  Malone  ?]  or  the  qualified  assertion 
of  Mr  Collier.  But  so  profound  is  my  conviction  of  the  vitality  of  error  that  I  con¬ 
fidently  expect  to  see  them  repeated  in  subsequent  editions  of  Shakespeare. 

318.  slipperie)  ‘All  women  are  slippery' — Burton  ( Anat .  of  Melan.  p.  598,  6th 
ed.)  that  is,  unstable.  Halliwell  says  that  in  some  copies  of  F4  this  is  misprinted 
flippery.  It  is  clearly  Jlipperie  in  the  three  copies  of  that  edition  belonging  to  the 
present  Ed. 

326.  present]  That  is,  instant. 

326.  ’shrew]  Pronounced  ’ shrow  ;  as  also  shreiu  the  noun,  and  shrewd  the  adj. 

329.  As  deepe  as  that]  That  is,  as  great  as  the  sin  of  which  you  accuse  her, 
granting  that  that  sin  were  true. 

33°>  elc-  Hazlitt  (p.  279)  '  It  is  only  as  Leontes  is  worked  up  into  a  clearer  con¬ 
viction  of  his  wrongs  by  insisting  on  the  grounds  of  his  unjust  suspicions  to  Camillo, 
who  irritates  him  by  his  opposition,  that  he  bursts  out  into  the  following  vehement 
strain  of  bitter  indignation ;  yet  even  here  his  passion  staggers,  and  is,  as  it  were, 
oppressed  by  its  own  intensity. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


49 


Is  leaning  Cheeke  to  Cheeke  ?  is  meating  Nofes  ?  33 1 

Kiffing  with  in-fide  Lip  ?  flopping  the  Cariere 

Of  Laughter,  with  a  figh?  (a  Note  infallible 

Of  breaking  Honeftie)  horfing  foot  on  footf 

Skulking  in  corners  ?  wifhing  Clocks  more  fwift?  335 

Houres, Minutes?  Noone,  Mid-night  f  and  all  Eyes 

Blind  with  the  Pin  and  Web,  but  theirs;  theirs  onely, 

That  would  vnfeene  be  wickedf  Is  this  nothing? 

Why  then  the  World,  and  all  that’s  in’t,is  nothing, 

The  couering  Skie  is  nothing, Bohemia  nothing,  340 

My  Wife  is  nothing,  nor  Nothing  haue  thefe  Nothings, 

If  this  be  nothing. 

Cam.  Good  my  Lord,  be  cur’d  343 


331.  meating]  FSF  ,  Theob.  meeting 
F  .  meting  (i.  e.  measuring)  Thirlby. 

332.  in-fide]  inside  Rowe. 

Cariere ]  Carier  F^F^.  carreer 
Rowe  i.  career  Rowe  ii. 

333.  Laughter ]  laughing  Glo. 

333.  334-  ( a. ..Honeftie )]  A. ..honesty : 
Rowe. 

336,  337.  Houres... Blind]  One  line. 


Steev.  Reed,  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

336.  Noone]  the  Noone  Ff,  Rowe  +  , 
Cap.  Var.  ’73,  ’78,  ’85,  Rann.  noon¬ 
day  or  high  noon  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

Eyes]  eyes  else  Walker,  Huds. 

337.  Pin  and  Web]  pin-and-web  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Wh.  ii. 

Web]  the  web  Ktly. 

341.  haue]  are  Lettsom  ap.  Dyce  iii. 


332.  Cariere]  A  term  of  horsemanship,  meaning  a  gallop  at  full  speed. — 
Ed. 

336.  To  reduce  this  vehement  line  to  plodding  rhythm  the  Second  Folio  inserted 
the  before  ‘  Noone.’  Next,  Steevens  purloined  ‘  Blind  ’  from  the  following  line,  and 
threw  the  accent  on  the  second  syllable  of  ‘  mid-night.’  Then  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  92) 
suggested  ‘  all  eyes  else.’  Lastly,  Abbott,  §  484,  makes  ‘  noon  ’  disyllabic  !  What 
actor  could  hope  to  move  his  audience  who  should  pronounce  with  measured  rhythm 
a  torrent  of  scornful  questions  like  this  ?  It  is  enough  that  the  stress  falls  on  the 
emphatic  syllables. — Ed. 

337.  Pin  and  Web]  Florio  (  A  Worlde  of  Wordes,  1598):  ‘  Cateratta,  Also  a 
disease  in  the  eies  called  a  pin  and  a  web.’  It  appears  that  in  1542  the  Surgeons  of 
London,  after  becoming  a  licensed  company,  regarded  more  their  own  profit  than  the 
general  welfare  of  the  public,  and  sued,  as  irregular  practitioners,  ‘  divers  honest 
p<?rsones,  aswell  men  and  woomen,  whome  God  hathe  endued  with  a  knowledge  of 
the  nature,  kinde,  and  operacfon  of  certeyne  herbes,  rotes  and  waters.’  An  Acte  was 
accordingly  passed  in  34  &  35  Henry  VIII.,  1542 — ‘that  persones  being  no  comen 
Surgeons  maie  mynistre  medicines  outwarde.’  Among  the  ailments  to  which  these 
honest  persones,  aswell  men  as  woomen,  had  ‘  mynisterd  ’  were  :  ‘  Womens  brestes 
being  sore,  a  Pyn  and  the  Web  in  the  eye,  uncomes  [whitlows  or  felons]  of  handes,’ 
etc. — Vicary’s  Anatomie ,  1548,  p.  208,  Early  Eng.  Text.  Soc.  Apparently,  the 
‘  pin  ’  referred  to  the  sharp  pain  and  the  ‘  web  ’  to  the  obscured  vision  produced 
by  a  cataract. — Ed. 


4 


5° 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Of  this  difeas’d  Opinion,  and  betimes, 

For  ’tis  moft  dangerous.  345 

Leo.  Say  it  be,  ’tis  true. 

Cam.  No,  no,  my  Lord. 

Leo.  It  is:  you  lye,  you  lye  : 

I  fay  thou  lyeft  Camillo,  and  I  hate  thee, 

Pronounce  thee  a  groffe  Lowt,a  mindleffe  Slaue,  350 

Or  elfe  a  houering  Temporizer,  that 

Canft  with  thine  eyes  at  once  fee  good  and  euill, 

Inclining  to  them  both:  were  my  Wiues  Liuer 
Infected  (as  her  life)  fhe  would  not  liue 

The  running  of  one  Glaffe.  355 

Cam.  Who  do’s  infe6t  her/ 

Leo.  Why  he  that  weares  her  like  her  Medull,  hanging 
About  his  neck  (Bohemia)  who,  if  j 
Had  Seruants  true  about  me,  that  bare  eyes 

To  fee  alike  mine  Honor, as  their  Profits,  360 

(Their  owne  particular  Thrifts)  they  would  doe  that 

Which  fhould  vndoe  more  doing  :  I, and  thou 

His  Cup-bearer,  whom  I  from  meaner  forme  363 


344.  betimes, \  betimes  F3F4>  betimes; 
Theob.  et  seq. 

353.  Wiues]  wife’s  Rowe. 

353.  354-  Liuer  ...life']  life. ..liver 
Daniel. 

357.  her  Medull]  her  Medul  F^.  his 
medal  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Var. 
’73,  Mai.  a  medal  Rann,  Coll.  (MS), 
Dyce  ii,  Ktly,  Huds.  her  medal  Rowe 
et  cet. 

358.  neck  (Bohemia)]  neck;  Bohe¬ 


mia —  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Var.  ’73. 
neck,  Bohemia  ;  Rowe  et  cet. 

358.  who,  if  ]  Who,— if  Var.  ’78, 
Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce, 
Wh. 

359.  bare']  bear  F  ,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
362.  more  doing ]  more  Doing  Theob. 

Warb.  Johns. 

I,]  Ay,  Cap.  et  seq. 

363-366.  whom.. .gall'd]  In  parenthe¬ 
sis,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 


355'  Glasse]  Malone:  That  is,  of  one  hour-glass. 

357.  her  Medull]  Steevens  :  I  suppose  this  means,  ‘  that  Polixenes  wore  her,  as 
he  would  have  worn  a  medal  of  her,  about  his  neck.’  Sir  Christopher  Hatton  is 
represented  with  a  medal  of  Queen  Elizabeth  appended  to  his  chain. — Malone  :  In 
Hen.  VIII ;  II,  ii,  32  we  have  the  same  thought : — ‘  a  loss  of  her,  That  like  a  jewell 
has  hung  twenty  years  About  his  neck.’  It  should  be  remembered  that  it  was  cus¬ 
tomary  for  gentlemen,  in  our  author’s  time,  to  wear  jewels  appended  to  a  ribbon  round 
the  neck.  So  in  Markham’s  Honour  in  Perfection,  1624,  p.  18: — ‘he  hath  hung 
about  the  neck  of  his  noble  kinsman,  Sir  Horace  Vere,  like  a  rich  jewel.’  [‘  Her 
medal  ’  is  a  medal  of  her ;  just  as  Sir  Christopher  Hatton’s  medal  was  one  of  Queen 
Elizabeth. — Ed.] 

363.  Cup-bearer]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


51 


Haue  Bench’d,  and  rear’d  to  Worfhip,  who  may’ft  fee 
Plainely,as  Heauen  fees  Earth,  and  Earth  fees  Heauen,  365 
How  I  am  gall’d,  might’ ft  be-fpice  a  Cup, 

To  giue  mine  Enemy  a  lafting  Winke  : 

Which  Draught  to  me,  were  cordiall. 

Cam.  Sir  (my  Lord) 

I  could  doe  this,  and  that  with  no  rafh  Potion,  370 

But  with  a  lingring  Dram,  that  lhould  not  worke 

Malicioufly,  like  Poyfon  :  But  I  cannot 

Beleeue  this  Crack  to  be  in  my  dread  Miftreffe 

(So  foueraignely  being  Honorable.)  374 


366.  gall'd]  gull'd  Grey,  Mason, 
Rann.  galled  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Knt, 
Coll,  i,  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Ktly. 

might  \ 'ft]  thou  might'Jl  Ff, 
Rowe+,  Cap.  Var.  ’73,  ’78,  ’85,  Rann, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Coll,  ii,  Huds. 

372.  Malicioufly ,  like]  Malicioufly, 
like  a  F  ,  Rowe.  Like  a  malicious  Han. 


Suspiciously  Anon.  (Fras.  Mag.  March, 
1853). 

374,  375.  [So.  ..I  haue]  So  sovereignly 
benign,  and  honourably  To  have  Bulloch. 

374.  Honorable .)]  honourable, —  Cap. 
honourable. — Sir,  Sta.  (Athen.  27  June, 
1874). 


366.  might’st]  Note  the  thou  added  by  Fa,  to  the  improvement  both  of  metre  and 
of  emphasis. 

367.  Winke]  Steevens  :  Compare  Temp.  II,  i,  285 : — ‘  To  the  perpetual  wink 
for  aye  might  put  this  ancient  morsel.’ 

368.  Which  Draught]  Abbott  (§  269) :  Here  a  noun  of  similar  meaning  sup¬ 
plants  the  antecedent,  giving  greater  emphasis. 

369.  Sir]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  MS  has  Sure  for  ‘  Sir,’  and  it  is  evidently  the 
true  text ;  Camillo  means  that  he  could  certainly  do  it.  [Collier  abandoned  this  Sure 
in  his  Third  Edition.] — Staunton:  With  his  usual  ignorance  of  Shakespearian 
phraseology  Mr  Collier’s  ever-meddling  annotator  both  here  and  in  III,  i,  where 
Perdita  says :  ‘  Sir,  my  gracious  lord,’  etc.  for  ‘  Sir  ’  reads  Sure.  And  Mr  Collier, 
mindless  of  Paulina’s, — ‘  Sir,  my  liege,  your  eye  hath  too  much  youth,’  etc.  in  V, 
i,  of  this  very  play ;  of  Prospero’s, — ‘  Sir,  my  liege,  do  not  infest  your  mind,’  etc. ; 
of  Hamlet’s, — ‘  Sir,  my  good  friend,’  etc.,  chooses  to  adopt  the  substitution,  and  tells 
us  Sure  is  ‘  evidently  the  true  text  1’  [See  IV,  iv,  9,  where  Collier’s  MS  makes  the 
same  change.] 

372.  Maliciously]  Johnson  :  ‘  Rash  ’  is  hasty,  as  in  2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  iv,  48  : — 
‘  rash  gunpowder.’  ‘  Maliciously  ’  is  malignantly,  with  effects  openly  hurtful. — 
Heard  (Sh.  as  a  Lawyer,  99) :  In  an  indictment  for  murder  it  is  neces  ary  to  allege 
that  the  act  by  which  the  death  was  occasioned  was  done  of  ‘  malice  aforethought,’ 
which  is  the  great  characteristic  of  the  crime.  ‘  I  should  suppose,’  says  Barrington, 
‘  that  the  word  “  maliciously  ”  in  [the  present  passage]  is  used  in  the  sense  it  bears 
in  the  common  forms  of  indictment  for  murder.’ — Observations  on  the  Statutes,  527, 
note,  5th  ed. 

374.  So  soueraignely].  That  is,  being  so  sovereignly,  so  supremely  honourable. 

374-378.  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  93) :  The  first  line :  ‘  So  sovereignly  being  hdnour- 


52 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


I  haue  lou’d  thee, 

Leo  Make  that  thy  queftion,  and  goe  rot  : 


375 


375.  Given  to  Leon.,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Var.  ’73.  Transposed  to  follow 
rot!  Cap.  Tyrwhitt. 

I. ..thee,]  I. ..thee.  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 
so  lov'd.  Han.  I...thee, —  Var.  ’78  et 
seq.  (subs.). 


376.  Make  that]  Make't  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Steev.  Var. 

Make. ..rot]  Mark  this  question, 
and  go  do't  Heath. 


abl£,  can  never  have  been  one  of  Shakespeare’s ;  not  to  mention  the  singularity  of 
sovereignly  and  being,  both  unusual  in  Shakespeare,  coming  together  in  the  same  line, 
and  the  improbability  of  ‘  Make  that ’  having  been  corrupted  into  Make  't.  Arrange, 
— ‘  So  sov’reignly  being  honourable.— I’ve  [properly  ’have]  lov’d  thee,—  |  Leon. 
Make  that  thy  question,  and  go  rot !  Dost  think  |  I  am  so  muddy,  so  unsettled,  | 
T  appoint  myself’  etc.  Unsettled,  a  quadrisyllable;  as  (if  any  particular  instance 
were  worth  adducing)  in  the  passage  of  How  a  Man  may  Choose,  etc.,  quoted  in 
Sh.  Vers.,  Arts,  ii,  iii,  p.  36, — ‘  My  settled  unkindness  doth  beget  A  resolution  to  be 
unkind  still.  See  Arts,  ii,  iii,  Sh.  Vers,  for  many  examples  of  this  usage. — Dyce 
(ed.  i)  objected  to  this  lengthening  of  ‘  unsettled,’  and  observed  that*  1  earlier  in  this 
scene  [line  1 7 7 J  Shakespeare  has  used  unsettled  without  any  such  irrc/cramf-’ 
Whereupon  Lettsom  (Walker’s  Editor)  in  a  footnote  to  the  foregoing  note  of 
Walker,  replied  that  Dyce’s  ‘  argument  is  even  stronger  against  pronouncing  English 
as  a  trisyllable  in  1  Hen.  VI :  I,  v,  as  English  occurs  previously  twice  in  that  short 
scene  as  a  disyllable.  Yet  there  Mr  Dyce  agrees  with  Walker  in  applying  the 
EiriKTaa^  to  English  in  La  Pucelle’s  speech.  Roth  pronunciations  were  used.’  In 
both  of  Dyce’s  subsequent  additions  Walker’s  note  is  quoted,  but  the  objection  to  it 
is  withdrawn. 

375,  376-  I  haue  .  .  .  rot]  Theobald  :  This  hemistich  assigned  to  Camillo 
must  have  been  wrongly  placed  to  him.  It  is  a  strange  instance  of  disrespect  and 
insolence  in  Camillo  to  his  King  and  Master  to  tell  him  that  he  once  loved  him. 

I  have  ventured  at  a  transposition  which  seems  self-evident.  Camillo  will  not  be 
persuaded  into  a  suspicion  of  the  disloyalty  imputed  to  his  Mistress.  The  King,  who 
believes  nothing  but  his  jealousy,  provoked  that  Camillo  is  so  obstinately  diffident, 
finely  [finally?]  starts  into  a  rage  and  cries ‘  I’ve  lov’d  thee.— Make ’t  thy  ques¬ 
tion,  and  go  rot,’  i.  e.  I  have  tendered  thee  well,  Camillo,  but  I  here  cancel  all  former 
respect  at  once.  If  thou  any  longer  make  a  question  of  my  wife’s  disloyalty ;  go 
from  my  presence,  and  perdition  overtake  thee  for  thy  stubbornness.’ — Johnson  :  I 
have  admitted  this  alteration,  but  am  not  convinced  that  it  is  necessary.  Camillo. 
desirous  to  defend  the  Queen,  and  willing  to  secure  credit  to  his  apology,  begins,  by 
telling  the  King  that  he  has  loved  him,  is  about  to  give  instances  of  his  love,  and  to 
infer  from  them  his  present  zeal,  when  he  is  interrupted. — Capell  (p.  165) :  Camillo 
is  cut  short  by  his  master,  and  ends  abruptly;  his  disbelief,  making  question  of  what 
the  master  believed,  raises  violent  passion;  and  he  is  (in  that  case)  first  bid  to  ‘go 
rot,’  and  told  afterwards  [see  Text.  Notes]-'  I  have  lov’d  thee,’  making  have 
emphatical,  which  implies  that  that  time  was  past;  This  position  of  the  words  has 
nothing  to  make  against  it  that  can  be  suggested  ;  in  its  favour,  every  thing ;  .  .  .  this 
speech  of  Leontes  will  be  found  by  a  good  pronouncer,  who  feels  it,  equal  to  most  in 
Shakespeare.— Steevens  :  I  have  restored  the  old  reading.  Camillo  is  about  to  tell 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


53 


Do’ft  thinke  I  am  fo  muddy,  fo  vnfetled,  377 

To  appoint  my  felfe  in  this  vexation  ? 

Sully  the  puritie  and  whiteneffe  of  my  Sheetes 

(Which  to  preferue,is  Sleepe;  which  being  fpotted,  380 

Is  Goades,  Thornes.  Nettles,  Tayles  ofWafpes) 

378»  379-  To. ..Sully']  One  line.  379-381.  Lines  end  of  ...being. ..wasps? 

Theob.  +  ,  Cap.  Rann,  Steev.  et  seq.  Mai. 

378.  To  appoint]  T’  appoint  Dyce  ii,  379.  whitenejfe]  witnefsY 4. 

iii,  Huds. 


Leontes  how  much  he  had  loved  him.  The  impatience  of  the  King  interrupts  him 
by  saying :  4  Make  that  thy  question,’  i.  e.  4  make  the  love  of  which  you  boast  the 
subject  of  your  future  conversation,  and  go  to  the  grave  with  it.’  4  Question,’  in  our 
author,  has  very  often  this  meaning.— M.  Mason  :  I  think  Steevens  right  in  restoring 
the  old  reading,  but  mistaken  in  his  interpretation  of  it.  Camillo  is  about  to  express 
his  affection  for  Leontes,  but  the  impatience  of  the  latter  will  not  suffer  him  to  pro¬ 
ceed.  He  takes  no  notice  of  that  part  of  Camillo’s  speech,  but  replies  to  that  which 
gave  him  offence, — the  doubts  he  had  expressed  of  the  Queen’s  misconduct,  and 
says, — ‘  Make  that  thy  question  and  go  rot.’ — Malone  :  Perhaps  the  words  4  being 
honourable  ’  should  be  placed  in  a  parenthesis,  and  the  full  point  after  the  latter  of 
these  words  be  omitted.  .  .  .  However,  the  text  is  very  intelligible  as  now  regulated. 
[I  think  4  that  ’  refers  to  the  Queen’s  misconduct,  and  that 4  Make  ’  is  not  the  imper¬ 
ative  but  the  subjunctive  :  4  If  you  doubt  the  queen’s  unfaithfulness  you  may  go  rot.’ 
—Ed. 

378.  To  appoint  my  selfe]  Swynfen  Jervis  {Diet.)  gives  involve  as  the 
meaning  here  of  this  phrase ;  which  certainly  affords  good  sense,  but  then  it  must 
be  accepted  on  Jervis’s  authority;  he  gives  no  parallel  passages.  Schmidt  pro¬ 
nounces  it  4  a  singular  expression,’  which  is  true ;  and  says  it  is  equivalent  to  4  dress 
myself  in  this  vexation,’  which  is  doubtful ;  he  bids  us  compare  it  with  4  drest  in  an 
opinion.’ — Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  91 ;  ‘attired  in  wonder.’ — Much  Ado,  IV,  i,  146;  4 wrapt 
in  fears.’ — Lucr.  456,  in  all  of  which  phrases,  where  the  word  to  dress,  or  its  precise 
equivalent,  is  used,  it  is  not  easy  to  detect  a  parallel  to  appoint.  The  general 
definition  of  appoint ,  given  by  Richardson  {Diet.  s.  v.)  is  all  sufficient,  viz. :  4  To  fix, 
settle,  establish,’  wherein  the  word  settle  is  singularly  appropriate  in  the  phrase  in 
hand :  4  Dost  thou  think  I  am  so  muddy,  so  unsettled,  as  to  establish,  to  settle  myself 
in  this  vexation  ?’  Richardson  cites,  among  many  other  examples :  4  Appoint  not 
heav’nly  disposition,  father.’ — Milton,  Samp.  Agon.  373,  where  appoint  is  used  as  in 
the  present  phrase. — Ed. 

381.  Is  Goades,  etc.]  When  counted  on  the  fingers  this  grating,  sibilant  line 
lacks  two  syllables.  To  remedy  this  sad  defect  in  a  passionate  utterance  of 
Leontes,  when,  of  all  times,  he  should  speak  in  irreproachable  rhythm,  various 
improvements  have  been  suggested.  Hanmer  reads  :  4  Is  goads  and  thorns,  nettles 
and  tails  of  wasps.’  Capell  adds  at  the  end  of  the  line :  or  would  /.  Walker 
{Crit.  ii,  16)  implies  that  Leontes’s  sufferings  were  not  sufficiently  acute,  and  that  he 
had  overlooked  vipers  which  should  glide  in  between  4  nettles  ’  and  4  tails  of  wasps.’ 
An  Anonymous  Emender  (recorded  in  the  Cam.  Ed.),  of  a  gentler  nature  than  Walker, 
suggests  pismires.  Keightley  upholds  iteration  and  reads  :  4  Is  goads,  is  thorns,  is 


54 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 
382 


Giue  fcandall  to  the  blood  o’th’Prince,  my  Sonne, 
(Who  I  doe  thinke  is  mine,  and  loue  as  mine) 
Without  ripe  mouing  to’t  ?  Would  I  doe  this  f 
Could  man  fo  blench  ? 

Cam.  I  muft  beleeue  you(Sir) 

I  doe,  and  will  fetch  off  Bohemia  for’t  : 
Prouided,that  when  hee’s  remou’d,your  Highneffe 
Will  take  againe  your  Queene,  as  yours  at  firft, 
Euen  for  your  Sonnes  fake,  and  thereby  for  fealing 
The  Iniurie  of  Tongues,  in  Courts  and  Kingdomes 
Knowne,and  ally’d  to  yours. 

Leo.  Thou  do’ft  aduife  me, 

Euen  fo  as  I  mine  owne  courfe  haue  fet  downe  : 

He  giue  no  blemifh  to  her  Honor,  none. 

Cam.  My  Lord, 

Goe  then  ;  and  with  a  countenance  as  cleare 
As  Friendfhip  weares  at  Feafts,  keepe  with  Bohemiay 
And  with  your  Queene  :  I  am  his  Cup-bearer, 

If  from  me  he  haue  wholefome  Beueridge, 

Account  me  not  your  Seruant. 


385 


390 


395 


400 


384.  to' t?... this ?]  to' t... this?  Han. 

386.  (.SiV)]  Sir ;  Theob.  et  seq. 

387.  I  doe,]  Ido;  Cap.  et  seq. 

388.  Prouided,  thaf\  Providtd  that 
Pope,  Han.  Provided ,  that,  Theob.  + , 
Cap.  Provided  that,  Dyce,  Coll,  ii,  Sta. 
Cam. 


390.  for  fealing']  forsealing  Anon.  ap. 
Cam.  for-sealing  Wh.  ii. 

400.  wholefome  Beueridge]  wholefome 
Beveridge  Fa.  wholfome  Beveridge  F  . 
wholfome  Beveridg  F  .  wholesome  bev¬ 
erage  Mai.  et  seq. 


nettles,’  etc.  Staunton,  to  make  sure  that  the  nettles  are  not  the  mild  teazel,  but  of 
the  proper,  smarting  variety,  proposes  ‘  stinging  neetles.’  Abbott  (p.  380),  not  to  be 
outdone  by  the  ‘wolf’s  long  howl  from  Oonalaska’s  shore,’  would  fain  have  us  read: 
‘  Is  go-ads,  tho-rns,’  etc. — Ed. 

385.  blench]  Stkevens  :  To  ‘  blench  is  to  start  off,  to  shrink.'  As  in  Ham.  II,  ii, 
626 :  ‘  if  he  but  blench,  I  know  my  course.’  Leontes  means — ‘  could  any  man  so 
start  or  fly  off  from  propriety  of  behaviour  ?’ 

390,  391.  sealing  ...  of  Tongues]  Capell  (p.  166)  :  This  phrase  is  one  of  the 
Poet  s  hardinesses ;  his  meaning, — sealing  up  tongues  that  are  injurious,  injure  by 
slander. 

395-  blemish]  Walker  (Vers.  66)  has  an  Article  on  ‘certain  classes  of  words 
the  greater  part  of  them  composed  of  two  short  syllables,  flourish,  nourish,  punish, 
etc.,  trouble,  humble,  couple,  little,  etc.,  suffer,  master,  finger,  etc.,  which  are  frequently 
contracted  into  one  syllable,  or  placed  in  monosyllabic  places  in  the  line.’  Of  the 
present  line,  he  says  :  ‘  I  suspect  we  should  write  and  arrange,— “  I’ll  give  no  blemish 
t’  her  honour,  none.  My  lord,”  ’  where,  of  course,  ‘  blemish  ’  is  to  be  contracted  into 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


55 


Leo.  This  is  all  : 

Do’t,  and  thou  haft  the  one  halfe  of  my  heart  ; 

Do’t  not,  thou  fplitt’ft  thine  owne. 

Cam.  lie  do’t,  my  Lord. 

Leo. I  will  feeme  friendly,  as  thou  haft  aduis’d  me.  Exit 

Cam.  0  miferable  Lady.  But  for  me, 

What  cafe  ftand  I  in  f  I  muft  be  the  poyfoner 
Of  good  Polixenes,  and  my  ground  to  do’t, 

Is  the  obedience  to  a  Matter  ;  one, 

Who  in  Rebellion  with  himfelfe,  will  haue 
All  that  are  his,  fo  too.  To  doe  this  deed, 

Promotion  followes  :  If  I  could  find  example 
Of  thoufand’s  that  had  ftruck  anoynted  Kings, 

And  flourifh’d  after,  Il’d  not  do’t  :  But  fince 

407.  me,']  me!  Ff,  Rowe.  412.  To  doe]  To  Rowe. 

410.  Majler ;  one]  Mafter,  one  F4  414.  thoufand’s]  thoufandsY 3F4. 

Rowe,  Pope.  415.  /I’d]  I’ Id  F4.  I’d  Pope. 

one  syllable.  It  is  observable  that  Walker  judiciously  says  ‘  we  should  write,’  etc. 
He  certainly  never  could  have  so  spoken  the  line. — Ed. 

403,  404.  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

408.  What  case]  Abbott,  §  86 :  That  is,  In  what  a  position  am  I  ?  [See  also, 
if  need  be,  this  same  section  for  other  examples  of  the  omission  of  a  after  what.] 

412.  so  too]  Delius:  That  is,  in  rebellion  with  themselves. — Deighton:  Who 
being  a  rebel  to  himself,  not  truly  loyal  to  his  own  nature,  desires  that  his  subjects 
should  be  equally  disloyal  by  doing  deeds  which  show  no  real  fidelity  to  him  (the 
‘obedience,’  line  410,  demanded  of  them  being  no  true  obedience);  not  as  Delius 
explains  it. 

414.  anoynted  Kings]  For  Blackstone’s  note  on  this  line  as  bearing  on  the  date 
of  composition,  and  for  Douce’s  reply,  see  Appendix,  ‘  Date  of  Composition.’ 

415-  Il’d]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  The  original  has  ‘  I  Yd.’  So  we  would  is  con¬ 
tracted  to  we’ Id,  not  we’d.  But  I  had  becomes  I’d,  and  we  had,  we’d.  That  the  / 
was  pronounced  as  well  as  written  in  would  and  should,  and  in  I’ Id  and  we’ Id,  as 
late  as  the  beginning  of  the  last  century,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  See  evidence  of  it 
in  the  Dramatis  Personae  of  Farquhar’s  Twin  Rivals,  1702,  where,  and  throughout 
the  play,  the  name  of  the  two  principal  characters  is  printed  not  Wouldbe,  but 
Wou’dbe,  where  the  apostrophe  marks  an  omitted  sound.  [Even  more  strength 
would  have  been  added  to  White’s  just  argument  had  he  correctly  reprinted  the  text 
of  the  Folio,  which  is,  not  I’ Id  but  ‘  Il’d.’  That  the  l  was  usually  pronounced 
Walker  ( Crit .  ii,  86)  has  shown  by  rhymes,  e.  g.  V.  and  A.,  385, — ‘  thy  palfrey  as 
he  should,  Welcomes  the  warm  approach  of  sweet  desire.  Affection  is  a  coal  that 
must  be  cool d’ ;  White  has  instanced  Farquhar’s  Twin  Rivals  in  1702  as  an  instance 
where  the  contractions  wou’d,  shod d  mark  the  omission  of  l  in  pronunciation.  He 
might  have  cited  much  later  instances.  In  Garrick’s  Version  of  the  present  play, 
in  his  Works,  printed  in  1774,  this  omission  is  uniformly  indicated. — Ed.] 


402 

405 

410 

415 


56 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Nor  Braffe,nor  Stone,  nor  Parchment  beares  not  one, 
Let  Villanie  it  felfe  forfwear’t.  I  muft 
Forfake  the  Court  :  to  do’t,or  no,  is  certaine 
To  me  a  breake-neck.  Happy  Starre  raigne  now, 
Here  comes  Bohemia.  Enter  Polixenes. 

Pol.  This  is  ftrange  :  Me  thinkes 
My  fauor  here  begins  to  warpe.  Not  fpeake? 

Good  day  Camillo. 

Cam.  Hayle  most  Royall  Sir. 

Pol.  What  is  the  Newes  i’th’Court  ? 

Cam.  None  rare  (my  Lord.) 

Pol.  The  King  hath  on  him  fuch  a  countenance, 
As  he  had  loft  fome  Prouince,and  a  Region 
Lou’d,  as  he  loues  himfelfe  :  euen  now  I  met  him 
With  cuftomarie  complement,  when  hee 
Wafting  his  eyes  to  th’  contrary,  and  falling 
A  Lippe  of  much  contempt,  fpeedes  from  me,  and 


416 


420 


425 


430 

432 


417.  Villanie']  villiany  F  . 

forfwear’t]  forfwirt  Fa.  for¬ 
swear  it  Ktly. 

419.  Starre]  Ff,  Rann,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  W  h.  ii.  Star,  Rowe  et  cet. 

now,]  now.  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
now!  Theob.  et  seq. 


420.  [Scene  iv.  Pope-f. 

422.  My  fauor]  Me  fauor  Fr 
424.  Hayle]  Hoyle  Fa.  Hoy l 


Hail  F 


427.  on  him]  one  him  F  . 

428.  he  had]  had  he  F^,  Rowe  i. 


419-  breake-neck]  Halliwell:  The  inversed  term,  neck-breah,  is  still  in  use  in 
the  provinces. 

419-  Happy  Starre]  Deighton  :  That  is,  ‘  may  some  good  Providence  care  for 
my  country,  now  in  so  evil  a  plight!’  [I  think  it  rather  refers  to  the  entrance  of 
Polixenes,  and  means,  ‘  may  some  propitious  Star  guide  me  in  this  interview.’— Ed.] 

•  cn2'  t°J^arpe^  ScHMIDT  says  that  this  means  ‘  to  change  for  the  worse,’  and  he 
is  followed  by  the  Century  Dictionary.  [But  I  think  it  rather  means  that  the  wel¬ 
come  of  Polixenes  threatens  to  become  shrunken  or  distorted  by  the  coolness  of 
eontes.  It  almost  seems  as  though  Shakespeare  recalled  his  own  song  in  As  You 
Like  It;  ‘  Freeze,  freeze,  thou  bitter  sky  .  .  .  Though  thou  the  waters  warp,  Thy 
sting  is  not  so  sharp  As  friend  remembered  not.' _ Ed.] 

C^’^r  iS]  ThC  emphasis  here  falls  0D  ‘is-’  ‘  What  be  the  news  in  the 

AB4BOTTA§ro7.had]'  F°r0ther  eXamPkS  Where  "  iS  USed  apParently  f°r  as  if  see 
432.  speedes  from  me]  M.  Mason  (p.  126) :  This  is  a  stroke  of  nature  worthy 
seem  SlyTo  P^"  ^  ^  3  ^  “snred  Camill°  that  he  would 

gets  the  better  of  accordlng  to  hls  advice;  but  on  meeting  him,  his  jealousy 

is  resolution,  and  he  finds  it  impossible  to  restrain  his  hatred. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


57 


So  leaues  me,  to  confider  what  is  breeding,  433 

That  changes  thus  his  Manners. 

Cam.  I  dare  not  know  (my  Lord.)  435 

Pol.  How, dare  not?  doe  not?  doe  you  know,  and  dare  not? 

Be  intelligent  to  me,  ’tis  thereabouts  : 

'  For  to  your  felfe,what  you  doe  know,  you  muft, 

And  cannot  fay,  you  dare  not.  Good  Camillo, 

Your  chang’d  complexions  are  to  me  a  Mirror,  440 

Which  fhewes  me  mine  chang’d  too:for  I  muft  be 
A  partie  in  this  alteration, finding 
My  felfe  thus  alter’d  with’t. 

Cam.  There  is  a  fickneffe 

Which  puts  fome  of  vs  in  diftemper,  but  445 


434.  changes ]  changeth  Glo. 

435.  (my  Lord )]  Om.  Han. 

436.  How,  dare  not ]  How,  date  not 

L- 

doe  not  ?  ...not  ?]  dare  not  ?  you 
do  know,  and  dare  not  Han. 

436,  437-  doe  not  ? ...dare  not  ? ...me,] 


do  not.  ...dare  not. ..me  ?  Cap.  do  not? 
...dare  not. ..me  ?  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Rann, 
Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh. 
i,  Sta.  Ktly. 

438.  you  doe]  do  you  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 
443.  with’t]  with  it  Rowe  ii  + ,  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 


433.  consider]  After  this  word  Hudson  places  a  full  stop,  and  connects  ‘  What  is 
breeding  ’  with  the  next  line,  with  the  following  note :  1  Does  not  Camillo’s  reply 
fairly  suppose  the  clause  after  “consider”  to  be  interrogative?  And  where  is  the 
objection  to  taking  “  consider  ”  as  used  absolutely,  or  without  an  object  expressed  ?’ 

433.  what]  This  is  the  emphatic  word. — Ed. 

436,  437-  How  .  .  .  thereabouts]  The  punctuation  in  the  Folio  of  these  two 
lines  is,  to  me,  satisfactory,  except,  perhaps,  the  interrogation  after  the  first  ‘  doe  not.’ 
By  changing  this  question  into  an  affirmation  the  sense  becomes,  ‘  How,  you  cannot 
mean  dare  not,  you  must  mean  do  not?  Emphatically  I  prefer  the  interrogation  at  the 
end  of  the  line,  rather  than  to  continue  the  question :  ‘  and  dare  not  be  intelligent  to 
me  ?’  as  the  majority  of  editors  read.  The  first  line  is  all  astonishment  and  bewil¬ 
derment,  then  Polixenes  commands :  ‘  Be  intelligible — it  must  be  something  of  this 
nature:  that  you  know  and  dare  not  tell ;  for  what  you  know  must  be  intelligible  to 
yourself,  and  you  cannot  say  you  dare  not  tell  yourself.’  ‘Intelligent’  elsewhere 
means  communicative ,  but  that  meaning  can  hardly  apply  here  where  Polixenes  tells 
Camillo  to  be  ‘  intelligent  ’  to  himself.  I  have  therefore  paraphrased  it  by  intelligible. 
—Ed. 

440.  chang’d  complexion3  i  This  refers  to  Camillo’s  blanched  cheeks,  the  sight 
whereof  reacts  on  Polixenes  and  causes  his  to  blanch  also.  The  same  phraseology 
is  used  in  Hen.  V :  II,  i,  72:  ‘Why,  how  now,  gentlemen!  What  see  ye  in  those 
papers  that  ye  lose  So  much  complexion  ?  Look  ye,  how  they  change  !  Their  cheeks 
are  paper.’  Possibly,  it  may  refer  to  Camillo’s  becoming  red  and  white  by  turns. 
Schmidt  erroneously  defines  ‘  complexion  ’  here  as  ‘  the  external  appearance,’  not 
‘  the  colour  of  the  skin.’ — Ed. 


58 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 
446 


450 


I  cannot  name  the  Difeafe,  and  it  is  caught 
Of  you,  that  yet  are  well. 

Pol.  How  caught  of  me  ? 

Make  me  not  fighted  like  the  Bafilifque. 

I  haue  look’d  on  thoufands,  who  haue  fped  the  better 
By  my  regard,  but  kill’d  none  fo  :  Camillo , 

As  you  are  certainely  a  Gentleman,  thereto 


448.  How  caught\  How  !  caught  Cap. 
Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var. 
Dyce,  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 

450.  I  haue~\  I  FaF3  (misprint.  / 
haue  is  the  catchword  on  preceding 


452 

page).  I've  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
452.  certainely ]  cerrainly  F^. 

Gentleman,  thereto ]  Gentleman, 
Pope-K  Gentleman  ;  thereto,  Var.  ’73. 
Gentleman  thereto ;  Var.  ’21. 


449.  Basilisque]  Halliwell:  The  popular  notion  of  the  basilisk  in  the  six¬ 
teenth  century,  derived  primarily  from  Pliny,  may  be  gathered  from  the  following 
extract  from  Andrewe  s  edition  of  The  Myrrour  and  Dyscrypcyon  of  the  tVorlde, 
n.  d.,  ‘  There  be  in  Inde  the  basilicocks  which  have  the  sight  so  venymous  that  they 
slee  al  men,  and  so  do  they  al  foules  and  bestes.’  [‘  To  come  now  vnto  the  Basiliske, 
whom  all  other  serpents  do  flie  from  and  are  affraid  of :  albeit  he  killeth  them  with 
his  very  breath  and  smel  that  passeth  from  him ;  yea,  and  (by  report)  if  he  do  but  set 
his  eie  on  a  man,  it  is  enough  to  take  away  his  life.’ — Holland’s  Plitiic,  Bk.  xxix, 
Cap.  iv.  ‘  The  Cockatrice  is  called  Basiliscus  in  Greeke,  and  Regulus  in  Latine, 
and  hath  that  name  Regulus  of  a  litle  King,  for  he  is  King  of  serpents,  and  they  are 
afeard  and  flye  when  they  see  him,  for  he  slayeth  them  with  his  smell  and  with  his 
breathe :  and  slayeth  also  all  thing  that  hath  lyfe,  with  breathe  and  with  sight.  In 
his  sight,  no  fowle,  nor  birde  passeth  harmlesse,  and  though  he  be  farre  from  the 
foule,  yet  it  is  burnt  and  devoured  by  his  mouthe.’ — Batman  vppon  Bartholome, 
P-  3S°»  verso.  ‘  There  is  some  question  amongest  Writers,  about  the  generation  of 
this  Serpent ;  for  some  (and  those  very  many  and  learned)  affirme,  him  to  be  brought 
forth  of  a  Cockes  egge.  For  they  say  that  when  a  Cock  groweth  old,  he  layeth  a 
certaine  egge  without  any  shell,  instead  whereof  it  is  couered  with  a  very  thicke 
skinne,  which  is  able  to  withstand  the  greatest  force  of  an  easie  blow  or  fall.  They 
say  moreouer,  that  this  Egge  is  layd  onely  in  the  Summer-time,  about  the  beginning 
of  Dogge-dayes,  being  not  long  as  a  Hens  Egge,  but  round  and  orbiculer :  Some¬ 
times  of  a  dusty,  sometimes  of  a  Boxie,  sometimes  of  a  yellowish  muddy  colour  . 
and  afterward  set  vpon  by  a  Snake  or  a  Toad,  bringeth  forth  the  Cockatrice,  being 
halfe  a  foot  in  length,  the  hinder  part  like  a  Snake,  the  former  part  like  a  Cocke, 
because  of  a  treble  combe  on  his  forehead.  .  .  .  Among  all  liuing  creatures,  there  is 
none  that  perisheth  sooner  then  dooth  a  man  by  the  poyson  of  a  Cockatrice,  for  with 
his  sight  he  killeth  him,  because  the  beames  of  the  Cockatrices  eyes,  doe  corrupt  the 
visible  spirit  of  a  man,  which  visible  spirit  corrupted,  all  the  other  spirits  coming  from 
the  braine  and  life  of  the  hart,  are  thereby  corrupted,  &  so  the  man  dyeth.’ — Topsell, 
History  of  Serpents,  p.  119. — Ed.] 

4S2-  As  you,  etc.]  Inasmuch  as  the  syllables  of  this  line,  when  counted  on  the 
fingers,  prove  to  be  twelve,  three  suggestions  have  been  made  for  its  reformation.— 
Capell  reads :  ‘  As  you  are,  certain,  gentleman ;  thereto,’  where  ‘  certain  ’  is  used 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


59 

453 


Clerke-like  experienc’d,  which  no  leffe  adornes 
Our  Gentry,  then  our  Parents  Noble  Names, 

In  whole  fucceffe  we  are  gentle  :  I  befeech  you,  455 

If  you  know  ought  which  do’s  behoue  my  knowledge, 

Thereof  to  be  inform’d,  imprifon’t  not 
In  ignorant  concealement. 

Cam.  I  may  not  anfwere. 

Pol.  A  Sickneffe  caught  of  me,  and  yet  I  well  ?  460 

I  muft  be  anfwer’d.  Do’ft  thou  heare  Camillo , 


453.  Clerke-like]  clerk-like,  Cap.  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll. 

experienc'd ]  expedienc'd  Ff, 

Rowe. 

adornes]  adotns  F  . 


455-  we  are ]  we're  Huds. 

456-  ought ]  aught  Theob.  ii  et  seq. 
457.  imprifon't ]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap. 

Dyce,  Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  Huds.  Rife,  Dtn. 
imprison  it  Var.  ’73  et  cet. 


adverbially,  which  is  quite  allowable. — Walker  (  Vers.  116)  finds  relief  in  pronouncing 
‘  Gentleman  ’  as  ‘  a  quasi-disyllable,’  but,  grown  bolder,  in  his  Crit.  iii,  94,  he  asserts 
that  it  is  1  a  disyllable  ’  without  qualification,  and  adds  that  4  thereto  ’  is  accented  on 
the  first  syllable. — Abbott,  §  499,  pronounces  the  line,  albeit  the  caesura  falls  at  the 
right  Alexandrine  stroke,  only  an  4  apparent  Alexandrine,’  and  calls  it  a  4  regular  verse 
of  five  accents  followed  by  a  foot,  more  or  less  isolated,  containing  one  accent.’  This 
extra  foot,  ‘  thereto,’  Abbott  accents  on  the  last  syllable.  Here  we  have  three  attempts 
to  correct  a  line  which  has  no  rhythmic  fault,  except  that  it  does  not  conform  to  the 
generality  of  the  lines  in  its  number  of  feet.  Each  foot  is  true  in  accent,  and  if  spoken 
properly  no  ear  could  detect  the  superfluity  of  syllables.  Two  extra  feet  are  less 
shocking  to  a  delicate  ear  than  to  hear  ‘  gentleman  ’  pronounced  gem' man,  a  pronun¬ 
ciation  indissolubly  associated,  in  our  American  ears,  with  plantation  negroes. — Ed. 

452.  thereto]  It  must  be  that  the  semicolon  after  this  word  in  the  Var.  ’21  is  a 
misprint. — Ed. 

453.  Clerke-like  experienc’d]  Of  the  comma  inserted  by  Capell  between  these 
two  words  there  is  much  to  be  said  in  favour.  4  The  speaker  compliments  Camillo,’ 
Capell  is  here  speaking  of  the  effect  of  this  comma,  4  with  being  a  gentleman,  a 
scholar,  and  a  man  of  knowledge  in  the  world,  for  that  is  meant  by  4  experienc’d  ’ ; 
they  have  been  united  till  now  in  one  epithet, — 4  Clerklike  experienc’d,’  which  is 
both  weak’ning  and  wrong ;  for  magis  magni  clerici  non  sunt  magis  magni  sapientes, 
as  wags  have  said  anciently.’ 

453.  which]  For  other  examples  of  the  use  of  4  which  ’  for  which  thing  used 
parenthetically,  see  Abbott,  §  271. 

455.  In  whose  success]  That  is, 4  in  succession  from  whom,’  as  Dr  Johnson 
points  out.  Schmidt  gives  a  similar  use  of  4  success  ’  in  2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  ii,  47. 

458.  ignorant  concealement]  According  to  Deighton,  4  ignorant  ’  is  here  used 
proleptically,  4  that  concealment  which  involves  ignorance  (on  my  part).’  4  Ignorant  ’ 
refers,  I  think,  to  Camillo,  and  the  phrase  means,  4  imprison  not  your  knowledge  in 
concealment  under  the  plea  of  ignorance,’  referring  to  lines  436-438,  as  is  shown  by 
the  fact  that  Polixenes  reverts  at  once  to  Camillo’s  previous  answer  that  he  could  not 
name  the  disease  which  was  caught  of  one  who  is  well. — Ed. 


6o 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


I  coniure  thee,  by  all  the  parts  of  man, 

Which  Honor  do’s  acknowledge,  whereof  the  leaft 
Is  not  this  Suit  of  mine,  that  thou  declare 
What  incidencie  thou  do’ft  gheffe  of  harme 
Is  creeping  toward  me  ;  how  farre  off,  how  neere, 
Which  way  to  be  preuented,if  to  be  : 

If  not,  how  belt  to  beare  it. 

Cam.  Sir,  I  will  tell  you, 

Since  I  am  charg’d  in  Honor,  and  by  him 

That  I  thinke  Honorable:  therefore  marke  my  counfaile, 

Which  muft  be  eu’n  as  fwiftly  followed,  as 

I  meane  to  vtter  it  ;  or  both  your  felfe,  and  me, 

Cry  loft,  and  fo  good  night. 


462 


465 


470 


474 


465-  gheffe ]  geffe  F2.  guefs  F3F4. 

466.  toward ]  towards  Rowe  ii  +  ,Var. 

’73- 

467.  if  to  he]  if  it  be  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns. 


469.  I  will]  I'll  Pope  +  ,  Mai.  Steev. 
Var.  Dyce  ii,  iiF,  Fiuds. 

472.  followed]  follow'd  Rowe  et  seq. 

473.  utter  it]  utter' t  Dyce  ii,  iii. 
and  me]  and  I  Coll.  (MS). 


462  coniure]  W.  A.  Wright  (Note  on  Macb.  IV,  i,  So) :  ‘  Conjure  ’  seems  to  be 
used  by  Shakespeare  always  with  the  accent  on  the  first  syllable,  except  in  Rom.  N 
Jul.,  ll,  1,  26,  and  Oth.,  I,  iii,  105.  In  both  these  passages  Shakespeare  says 
‘  conjure  ’  where  we  should  say  ‘  conjure.’  In  all  other  cases  he  uses  ‘  conjure  ’ 
whether  he  means  (1)  ‘adjure,’  (2)  ‘conspire,’  or  (3)  ‘use  magic  arts.’ 

462.  parts  of  man]  That  is,  all  the  duties  imposed  by  Honour  on  man.  ‘  Part  ’ 
is  here  used  in  this  sense  of  allotted  dtity  as  it  is  in  Generydes,  line  3013  •  ‘  Syr 
Anasore  the  knyght,  And  s,r  Darell,  |  And  All  the  toder  knyghtez  eu^chone  I 
Eche  for  his  parte  quyte  hym  self  full  wele.’ — (£.  £.  Text.  Soc.,  cited  by  the  Cent. 
Diet.)'  Schmidt’s  interpretation  of  ‘part’  as  ‘share  of  action,  particular  business 
task  ’  is  inadequate.  Deighton  rightly  defines  it. — Ed. 

465.  incidencie  ...  of  harme]  That  is,  ‘what  impending  harm.’  An  ‘inci¬ 
dencie,’  or  falling,  that  ‘  creeps  ’  is  somewhat  of  a  confusion  of  metaphors  —Ed 

473-  your  selfe,  and  me]  If  ‘me’  for  I  be  not  mere  carelessness,  there  is  but 
one  explanation  which  seems  to  me  at  all  possible,  and  this  is  that  it  is  not  Polixenes 
and  Camillo  who  ‘  cry  lost,'  but  it  is  the  imaginary  cry  of  spectators  who  see  their 
doom  and  bid  them  an  everlasting  farewell.  In  the  phrase  ‘  cry  aim  ’  it  was  not  the 
archer  who  aimed  that  so  cried  ;  it  was  the  spectators.  That  phrase  may  have  been 
(  overing  in  Camillo’s  mind,  and  the  present  passage  shaped  itself  on  that  formula  • 
both  for  yourself  and  for  me  there  is  the  cry  of  “lost,”  and  so  good  night  to  us  ’ 
The  use  of  the  very  phrase  ‘good  night’  implies  a  group  of  imaginary  friends;  no 
one  says  it  to  himself.  The  two  examples  of  ‘  me  ’  used  for  7  given  by  Abbott 

i§21°)’  "0t  paral,el  to  the  Present;  both  are  preceded  by  conjunctions  which 

ay  have  had,  as  Abbott  says,  a  quasi -prepositional  force. — Ed. 

,  474'  g°°d  m£htl  Schmidt  gives  several  examples  besides  the  present  where 
good  night  ’  means  farewell  for  ever,  lost  for  ever. 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


6l 


Pol.  On,  good  Caniillo.  475 

Cam.  I  am  appointed  him  to  murther  you. 

Pol.  By  whom,  Camillo  ? 

Cam.  By  the  King. 

Pol.  For  what  ? 

Cam.  He  thinkes,  nay  with  all  confidence  he  fweares,  480 
As  he  had  feen’t,  or  beene  an  Inftrument 
To  vice  you  to’t,  that  you  haue  toucht  his  Queene 
Forbiddenly.  483 

476.  /  am  appointed  hint]  I  appointed  appointed  by  him  Ktly.  I  appointed  am 

him  Ff.  I  am  appointed  Rowe,  Pope.  Anon.  MS  ap.  Hal. 

Iam  appointed  Him  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  476.  murther ]  murder  F3F4. 

I  am  appointed,  Sir,  Han.  Cap.  I  am 


476.  appointed  him]  This  ‘  him  ’  seems  to  have  given  rise  to  needless  difficulty. 
Abbott  (§  220)  (possibly  misled  by  Boswell,  who  says  that  by  is  understood,  and 
that  the  full  phrase  is  :  ‘Iam  appointed  by  him  to  murder  you)’  suggests  that  *  him  ’ 
is  used  for  by  him  in  virtue  of  its  representing  an  old  dative.  Deighton  says  that 
‘  this  seems  impossible  ’  and  that  there  is  a  confusion  of  two  constructions :  ‘  I  am 
appointed  he  who  should  murder  you’  and  ‘He  appointed  me  to  murder  you.’ 
Whereas  Steevens,  the  earliest  to  notice  the  passage  (probably  taking  his  cue  from 
Theobald’s  text),  gave  at  the  first  the  simplest  explanation,  viz. :  ‘Iam  the  person 
appointed  to  murder  you,’  or  as  Staunton  paraphrases  it :  ‘  I  am  the  agent  appointed 
to  murder  you.’ — Ed. 

482.  To  vice]  Warburton:  That  is,  to  draw,  persuade  you.  The  character 
called  the  Vice,  in  the  old  plays,  was  the  tempter  to  evil. — Heath  :  The  genuine 
reading  is  so  very  obvious,  one  can  scarce  miss  it :  ‘To  'ntice  you.’ — Steevens  :  The 
vice  is  an  instrument  well  known ;  its  operation  is  to  hold  things  together.  So  the 
Bailiff,  speaking  of  Falstaff :  ‘ana’  come  but  within  my  vice  ’  [2  Hen.  IV:  II,  i,  24]. 
It  may,  indeed,  be  no  more  than  a  corruption  of  ‘  to  advise  you.’ — Collier  :  ‘  To 
vice  ’  had  a  very  general  signification  in  the  time  of  Shakespeare ;  here  it  means,  to 
draw  as  by  a  mechanical  power.— R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  I  have  hardly  a  doubt  that 
there  has  been  a  slight  typographical  error,  and  that  we  should  read  ‘  to  'tice  you.’ — 
Halliwell  :  The  connexion  between  the  terms  instrument  and  vice  seems  to  indi¬ 
cate  that  the  latter  is  here  a  verb  in  the  sense,  to  screw,  or  move,  like  a  vice. 
‘  Turnoir,  the  vice  or  winch  of  a  presse.’ — Cotgrave.  ‘  Machina  lignea,  qua  quae 
imus  geruntur  aut  fiunt,  versatione  rotarum  spectatoribus  ostenduntur,  a  vice  or  gin 
of  wood,  wherewith  such  things  as  are  done  within  out  of  sight,  are  shewed  to  the 
beholders  by  the  turning  about  of  wheeles.’ — Nomenclator,  1585. — Staunton  :  That 
is ,  to  screw  you  to  it.  So  in  Twelfth  Night,  R,  i,  ‘ — I  partly  know  the  instrument 
That  screws  me  from  my  true  place  in  your  favour.’  [I  think  that  Hallivvell’s  reason 
is  just :  the  immediate  connection  of  ‘  instrument  ’  shows  that  the  text  is  right,  and 
that  mechanical  force  is  metaphorically  meant.  Heath’s  ’ ntice  was  modified  by 
Grant  White  into  'tice,  and  in  The  Parthenon  (7  June,  1862)  'tice  was  strongly  urged 
by  «  W.  W.”  (‘  the  late  Mr  Williams,’  says  Dyce),  the  only  critic  who  has,  in  this 
passage,  a  good  word  to  say  for  Warburton,  ‘  vho,  it  not  quite  right,’  says  W.  W.,  ‘  I 


62 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Pol.  Oh  then,  my  beft  blood  turne 
To  an  infected  Geliy,  and  my  Name 
Be  yoak’d  with  his,  that  did  betray  the  Beft  : 
Turne  then  my  frefheft  Reputation  to 
A  fauour,that  may  ftrike  the  dulleft  Nofthrill 
Where  I  arriue,and  my  approch  be  fhun’d, 


485 


489 


484.  blood]  bloud  F  . 

485.  Geliy]  jelly  Var.  ’78. 

486.  the  Befl]  the  Best  Knt  et  seq. 
(subs.). 


487.  Reputation ]  Reputatian  F^. 

488.  Nofthrill ]  NoflrilY F 
489-491  -jhun'd... read]  fear'd. ..read 

of  Anon.  MS  ap.  Hal. 


think  was  at  least  on  the  right  scent.’  <  An  “  instrument  ”  being  an  implement,  and 
a  vice  being  an  implement,’  he  goes  on  to  say,  ‘has  led  to  an  unquestioning  ad¬ 
mission  of  the  accuracy  of  the  old  copies.  But  an  instrument  also  means  an  agent, 
as  in  this  play,  V,  ii,  72,  “  all  the  instruments  [i.  e.  agents]  which  aided  to  expose  the 
child  ”  ;  and  in  Oth.,  IV,  ii “  you  my  father  do  suspect  An  instrument  of  this  your 
calling  back.”  Nor  is  it  necessary  to  multiply  quotations.  “  It  is  used,”  says  John¬ 
son,  “of  persons  as  well  as  things;  but  of  persons  very  often  in  an  ill  sense.” 
Exactly  so.  Camillo  means  to  say  that  Leontes  is  as  firmly  convinced  that  Polixenes 
is  intriguing  with  Hermione,  as  if  he  (Leontes)  had  been  an  instrument,  or  agent  to 
persuade  or  entice  him  to  such  a  course.  If  we  read  Pice  for  “  vice,”  we  have  then 
an  abbreviation  of  “entice”  very  common  in  our  old  authors,  and  of  which  Shake¬ 
speare  himself  furnishes  a  precedent  in  Tit.  And.  Ill,  iii These  two  have  ’ticed 
me  hither  to  this  place.”  This  reading  .  .  .  requires  no  eccentric  illustration  from 
clock-work  or  carpentry.’  W.  W.  commences  his  note  by  saying  that  ‘  upon  the  sole 
authority  of  this  [present]  passage  Johnson  and  Richardson  introduce  “  vice  ”  into 
their  Dictionaries  as  a  verb.  Explaining  the  substantive  “  vice  ”  as  “  a  kind  of  iron 
pness  used  by  workmen,”  Johnson  assigns  to  it,  as  a  verb,  the  meaning  “  to  draw  by 
a  kind  of  violence.”  What  the  “  kind  ”  of  violence  may  be,  by  which  a  vice-an 
implement  for  fixing  anything  firmly  in  one  place,— may  become  an  instrument  of 
traction,  he  does  not,  of  course,  state.’  This  criticism  of  Johnson  and  Richardson 
for  doing  their  simple  duty  is  unmerited.  Dyce  was  convinced  by  W.  W.’s  note 
and  adopted  Pice  in  the  text  of  both  his  Second  and  Third  Editions.  W.  W.  says 
that  Johnson’s  definition  of  the  verb  is  ‘to  draw  by  a  kind  of  violence,’  but  he  does 
not  give  the  edition  of  Johnson’s  Dictionary  from  which  he  quotes;  in  the  Second 
ltion  of  1755  there  is  simply  ‘To  Vice,  v.  n.  [from  the  noun].  To  draw  ’ _ Ed 

486.  the  Best]  Henderson:  Perhaps,  Judas.  The  word  is  spelt  with  a  capital 
letter  m  the  Folio.  [Unquestionably  Henderson  is  right  in  his  surmise,  but  the  weak¬ 
ness  of  the  remark  by  which  he  supports  it,  is  evident,  at  a  glance,  to  any  one  who  has 

before  him,  as  here,  the  text  of  the  Folio,  where  almost  every  noun  is  spelled  with  a 
capital. — Ed.]  r 

487.  to]  For  other  examples  of  unemphatic  monosyllables  in  emphatic  places,  see 
bbott,  §  357.  These  monosyllables  are  a  characteristic  of  this  play.  See  lines 

493)  50I>  S°4>  5r9)  and  531  infra,  in  this  very  scene. 

488.  sau°ur]  This  refers  to  the  prevalent  belief,  possibly  largely  due  to  the  Bible, 

the  nostriR-ED  ^  the  air  that  U  can  be  P^eived  by 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


63 

490 


Nay  hated  too,worfe  then  the  great’ ft  Infection 
That  ere  was  heard,  or  read. 

Cam.  Sweare  his  thought  ouer 
By  each  particular  Starre  in  Heauen,  and 
By  all  their  Influences  ;  you  may  as  well  494 

491.  read]  read  of  Ktly.  thought  Theob.  conj.,  Huds.  this  oath 

492.  his  thought]  this  though  Theob.  + .  Lettsom  ap.  Dyce. 

this,  though,  Coll.  (MS),  Wh.  i.  this 


492.  Sweare  .  .  .  ouer]  Theobald  ( Nichols ,  ii,  359)  at  first  hesitated  between 
‘  Swear  this  thought  over  ’  and  ‘  Swear  this  though  over,’  but  eventually,  in  his  edi¬ 
tion,  adopted  the  latter,  with  the  following  note  :  ‘  Polixenes,  in  the  preceding  speech, 
had  been  laying  the  deepest  imprecations  on  himself,  if  he  had  ever  abused  Leontes 
in  any  familiarity  with  his  queen.  To  which  Camillo  very  pertinently  replies  :  “  swear 
this  though  over,”  etc.,  i.  e.  Sir,  Though  you  should  protest  your  innocence  never  so 
often,  and  call  every  Star  and  Saint  in  heaven  to  witness  to  your  adjuration ;  yet  jeal¬ 
ousy  is  so  rooted  in  my  Master’s  bosom,  that  all  you  can  say  and  swear  will  have  no 
force  to  remove  it.’ — Johnson  :  ‘  Swear  his  thought  over  ’  may  perhaps  mean  over¬ 
swear  his  present  persuasion,  that  is,  endeavour  to  overcome  his  opinion,  by  swearing 
oaths  numerous  as  the  stars. — Capell  (167);  ‘  His  thought  ’  is  his  conceiv’d  jeal¬ 
ousy  ;  and  by  swearing  over  this  thought,  is  meant — bringing  arguments  against  it 
back’d  with  oaths,  and  those  oaths  as  numerous  as  the  stars  they  are  fetch’d  from. — 
Malone  :  The  vulgar  still  use  a  similar  expression  :  ‘  To  swear  a  person  down .’ — 
Halliwell  quotes  Meas.for  Meas.  V,  i,  243  :  ‘  Though  they  would  swear  down  each 
particular  saint  ’  as  a  proof  that  Shakespeare  himself  uses  the  phrase  which  Malone 
mentions.  [It  is  not  clear,  however,  that  the  citation  is  exactly  parallel. — Ed.] — 
Steevens  :  In  Shakespeare  we  have  ‘  weigh  out  ’  for  outweigh,  ‘  overcome  ’  for  come 
over,  etc.,  and  ‘over-swear’  for  swear  over  in  Twelfth  Night,  V,  i,  276: — ‘And  all 
those  sayings  will  I  over-swear.’ — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  The  original  text,  in  spite 
of  Theobald’s  indication  of  the  obvious  error,  has  been  hitherto  retained  with  the 
extraordinary  explanation  ‘  over-swear  his  thought !’  [In  White’s  Second  Edition  the 
original  text  is  retained  without  comment. — Ed.] — Staunton  :  Theobald’s  emenda¬ 
tion,  besides  being  foreign  to  the  mode  of  expression  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  is  a 
change  quite  uncalled  for ;  to  swear  over  =  over-swear,  is  merely  to  out-swear. — 
Dyce  (ed.  ii)  upholds  Staunton  in  the  assertion  that  ‘  no  Elizabethan  writer  would 
have  used  though  in  that  manner.’  ‘  The  old  text,’  he  adds,  ‘  if  right,  means  “  over¬ 
swear  his  thought  ” :  Camillo  has  said  in  his  preceding  speech,  “  He  thinks,  nay,  with 
all  confidence  he  swears  f  etc. — Keightley  {Exp.  199)  gives  an  interpretation  dif¬ 
fering  from  the  others:  ‘This,  if  correct,’  he  says,  ‘would  seem  to  mean  exercise 
his  thought,  try  to  banish  it.’  [Even  were  the  phrase  obscure,  which  it  is  not,  the 
original  text  should  stand  when  so  much  can  be  said  in  its  favour. — Ed.] 

494.  Influences]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  There  is  little,  if  any  doubt,  in  my  mind 
that  Shakespeare  wrote  influence.  See  note  on  ‘skyey  influences  ’  in  Meas.  for  Meas. 
Ill,  i,  9  [which  is  substantially  as  follows :]  The  rhythm,  both  here  and  [in  the 
present  passage  in  Wint.  Tale'],  would  seem  to  require  influence.  For  influence  in 
Shakespeare’s  time  was  a  word  without  a  plural,  and  was  used,  especially  when 
applied  to  heavenly  bodies  (to  which  service  it  was  then  almost  set  apart, — see  Cot- 


64 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Forbid  the  Sea  for  to  obey  the  Moone, 

As  (or  by  Oath)  remoue,  or(Counfaile)fhake 
The  Fabrick  of  his  Folly,  whofe  foundation 
Is  pyl’d  vpon  his  Faith,  and  will  continue 
The  Handing  of  his  Body. 

Pol.  How  fhould  this  grow  ? 

Cam.  I  know  not:  but  I  am  fure  Tis  fafer  to 
Auoid  what’s  growne,  then  queftion  how  Tis  borne. 

501.  I  anf\  I'm.  Pope-f ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 


495 


500 

502 


grave,  also  Richardson),  in  its  radical  sense  of  ‘  in-flowing,’  and  then  in  the  singular 
form,  even  when  all  those  bodies  are  spoken  of.  See  Milton,  who  frequently  uses  the 
word,  but  never  in  the  plural : — ‘  And  happie  Constellations  on  that  houre  Shed  their 
selectest  influence.  Par.  Lost,  VIII,  512  ;  ‘and  taught  the  fixt  [*.  e.  stars]  Their 
influence  malignant  when  to  shed.’— Ib.  X,  663 ;  ‘  Unmuffle,  ye  faint  stars,  and  thou 
fair  Moon.  ...  Or  if  your  influence  be  quite  damm’d  up.’ — Comus,  330.  [This 
note  was  written  in  salad-days.  At  a  maturer  age  White  would  never  have  made  a 
universal  assertion  on  any  question  of  language,  such  as,  that  ‘  influence  ’  was  ‘  a  word 
without  a  plural.’  For  a  moment  he  forgot  the  music  of  ‘  Canst  thou  bind  the  sweet 
influences  of  the  Pleiades,  or  loose  the  bands  of  Orion  ?’  And  in  the  Bible  Word-book, 
W.  Aldis  Wright,  in  reference  to  this  verse  in  Job,  quotes  :  ‘  The  astrologers  call  the 
evill  influences  of  the  starrs,  evill  aspects.’— Bacon,  Ess.  ix,  p.  29.  Unquestionably, 
White  is  in  the  main  right.  Influence  would  improve  the  rhythm  both  here  and  in 
Meas.  for  Meas. ;  the  j  sound  wherewith  the  word  ends  was  an  ample  indication,  if 
a  plural  were  at  any  time  needed. — Ed.] 

495'  for  to]  In  R.  G.  White’s  excellent  Essay  on  the  Authorship  of  Henry  VI, 
it  is  the  use  of  this  for  to  with  an  infinitive,  which  leads  him  to  discriminate  between 
Shakespeare  s  work  and  Greene’s.  Greene  appears  to  have  had  a  fondness  for  this 
idiom,  of  which  White  marked  more  than  sixty  instances  in  Greene’s  works,  whereas 
‘  Shakespeare  and  Marlowe,’  he  says  (p.  431),  ‘never  use’  it.  This  assertion  is  some¬ 
what  too  broad,  as  we  see  in  the  text  before  us.  But  still,  neither  this  present  in¬ 
stance,  nor  another  (given  by  Abbott,  §  152)  in  All's  Well,  V,  iii,  181,  nor  sundry 
others  (see  note  on  Ham.  Ill,  i,  167,  of  this  ed.),  really  damage  White’s  serviceable 
touchstone.  That  ‘  for  to  saint  ’  occurs  in  Pass.  Pil.  342  is,  thanks  to  White,  one  of 
the  grounds  for  disbelieving  that  portion  of  the  medley  to  have  been  written  by 
Shakespeare. — Ed. 

497,498.  whose  .  .  .  Faith]  Steevens  :  That  is,  this  folly  which  is  erected  on 
the  foundation  of  settled  belief. 

500-502.  How  .  .  .  borne]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  95)  would  divide  these  lines: 

‘  How  should  this  grow  ?  I  know  not ;  but  I'm  sure,  |  ’Tis  safer  to  avoid  what’s 
grown,  than  question  |  How  it  is  born.’  ‘  The  common  arrangement,’  he  remarks,  <  is 
anti- Shakespearian  partly  as  regards  the  flow,  partly  on  account  of  the  very  feeble 
ending,— “—’tis  safer  to  \  Avoid  what’s  grown,”  etc.  For  although  Shakespeare 
frequently  concludes  a  line  with  and,  or  some  other  particle  equally  inadmissible, 
according  to  our  modern  pronunciation  at  least  (possibly  there  may  have  been  some¬ 
thing  in  the  old  mode  of  accentuation  which  cleared  up  this  apparent  exception  to 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


65 

503 


If  therefore  you  dare  truft  my  honeftie, 

That  lyes  enclofed  in  this  Trunke,  which  you 
Shall  beare  along  impawnd,  away  to  Night, 

Your  Followers  I  will  whifper  to  the  Bufineffe, 

And  will  by  twoes,  and  threes,  at  feuerall  Pofternes, 

Cleare  them  oW  Citie  :  For  my  felfe,Ile  put 
My  fortunes  to  your  feruice(which  are  here 
By  this  difcouerie  loft.)  Be  not  vncertaine,  5 10 

For  by  the  honor  of  my  Parents,  I 
Haue  vttred  Truth:which  if  you  feeke  to  proue, 

I  dare  not  ftand  by  ;  nor  fhall  you  be  fafer, 

Then  one  condemnd  by  the  Kings  owne  mouth  : 

Thereon  his  Execution  fworne.  515 


513.  by]  by't  Han. 

514.  condemnd]  condemned  Ff. 

514,  515.  Then  ...mouth :  Thereon] 

Then... mouth,  thereon  (one  line)  Cap. 


Rann,  Mai.  Steev.Var.  Knt,  Dyce,  Cam. 
Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

515-  Thereon  his\  His  Han. 


Shakespeare’s  general  harmony),  yet  an  act  of  divorce  between  to  and  its  verb  is 
beyond  its  license.’ 

500.  How  should  .  .  .  grow]  That  is,  ‘  how  was  this  (likely)  to  grow  ?’  This 
use  of  should  (a  word  whereof  the  delicate  shade  of  meaning  is  frequently  difficult 
to  catch)  seems  to  increase  (as  Abbott,  §  325  says,  in  reference  to  ‘  What  should 
this  mean?’ — Hen.  VIII:  III,  ii,  160)  ‘the  emphasis  of  the  interrogation,  since  a 
doubt  about  the  past  (time  having  been  given  for  investigation)  implies  more  per¬ 
plexity  than  a  doubt  about  the  future.’ 

S°4)  S°S-  this  Trunke  .  .  .  impawnd]  ‘  Trunk  ’  is  here  used  with  a  double  mean¬ 
ing.  That  Camillo  means  his  body ,  he  shows  by  ‘  this,’  laying  his  hand  on  his  breast ; 
that  he  may  also  mean  a  chest  or  coffer,  is  shown  by  the  word  ‘  impawned.’ — Ed. 

506.  whisper]  Again  used  transitively  in  IV,  iv,  884 :  ‘  whisper  him  in  your 
behalfe.’  If  more  examples  are  needed,  see  Abbott,  §  200. 

508.  Cleare]  Deighton  :  This  word  in  such  a  context  looks  like  an  allusion  to 
the  clearing  of  goods  at  a  custom-house. 

510.  discouerie]  That  is,  revelation,  disclosure. 

5 1 1.  honor  of  my  Parents]  Polixenes  had  referred  to  ‘our  Parents  noble 
names.’ — Ed. 

512.  513.  seeke  .  .  .  stand  by]  Deighton:  That  is,  ‘if  you  should  test  my 
information  by  speaking  to  Leontes,  I  dare  not  stay  to  see  the  result.’  [Or,  per¬ 
haps,  1  if  you  seek  to  prove  that  what  I  have  said  is  true,  I  dare  not  maintain  it.’ 
—Ed.] 

514,  515.  mouth:  Thereon]  Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  95):  I  think  it  not  impossible 
that  Shakespeare  wrote  :  ‘  — by  th’  King’s  own  mouth,  dr5  thlreon,'  etc.  (dr*  might 
more  easily  slip  through  than  and.) 

515.  Thereon  .  .  .  sworne]  Deighton:  That  is,  ‘  whose  death  as  a  sequel  to 
his  conviction  has  been  predetermined.’ 

S 


66 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 

516 


Pol.  I  doe  beleeue  thee  : 

I  faw  his  heart  in’s  face.Giue  me  thy  hand, 

Be  Pilot  to  me,  and  thy  places  fhall 
Still  neighbour  mine.  My  Ships  arc  ready,  and 
My  people  did  expert  my  hence  departure  520 

Two  dayes  agoe.  This  Iealoufie 
Is  for  a  precious  Creature  :  as  fhee’s  rare, 

Muft  it  be  great  ;  and,  as  his  Perfon’s  mightie, 

Mull;  it  be  violent  :  and,  as  he  do’s  conceiue, 

He  is  difhonor’d  by  a  man,  which  euer  525 

Profefs’d  to  him :  why  his  Reuenges  muft 

In  that  be  made  more  bitter.  Feare  ore-fhades  me : 

Good  Expedition  be  my  friend,  and  comfort  528 


517.  in’s']  i’ns  F3.  in  his  Cap.  Var. 
’73,  ’78,  ’85,  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Reed, 
Var.  Knt,  Ktly. 

519.  arc]  Ft. 

521.  Iealoufie]  jealousy  of  his  W alker, 
Huds.  jealousy ,  Camillo,  Cartwright. 

526.  to  him  .•]  to  him,  Han.  love  to 
him  Ktly. 

528.  and  comfort ]  Heav'n  comfort 
Han.  Cap.  Coll,  ii  (MS).  God  comfort 


Sing,  conj.,  Ktly.  and  consort  Bulloch 
(transposing  this  line  to  follow  530). 

528,  529.  and  comfort...  Theame  :  but 
nothing ]  and  conserve. ..  Throne ;  but 
nothing  Anon.  ap.  Wh.  (Sh.  Schol.). 
God  comfort. ..and  pardon  his  crime, 
but  offspring  W.  W.  Lloyd  (N.  &  Qu. 
VIII,  i,  471).  and  comfort ! ...theme, 
wot  nothing  F.  Adams  (N.  &  Qu.  VIII, 
ii,  444). 


517.  saw  .  .  .  face]  Steevens  :  So  in  Macbeth:  ‘  To  find  the  mind’s  construc¬ 
tion  in  the  face.’  [A  singularly  inappropriate  quotation.  Steevens  does  not  give 
the  Act  and  Scene,  possibly  in  the  trust  that  no  one  would  verify  it ;  assuredly  it 
could  not  have  been  verified  by  succeeding  editors  who  have  cited  it.  Duncan  (I,  iv, 
Ii)  says :  ‘  There’s  no  art  To  find  the  mind’s  construction  in  the  face.’ — Ed. 

518.  places]  Malone:  Perhaps  Shakespeare  wrote — ‘  thy  paces  shall,’  etc.  Thou 
shalt  be  my  conductor,  and  we  will  both  pursue  the  same  path.  The  old  reading, 
however,  may  mean, — wherever  thou  art,  I  will  still  be  near  thee. — Steevens  :  By 
‘  places  ’  Shakespeare  means — preferments,  or  honours. 

521.  This  Iealousie]  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  257)  :  We  might  read,  ‘This  his  jeal¬ 
ousy  ;’  but  that  a  syllable  would  still  be  wanting.  But  I  think  Shakespeare  wrote, 
‘  This  jealousy  of  his  the  concluding  words  of  the  line  having  dropped  out,  by  an 
accident  not  altogether  unfrequent  in  the  Folio.  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  96)  repeats  the 
same  emendation  :  of  his,  and  asks  :  ‘  Can  the  proximity  of  is  to  his  have  had  any 
hand  in  producing  the  error?’ 

526.  Profess’d]  Staunton  ( Athenaum ,  27  June,  1874) :  The  best  emendation 
that  occurs  to  me,  after  long  pondering  on  the  passage,  is  to  read : — ‘  Profess’d 
to  love  him,’  etc.  Note  in  Hermione’s  noble  vindication  of  her  conduct,  that 
the  professed  love  of  Polixenes  to  her  husband  is  particularly  dwelt  on  ;  see  III, 
ii,  74-76. 

528-53°-  Good  .  .  .  suspition]  These  lines  have  been  pronounced  incompre- 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


67 


The  gracious  Queene,  part  of  his  Theame;but  nothing 

Of  his  ill-ta’ne  fufpition.  Com q  Camillo,  530 


529.  Queene,  part\  Queen;  part 
Theob.  Queen's ;  part  Warb.  Johns. 
Queen  !  part  Cap. 

Queene, ...his  Theame ;  but  noth¬ 


ing ]  queen' s... this  theme,  but  noting  R. 
M.  Spence  (N.  &  Qu.  VII,  ix,  24). 

529.  Thearne~]  F2.  Theam  F3F4. 
dream  Coll,  ii  (MS). 

but  nothing ]  by  his  noting  Orger. 


bensible  and  have  given  rise  to  much  discussion.  R.  G.  White  (ed.  ii)  says  that 
‘  Shakespeare  himself  might  be  able  to  tell  us  what  he  meant  when  he  wrote  it ;  no 
one  else.’  The  various  remedies  which  have  been  proposed  in  the  belief  that  the  lines 
are  corrupt  will  be  found  in  the  Textual  Notes,  and  some  of  them,  as  defended  by 
their  authors,  in  the  Commentary.  For  me  the  text  needs  no  emendation,  and  I  can¬ 
not  but  believe  that  the  main  obstruction  to  an  apprehension  of  the  passage  lies  in  the 
failure  to  comprehend  the  dramatic  situation.  It  is  necessary  that  we  should  retain 
our  respect  for  Polixenes,  and  it  is  a  dramatic  necessity  that  he  should  be  removed 
from  the  scene.  There  can  be  no  friendly  leave-taking  from  Leontes,  still  less  can 
there  be  a  hostile  one.  Polixenes  must  go  away  by  stealth,  there  is  no  other  course. 
But,  to  save  himself  by  flight,  and  purposely  leave  behind  the  queen  to  bear  the  full 
brunt  of  Leontes’s  revenge  would  be  contemptible,  and  forfeit  every  atom  of  our  re¬ 
spect  for  him.  He  must  be  represented  then  as  entirely  ignorant  that  Hermione  is 
included  in  the  worst  suspicions  of  the  king,  and  likewise  as  fully  impressed  with  the 
idea  that  this  flight  of  his  is  all  that  is  needed  eventually  to  restore  sunshine  to  the  Court. 
Through  his  veneration,  almost,  for  Hermione  he  knew  that  her  gentle  heart  must  suffer 
some  pang  over  such  an  unhappy  ending  of  a  visit  which  had  been  throughout  unclouded 
and  prolonged  at  her  earnest  entreaty.  Some  comfort  she  will  therefore  need,  and 
this  she  will  find  in  his  safe  departure.  His  stealthy  flight,  abhorrent  as  it  is  to  him, 
when  thus  incited  by  a  chivalrous  devotion  to  Hermione,  appears  in  the  light  of  a  self- 
sacrifice,  and  instead  of  tarnishing  our  admiration  for  him,  serves  but  to  brighten  it. 
Taking  this  view  of  the  dramatic  situation,  the  lines  before  us  seem  to  me  intelligible 
as  they  stand,  without  emendation.  ‘  May  my  hasty  departure,’  says  Polixenes  in 
effect,  ‘  prove  my  best  course,  and  bring  what  comfort  it  may  to  the  gracious  Queen 
whose  name  cannot  but  be  linked  with  mine  in  the  King’s  thoughts,  but  who  is  not 
yet  the  fatal  object  of  his  ill-founded  suspicion.’ — Ed. 

Here  follow  the  notes  of  the  commentators : — 

Warburton  :  How  could  this  expedition  comfort  the  queen  ?  on  the  contrary,  it 
would  increase  her  husband’s  suspicion.  We  should  read :  ‘  and  comfort  The  gra¬ 
cious  queen's ;  i.  e.  be  expedition  my  friend,  and  be  comfort  the  queen’s  friend. — 
Johnson  :  Dr  Warburton’s  conjecture  is,  I  think,  just ;  but  what  shall  be  done  with 
the  following  words,  of  which  I  can  make  nothing  ?  Perhaps  the  line  connecting 

them  to  the  rest  is  lost : — ‘  but  nothing  Of  his  ill  ta’en  suspicion - !’  [Wagner 

and  Proescholdt  make  the  same  conjecture  as  to  the  loss  of  a  line.]  Jealousy  is 
a  passion  compounded  of  love  and  suspicion ;  this  passion  is  the  theme  or  subject  of 
the  King’s  thoughts.  Polixenes,  perhaps,  wishes  the  Queen,  for  her  comfort,  so  much 
of  that  theme  or  subject  as  is  good,  but  deprecates  that  which  causes  misery.  ‘  May 
part  of  the  King’s  present  sentiments  comfort  the  Queen,  but  away  with  his  suspicion.’ 
This  is  such  meaning  as  can  be  picked  out. — W.  Aldis  Wright  [Cam.  Ed.),  after 
quoting  Dr  Johnson’s  remark  about  Warburton,  and  his  suggestion  that  perhaps  a  line 


68 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


[528-530.  Good  Expedition  .  .  .  ill-ta’ne  suspition] 

is  lost,  remarks  that,  ‘  In  fact  we  should  have  expected  Polixenes  to  say  that  his  flight 
without  Hermione  would  be  the  best  means  not  only  of  securing  his  own  safety,  but 
of  dispelling  the  suspicions  Leontes  entertained  of  his  queen.’ — Heath  (p.  207)  : 
The  verb,  comfort,  as  appears  by  the  stile  of  our  laws,  had  a  double  signification.  It 
signified,  to  alleviate  sorrow,  and  to  assist,  or  encourage.  The  poet  employs  the  word 
in  both  senses  in  this  passage,  according  to  the  subject  to  which  it  is  applied.  Bohe¬ 
mia’s  wish,  therefore,  is :  That  the  expedition  he  was  about  to  use  might  be  fortunate 
to  himself  and  prove  a  comfort  to  the  Queen  too,  his  partner  in  the  King’s  imputation, 
as  he  was  assured,  from  her  gracious  disposition,  that  she  could  not  but  be  very 
deeply  affected  with  grief  if  any  misfortune  should  befall  himself;  but  at  the  same 
time  he  wishes,  too,  that  his  flight  might  not  give  the  least  handle  or  encouragement 
to  strengthen  the  King’s  ill-grounded  suspicion. — Capell  (p.  167):  The  speaker’s 
being  in  safety  might  (in  fact)  be  some  comfort  to  the  person  the  wish  is  made  for, 
under  the  old  reading ;  but  ’tis  absurd  that  he  should  think  of  it  here ;  his  first  prayer 
is  for  himself,  and  is  drawn  from  his  '■fear a  short  one  follows  it  for  the  queen ; 
and  in  calling  her  ‘ gracious  ’  he  is  reminded  that  out  of  that  graciousness  rises  her 
present  danger ;  that  the  jealousy  of  Leontes  is  built  on  it,  and  had  no  other  founda¬ 
tion,  which  he  expresses  in  the  words  that  follow  his  prayer — *  part  of  his  theme,  but 
nothing  Of  his  ill  ta’en  suspicion,’  meaning  that  the  graciousness  was  part  of  it,  but 
was  improperly  made  so  of  his  suspicion. — Steevens  :  Perhaps  the  sense  is,  May 
that  good  speed,  which  is  my  friend,  comfort  likewise  the  Queen,  who  is  ‘  part  of  its 
theme,’  i.  e.  partly  on  whose  account  I  go  away ;  but  may  not  the  same  comfort  ex¬ 
tend  itself  to  the  groundless  suspicions  of  the  King,  i.  e.  may  not  my  departure  sup¬ 
port  him  in  them  !  His  for  its  is  common  with  Shakespeare :  and  Paulina  says,  in  a 
subsequent  scene,  that  she  does  not  choose  to  appear  a  friend  to  Leontes,  ‘  in  com¬ 
forting  his  evils,’  i.  e.  in  strengthening  his  jealousy  by  appearing  to  acquiesce  in  it. — 
Malone  :  ‘  Comfort  ’  is,  I  apprehend,  here  used  as  a  verb.  Good  expedition  befriend 
me,  by  removing  me  from  a  place  of  danger,  and  comfort  the  innocent  Queen,  by 
removing  the  object  of  her  husband’s  jealousy ;  the  Queen,  who  is  the  subject  of  his 
conversation,  but  without  reason  the  object  of  his  suspicion  !  We  meet  with  a  similar 
phraseology  in  Twelfth  Night,  III,  iv,  280 :  ‘  Do  me  this  courteous  office,  as  to  know 
of  the  knight ;  what  my  offence  to  him  is  :  it  is  something  of  my  negligence,  nothing 
of  my  purpose.'  [This  note  and  paraphrase  of  Malone  receives  the  approval  of 
Dyce,  White  (ed.  i),  and  Deighton.  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  96)  gives  additional 
examples  of  this  use  of  *  nothing  ’ :  Ant.  Cleop.  II,  ii,  79,  ‘  Let  this  fellow  Be 
nothing  of  our  strife  ’ ;  Meas.  for  A/eas.  II,  iv,  71,  ‘  I’ll  make  it  my  morn  prayer  To 
have  it  added  to  the  faults  of  mine,  And  nothing  of  your  answer.’] — Staunton: 
We  are  still  wide — toto  coelo,  tota  regione — of  the  genuine  text,  now,  it  may  be  feared, 
irrecoverable. — Halliwf.ll  :  In  other  words,  May  expedition  be  my  friend  by  re¬ 
moving  me  from  this  scene  of  danger,  and  at  the  same  time  may  my  absence,  the 
object  thus  accomplished,  comfort  the  beautiful  queen,  who  is,  indeed,  partly  the  sub¬ 
ject  of,  but  in  no  degree  the  reasonable  object  of,  his  suspicion.  If  the  words  in  the 
next  line  be  taken  more  literally,  it  must  be  presumed  that  Polixenes  had  misappre¬ 
hended  the  exact  force  of  Camillo’s  former  speech,  and  was  thinking  that  he  himself 
was  the  chief  object  of  the  suspicion  of  Leontes.  The  meaning  then  will  be :  com¬ 
fort  the  beautiful  queen,  who  is  part  of  the  subject  of  his  thoughts,  but  who  has 
not  fallen  under  his  suspicion.  There  is  the  difficulty,  in  this  interpretation,  arising 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 

I  will  refpefl  thee  as  a  Father,  if 

Thou  bear’ ft  my  life  off,  hence  :  Let  vs  auoid. 

S32-  °ffi  hence]  off  hence  Rowe. 


from  tlie  obvious  circumstance  that  guilt  must  be  shared  by  both,  but  Polixenes  may 
be  presumed  to  imagine  that  he  alone  had  displayed  courtesies  misinterpreted  by 
Leontes,  and  that  the  queen,  who  had  not  been  seriously  suspected,  would  yet  receive 
comfort  from  his  absence  by  the  then  impossibility  of  a  surmise  of  her  bestowing  even 
a  faint  appreciation  on  him  degenerating  into  actual  suspicion.  In  Greene’s  novel,  no 
intimation  is  given  to  the  character  answering  to  Polixenes  of  the  cause  of  the  king’s 
anger.— The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  We  think  that  the  reason  that  this  passage  has  been 
found  obscure  is  because  ‘  expedition  ’  has  been  taken  in  the  sense  of  hasty  departure  ; 
whereas,  if  it  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  speed  (used  as  it  is  found  in  III,  ii,  155),— 
for  success,  process  of  event,  issue  or  result  of  occurrence,  destined  ordination  of  action 
or  incident, — the  meaning  of  the  whole  passage  becomes  clear,  although  condensedly 
and  elliptically  expressed.  We  interpret  it  to  signify :  ‘  Good  speed  (or  prosperous 
issue  of  events)  befriend  me,  and  comfort  the  queen ;  who  is,  with  myself,  the  object 
of  his  anger,  but  who,  like  myself,  deserves  no  jot  of  his  misconceived  suspicion  !’ — 
Ingleby  (Sk.  the  Book,  i,  147)  :  Line  528  surely  means,  ‘  Let  us  both  make  good 
speed.'  That  is,  ‘  Let  me  have  good  speed  for  my  friend,  and  the  Queen  have  good 
speed  for  her  comfort.’  .  .  .  The  one  archaic  phrase  is  to  be  part  of,  meaning  to  con¬ 
tribute  to.  .  .  .  The  king’s  ‘  theame  ’  was  of  the  Queen  and  Polixenes;  each  contributed 
to  it,  as  he  himself  says  in  II,  iii,  6-8.  There  yet  remains  the  obsolete  expression — 
‘  but  nothing  Of  his  ill-ta’ne  suspition.’  To  be  something  of  is  the  same  as  to  be  part 
of ;  i.  e.  to  contribute  to  :  and  to  be  nothing  of  is  not  to  contribute  to. — Hudson’s 
text  is  :  Good  expedition  be  my  friend  and  nothing  The  gracious  Queen,  part  of  his 
theme,  discomfort  Of  his  ill-ta’en  suspicion.’  His  note :  I  have  ventured  to  try  a 
reading  not  hitherto  proposed,  so  far  as  I  am  aware.  It  makes  no  literal  change 
except  that  of  but  into  dis  ;  while  it  supposes  ‘  comfort  ’  and  ‘  nothing  ’  to  have  crept 
into  each  other’s  place ;  perhaps  by  mistake,  perhaps  by  sophistication.  The  mean¬ 
ing  seems  to  be,  ‘  May  a  speedy  departure  befriend  me,  and  nowise  discomfort  the 
Queen  in  respect  of  his  groundless  suspicion  !’ — Rolfe  :  On  the  whole  Clarke’s 
explanation  seems  satisfactory.  If,  however,  we  take  ‘  expedition  ’  in  its  ordinary 
sense,  we  may  perhaps  accept  Malone’s  paraphrase. — Perring  (p.  176):  ‘The 
queen  is  nothing  of  the  king’s  suspicion  ’  may  mean,  ‘  she  gives  no  occasion  to  the 
king  to  suspect,  however  much  he  may  suspect she  does  nothing  to  promote  it ; 
and  in  that  sense  she  is  ‘  nothing  of  it.’  ...  I  conceive  that  Polixenes  expressed  a 
wish  that  the  good  expedition,  which  he  prays  may  befriend  him,  may  ‘  comfort  the 
queen.’  I  put  it  thus  :  where  he  was,  he  was  already  a  doomed  man,  without  a  chance 
of  vindicating  his  character  or  escaping  the  king’s  vengeance.  To  get  away  as  fast  as 
he  could  was  his  only  hope ;  well,  then,  he  might  pray  for  himself,  ‘  Good  expedition  be, 
my  friend.’  .  .  .  His  speedy  withdrawal — his  disappearance  from  the  scene — bene¬ 
ficial  to  himself,  would  benefit  also  the  queen ;  would  be  the  best  arrangement,  no 
indeed  for  her  justification — for  that  was  impossible — but  for  her  ‘  comfort.’  .  .  . 
Well,  then,  he  might  further  pray  that  his  expeditious  departure  might  ‘  comfort  the 
queen.’ 

532.  auoid]  That  is,  depart,  escape.  Cf.  1  Sam.  xviii,  11  :  ‘And  David  avoided 
out  of  his  presence  twice.’ 


70 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


Cam.  It  is  in  mine  authorise  to  command  533 

The  Keyes  of  all  the  Poflernes  :  Pleafe  your  Highneffe 
To  take  the  vrgent  houre.  Come  Sir, away.  Exeunt.  535 


Achts  Secundus.  Scena  Priina. 


Enter  Hermione  ,  Mamillius  ,  Ladies  :  Leontes , 
Antigonus,  Lords. 


Her.  Take  the  Boy  to  you:  he  fo  troubles  me, 

’Tis  paft  enduring.  5 

Lady.  Come(my  gracious  Lord) 

Shall  I  be  your  play-fellow? 

Mam.  No,  lie  none  of  you. 

Lady.  Why(my  fweet  Lord?) 

Mam.  You’le  kiffe  me  hard,  and  fpeake  to  me,  as  if  10 

I  were  a  Baby  ftill.  I  loue  you  better. 

2.  Lady.  And  why  fo(my  Lord  f)  12 


1.  Scena  Prima]  Scaena  Priina  F2F3. 
The  Scene  continued.  Pope.  The  Pal¬ 
ace.  Theob. 

2.  Enter...]  Enter  Hermione,  Mam- 
millius,  and  Ladies.  Rowe  et  seq.  (subs.). 

3.  Lords.]  Lord.  Ff. 


6.  Lady.]  1  Lady.  Rowe. 

10,  11.  You'  le...loue\  Two  lines,  end¬ 
ing  me, ...love  Cap. 

12.  my  Lord~\  pray,  my  lord  Han. 
my  good  lord  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13.  my 
dear  lord  Ktly. 


2.  Hermione,  Mamillius]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

4.  Take,  etc.]  Macdonald  ( The  Imagination,  p.  156):  Note  the  changefulness 
of  Hermione’s  mood  with  regard  to  her  boy,  as  indicative  of  her  condition  at  the 
time.  If  we  do  not  regard  this  fact,  we  shall  think  the  words  introduced  only  for  the 
sake  of  filling  up  the  business  of  the  play. 

Lady  Martin  (p.  349) :  Is  there,  even  in  Shakespeare,  any  passage  more  charm¬ 
ing  in  itself,  or  more  cunningly  devised  to  reveal  to  an  audience  the  main  purpose  of 
the  play,  than  the  brief  scene  with  which  the  Second  Act  opens  ?  The  boy  Mamillius, 
of  whom  Archidamus  had  spoken  as  ‘  the  gallant  child,’  the  ‘  gentleman  of  the  great¬ 
est  promise  that  ever  came  into  his  note,’  unconscious  of  the  delicate  condition  of  his 
mother  has  fatigued  her  with  his  caresses  and  the  eager  importunity  of  his  questions. 
.  .  .  What  mother  could  long  keep  such  a  darling  from  her  side  ?  Hermione  could 
not,  and  presently  she  calls  him  back  to  her. 

n,  12.  I  were  .  .  .  Lord?]  Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  97)  :  Arrange:  ‘I  were  a  baby 
still  |  I  love  you  better.  And  why  so,  my  lord  ?’  [All  these  re-arrangements,  of 
which  Walker  is  so  fond,  are  solely  for  the  benefit  of  the  eye.  No  ear  could  detect 
them,  unless  the  lines  were  uttered  in  a  song-song  rhythmical  chant,  where  each 
speaker  takes  up  the  rhythm  without  a  pause. — Ed. 

12.  my  Lord  ?]  Steevens  (whose  text  reads  ‘  my  good  lord  ’)  :  The  epithet  good. 


act  n,  SC.  i.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  J I 

Mam.  Not  for  becaufe  13 

Your  Browes  are  blacker  (yet  black-browes  they  fay 
Become  fome  Women  belt,  fo  that  there  be  not  15 

Too  much  haire  there,  but  in  a  Cemicircle, 

Or  a  halfe-Moone,  made  with  a  Pen .) 

2 .Lady.  Who  taught  ’  this  ? 

Mam.  I  learn’d  it  out  of  Womens  faces:  pray  now,  19 


16.  Cemicircle ]  F,.  this  Ff,  Coll,  taught  ye  this  Walker, 

17.  Or  a]  Like  a  Han.  Or  Steev.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  taught  you  this 

Var.  ’03,  ’13.  Rowe  et  cet. 

18.  taught  ’this]  Dyce  i,  Wh.  taught 

which  is  wanting  in  the  old  copies,  is  transplanted  (for  the  sake  of  metre)  from  a 
redundant  speech  in  the  following  page.  [Dyce  is  fond  of  exclamation  marks;  it 
is  strange  that  he  did  not  quote  this  note  that  he  might  exhaust  the  compositor’s  case. 
—Ed.] 

18.  Who  taught  ’this]  Rowe  inserted  you:  ‘who  taught  you  this?’  Thus  the 
phrase  is  to  be  found  in  the  majority  of  editions  to  this  day.  Collier  was  the  first 
to  discard  Rowe’s  insertion  and  to  restore  what  he  supposed  to  be  the  reading  of  the 
Folio:  ‘  Who  taught  this  ?  He  failed  to  see  that  you  or  ye  is  virtually  present  in  the 
Folio  in  the  shape  of  an  apostrophe,  just  as  I  is  present  in  ‘  ’beseech  you.’  The 
apostrophe  merely  indicates  that  the  presence  oi you  or  ye  is  to  be  felt,  or,  if  at  all  pro¬ 
nounced,  is  to  be  slurred,  like  ‘  This’  a  good  block  ’  in  Lear ,  where  the  full  phrase  is, 
<  This  is  a  good  block.’  This  is  not  the  only  place  in  this  play,  or  in  the  Folio,  where 
an  absorption  is  indicated  by  an  apostrophe ;  we  have  already  met  with  an  instance 
in  ‘a  Ladyes  Verely  ’is,’  in  line  62  of  the  preceding  scene;  and  in  addition  to  that 
instance  and  to  the  present  there  are  the  following  instances  in  this  and  other  plays 


where  this  apostrophe  appears  in  the  text  of  the  Folio : — 

‘  As  boldness  from  my  bosome,  le ’t  not  be  doubted  ....  Wint.  Tale,  II,  ii,  63. 

‘  We  have  .  .  .  served  you  and  ’beseech’  So  to  esteem  us  ’  .  “  II,  iii,  182. 

‘  Please  ’your  Highness’ .  “  H>  hi,  231. 

< — that  goes  to  bed  with’  Sun’ .  “  IV,  iv,  124. 

*  ’Maybe  he  has  paid  you  more .  “  IV,  iv,  269. 

‘  so  I  see  she  must  be)  ’fore  Leontes .  “  IV,  iv,  616. 

‘  She  is  i’  th’  reare  ’our  Birth  ’ .  “  IV,  iv,  659. 

‘  ’Pray  heartily  he  be  at’  Pallace .  “  IV,  iv,  800. 

‘  Let’s  all  sink  with’  King’ . Tempest,  I,  i,  74. 

•'  while  Stephano  breathes  at’  nostrils  ’ .  “  H>  h,  68. 


‘  this’  a  good  Fryer  belike  ’ . Meas.  for  Meas.,  V,  i,  131. 

There  may  be  others,  but  these  are  all  I  have  noted.  The  number  of  cases,  wherein 
absorption  of  dentals,  liquids,  and  gutturals  occur,  which  are  not  indicated  in  the 
Folio,  is  legion.  It  is  superfluous  to  call  attention  to  the  large  majority  which  are 
indicated  in  the  present  play.  Whatever  else  may  be  inferred  from  this  majority! 
it  certainly  points  to  the  carefulness  of  these  especial  compositors.— Ed. 

19.  I  learn’d  .  .  .  faces]  Deighton  :  That  is,  by  a  careful  study  of  women’s 
faces,  but  possibly  with  the  secondary  sense  of  watching  the  looks  with  which  women 
examine  each  other’s  personal  appearance. 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


72 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


What  colour  are  your  eye-browes  ? 

Lady.  Blew(my  Lord.) 

Mam.  Nay,  that’s  a  mock:  I  haue  feene  a  Ladies  Nofe 
That  ha’s  beene  blew,  but  not  her  eye-browes. 

Lady.  Harke  ye, 

The  Queene(your  Mother)rounds  apacerwe  fhall 

Prefent  our  feruices  to  a  fine  new  Prince 

One  of  thefe  dayes,  and  then  youl’d  wanton  with  vs, 

If  we  would  haue  you. 

2.Lady.  She  is  fpread  of  late 
Into  a  goodly  Bulke(good  time  encounter  her.) 

Her.  What  wifdome  ftirs  amongft  youPCome  Sir,  now 
I  am  for  you  againe  :  ’Pray  you  fit  by  vs, 

And  tell’s  a  Tale. 

Mam.  Merry,  or  fad,  fhal’t  be  ? 

Her.  As  merry  as  you  will. 

Mam.  A  fad  Tale’s  belt  for  Winter  t 
I  haue  one  of  Sprights,  and  Goblins. 

Her.  Let’s  haue  that  (good  Sir.) 

Come-on,  fit  downe,  come-on,  and  doe  your  beft, 

To  fright  me  with  your  Sprightsryou’re  powrefull  at  it. 


20 


25 


30 


35 


40 


20.  are  your]  be  your  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 
27.  youl’d]  Fa.  you' Id  F3<  you' l  F4, 
Rowe-f .  you'd  Cap.  et  cet. 

30.  Bulke]  bulk;  Theob.  et  seq. 
(subs.). 

32.  ’Pray]  Fa. 

33.  tell’s]  tell  us  Cap.  Var.  ’73,  ’78, 
’85,  Rann,  Mai. 


34 -Jhal'f]  yhal 't,  Fa.  shall  it  Var. 
’73,  ’78,  ’85,  Rann,  Mai. 

36,  37-  A  fad. ..one]  One  line,  Dyce, 
Walker,  Cam.  Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

for...  Goblins]  One  line,  Han. 

37,  40.  Sprights]  Sprites  Cap. 

38.  good  Sir]  sir  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13. 

39.  downe,]  down.  F  ,  Rowe  + .  down  ; 
Var.  ’78  et  seq.  (subs.). 


33.  tell’s  a  Tale]  Drake  (Sh.  and  his  Times ,  i,  107)  :  Burton,  in  his  Anatomy 
of  Melancholy,  1617  [p.  274,  sixth  ed.]  enumerates,  among  ‘the  ordinary  recreations 
which  we  have  in  Winter,  .  .  .  merry  tales  of  errant  Knights,  Queens,  Lovers, 
Lords,  Ladies,  Giants,  Dwarfs,  Theeves,  Cheaters,  Witches,  Fayries,  Goblins, 
Friers,  etc.,  .  .  .  which  some  delight  to  hear,  some  to  tell;  all  are  well  pleased 
with  ;  and  he  remarks  shortly  afterward,  ‘  when  three  or  four  good  companions 
meet,  [they]  tell  old  stories  by  the  fire  side,  or  in  the  Sun,  as  old  folks  usually  do,’ 
etc.  Milton  also,  in  his  L' Allegro,  1645,  gives  a  conspicuous  station — ‘to  the  spicy 
nut-brown  ale,  With  stories  told  of  many  a  feat  ’ ;  and  adds :  ‘  Thus  done  the  tales,  to 
bed  they  creep,  By  whispering  winds  soon  lull’d  to  sleep.’ 

36.  sad  Tale’s  best  for  Winter]  Tyrwhitt:  Hence,  I  suppose,  the  title  of  the 
play.— Steevens  :  This  supposition  may  seem  to  be  countenanced  by  our  author’s 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


73 


Mam .  There  was  a  man.  41 

Her.  Nay,  come  fit  downe  :  then  on. 

Mam.  Dwelt  by  a  Church-yard:  I  will  tell  it  foftly, 

Yond  Crickets  ihall  not  heare  it. 

Her.  Come  on  then,  and  giu’t  me  in  mine  eare.  45 

Leon.  Was  hee  met  there  ?  his  Traine  ?  Camillo  with 
him  ? 

Lord.  Behind  the  tuft  of  Pines  I  met  them,  neuer 
Saw  I  men  fcowre  fo  on  their  way  :  I  eyed  them 
Euen  to  their  Ships.  5° 

Leo.  How  bleft  am  I 

In  my  iuft  Cenfure?  in  my  true  Opinion  ?  5 2 


41.  man .]  man —  Rowe  ii  et  seq. 

44.  Yond ]  Yon’  Cap.  Yon  Var.  ’78. 
Yond’  Coll.  Ktly. 

Crickets ]  Crickits  F4. 

45.  Come. ..eare.']  Two  lines,  ending 
then,. ..eare.  Cap.  et  seq. 

giu’t' ]  give  it  Han. 
eare.]  eare.  Enter  L.  Ff. 

46.  Scene  ii.  Pope-K 

Enter  Leontes,  Antigonus,  and 
Lords.  Rowe,  et  seq.  (subs.). 


46,  47.  One  line,  Rowe  et  seq. 

48.  Lord.]  1  L.  Cap. 

49.  eyed]  Ff,  Cam.  Wh.  ii.  ey’d 
Rowe  et  cet. 

50.  Euen  to]  On  even  to  Han.  Even 
unto  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

51.  bleft]  blessed  then  Steev.  conj. 

52.  Cenfure  ? ...  Opinion  ?]  censure ! ... 
opinion!  Pope +  ,  Var.  Knt,  Coll,  c en¬ 
sure, ...opinion  !  Dyce,  Cam. 


98th  Sonnet :  ‘  Yet  not  the  lays  of  birds  nor  the  sweet  smell  Of  flowers  .  .  .  Could 
make  me  any  summer’s  story  tell.’  And  yet  I  cannot  help  regarding  the  words — -for 
■winter  (which  spoil  the  measure)  as  a  play-house  interpolation.  All  children  delight 
in  telling  dismal  stories;  but  why  should  a  dismal  story  be  best  for  Winter ? — 
Malone:  As  better  suited  to  the  gloominess  of  the  season. — Halliwell:  As  the 
correctness  of  the  text  has  been  questioned,  the  following  may  deserve  quotation.  It 
is  extracted  from  the  Dedicatory  Epistle  prefixed  to  the  old  tragedy  of  Tancred  and 
Gismund, — ‘  And  now  that  weary  winter  is  come  upon  us,  which  bringeth  with  him 
drooping  days  and  tedious  nights,  if  it  be  true  that  the  motions  of  our  minds  follow 
the  temperature  of  the  air  wherein  we  live,  then  I  think  the  perusing  of  some  mourn¬ 
ful  matter  tending  to  the  view  of  a  notable  example,  will  refresh  your  wits  in  a  gloomy 
day,  and  ease  your  weariness  of  the  lowering  night.’ — The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  This 
first  portion  of  the  play, — full  of  chilling  suspicion,  bitter  injustice,  and  cold-blooded 
cruelty, — harmonises  finely  with  the  name  of  The  Winter’s  Tale ;  while  the  warmth 
of  youthful  beauty,  the  glow  of  young  love,  the  return  of  confidence,  the  restoration 
to  faith  and  truth,  the  revival  from  death  to  life,  in  the  latter  portion  of  the  play, 
poetically  consist  with  the  ripeness  of  summer  and  rich  colouring  of  the  season  then 
made  its  existing  time. 

44.  Crickets]  Dyer  (p.  252)  :  The  cricket’s  supposed  keen  sense  of  hearing  is 
referred  to  here.  [Rather,  Mamillius  refers  to  ‘  yond  ’  Ladies  in  waiting,  with  their 
tittering,  and  chirping  laughter.  This  maturity  of  observation  in  the  little  boy 


74 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


Alack,  for  leffer  knowledge,  how  accurs’d,  53 

In  being  fo  bleft  ?  There  may  be  in  the  Cup 

A  Spider  fteep’d,and  one  may  drinke  ;  depart,  55 

And  yet  partake  no  venome:  (for  his  knowledge 

Is  not  infe6led)  but  if  one  prefent 

Th’abhor’d  Ingredient  to  his  eye,  make  knowne 

How  he  hath  drunke,  he  cracks  his  gorge,  his  Tides 

With  violent  Hefts:  I  haue  drunke,  and  feene  the  Spider.  60 

Camillo  was  his  helpe  in  this,  his  Pandar: 

There  is  a  Plot  againfl  my  Life,  my  Crowne  ;  62 


53.  knowledge ,]  knowledge!  Han. 
knowledge —  Johns. 

54-60.  Marked  as  mnemonic  lines, 
Warb. 

55.  drinke;  depart ]  drink ,  depart, 
Han.  drink  a  part  Coll.  (MS),  drain 


it  deep  Jervis,  drink,  repeat  it  Cart¬ 
wright. 

59)  60.  drunke J  drank  Steev.  Var. 

’03)  ’13.  ’21. 

61.  Pandar]  Pander  Ff,  Rowe, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  (cor¬ 
rected  in  Errata). 


throughout  this  scene  has  its  purpose.  The  heart  of  a  less  precocious  child  would 
not  have  been  broken  by  the  ill-treatment  of  his  mother.— Ed.] 

52.  Censure]  That  is,  opinion,  judgement;  not,  as  now,  implying  reprehension. 
Deighton  thinks  that  this  sentence  is  uttered  ironically.  On  the  contrary,  it  is,  I 
think,  an  expression  of  genuine  sincerity. —  Ed. 

53.  lesser  knowledge]  Johnson  :  That  is,  ‘  O  that  my  knowledge  were  less  !’ 

55.  Spider]  Sir  Francis  Bacon  in  the  speech  (Amos’s  Great  Oyer  of  Poisoning, 

p.  350)  which  he  had  prepared  for  delivery  if  the  Countess  of  Somerset  had  pleaded 

Not  Guilty  on  the  trial  for  Overbury  s  murder,  speaks  ‘  of  a  volley  of  poisons ; 
arsenic  for  salt,  great  spiders  and  cantharides  for  pig-sauce,  or  partridge  sauce, 
because  they  resembled  pepper.’ — Ed. — Staunton:  It  was  a  prevalent  belief 
anciently  that  spiders  were  venomous,  and  that  a  person  might  be  poisoned  by 
drinking  any  liquid  in  which  one  was  infused.  From  the  context  it  would  appear, 
however,  that  to  render  the  draught  fatal,  the  victim  ought  to  see  the  spider.  So  in 
Middleton’s  No  Wit  like  a  Woman's,  II,  i :  ‘  Even  when  my  lip  touch’d  the  contract¬ 
ing  cup,  Even  then  to  see  the  spider.’ 

55-  drinke  ;  depart]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  We  are  strongly  tempted  to  substitute  the 
reading  of  the  MS :  ‘  one  may  drink  a  part,'  for  why  after  drinking  was  the  drinker 
necessarily  to  ‘  depart  ?’  It  was  easy  to  mishear  a  part,  and  to  write  it  or  print  it 

depart.  A  part  can  mean  nothing  but  a  portion  of  the  contents  of  the  cup. _ 

Staunton  :  What  Shakespeare  wrote,  we  are  persuaded,  was  :  one  may  drink  deep 
o  t'  Dyce  (ed.  ii)  pronounces  the  present  text  *  a  very  doubtful  reading  ’ ;  but  I  can 
see  neither  a  doubt  nor  a  difficulty.  The  words  mean  ‘  if  one  may  drink,  and  then 
go  his  way.’ — Ed. 

60.  Hefts]  Steevens  :  That  is,  hearings,  what  is  heaved  up. — Collier  :  Not  ‘  the 
things  which  are  heaved  up,’  but  the  act  of  heaving.  In  II,  iii,  44,  we  have  ‘need¬ 
less  heavings,’  and  not  ‘  hefts.’ 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


75 

63 


All’s  true  that  is  miftrufted :  that  falfe  Villaine, 

Whom  I  employ’d,  was  pre-employ’d  by  him  : 

He  ha’s  difcouer’d  my  Defigne,  and  I  65 

Remaine  a  pinch’d  Thing;yea,a  very  Trick 
For  them  to  play  at  will  :  how  came  the  Pofternes 
So  eafily  open  ? 

Lord.  By  his  great  authority, 

Which  often  hath  no  leffe  preuail’d,  then  fo,  7° 

On  your  command. 

Leo.  I  know’t  too  well.  7 2 


70,  71.  often. ..On]  hath  prevailed 
oftentimes  no  less  Than  so  on  Han. 

70.  hath~\  have  F4,  Rowe  i. 

fo,\  fo  F3F4,  Rowe  +  ,  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 
72.  know't~\  know  Johns. 

too  well .]  too  well,  too  well.  Anon, 
ap.  Cam. 

65.  discouer’d]  That  is,  revealed.  See  discouerie,  I,  ii,  510- 

66.  pinch’d  Thing]  Heath  (p.  208) :  That  is,  a  mere  child’s  baby,  a  thing 
pinched  out  of  clouts,  a  puppet  [‘  trick  ’]  for  them  to  move  and  actuate  as  they  please. 

_ Steevens  :  This  sense  may  be  supported  by  The  City  Match  [II,  v]  :  ‘  Quartfeld. 

Is  not  the  folding  of  your  napkins  brought  Into  the  bill  ?  Roseclap.  Pinch’d  napkins, 
captain,  and  laid  Like  fishes,  fowls,  or  faces.’  Again  by  a  passage  in  Alls  Well,  IV, 
iii,  140 :  ‘  If  ye  pinch  me  like  a  pasty  I  can  say  no  more,’  i.  e.  the  crust  round  the  lid 
of  it,  which  was  anciently  moulded  by  the  fingers  into  fantastic  shapes.  [Steevens 
gives  several  other  examples,  not  at  all  applicable  to  the  present  phrase,  to  show  that 
to  pinch  had  ‘  anciently  a  more  dignified  meaning  than  at  present.’] — Mason  (p.  127)  : 
<  Pinched  ’  here  means  shrunk,  or  contracted;  thus  we  say,  ‘  pinched  with  cold.’ — 
Knight  considers  Heath’s  interpretation  as  ‘  forced;  although  “  pinch  d  may  con¬ 
vey  the  meaning  of  one  made  petty  and  contemptible.  —Collier,  on  the  other  hand, 
approves  and  holds  it  to  be  ‘  probably  the  correct  interpretation,’  adding  that  ‘  puppets 
are  moved  and  played  by  pinching  them  between  the  finger  and  thumb.’ — Dyce 
(Gloss.)  quotes  Heath  and  adds  ‘Perhaps  so.’— Staunton  :  That  is,  a  restrained, 
nipked,  confined  thing.  [Without  denying  Heath’s  interpretation,  it  is  possible,  from 
the  connection  of  thought  to  suppose  the  meaning  of  Leontes  to  be  that  after  the 
shape,  the  proportions,  of  his  design  have  been  ruined  by  ‘  discovery,’  as  a  bladder 
when  it  is  pricked,  he  is  reduced  merely  to  a  pinched  and  shrivelled  thing, — then  the 
association  of  ideas  suggests  a  trick,  a  puppet,  a  toy. — Ed.] 

71.  command]  Walker  (  Vers.  127):  Commandement,  I  suspect,  poscente  metro. 
So  it  was  pronounced  as  late,  apparently,  as  1672.  Wallis,  the  grammarian,  lived 
1616-1703  ;  the  first  edition  of  his  Grammar  was  published  in  1653;  the  third,  with 
additions,  in  1672;  from  which  latter  I  quote,  p.  52,  ad  fin.  ‘ — non  dubito  fuisse 
quondam  pronuntiatam  [the  e  in  miles,  finely,  advancement,  etc.]  non  minus  quam 
in  voce  commandement,  mandatum,  ubi  adhuc  pronunciari  solet.’  A  writer  in  The 
Saturday  Magazine,  Aug.  17,  1844,  ‘  On  the  Language  of  Uneducated  People,’  No.  I, 
says  that  many  cockneys  still  pronounce  it  thus. 


63.  «]  was  or  /  Lettsom  (ap.  Dyce). 
was  Ktly.  I  Huds. 

64.  pre-employ' o']  pree  employ'd  F4- 

65.  ha's ]  hath  Rowe  +  ,  Rann,  Mai. 
68.  open ]  open'd  Cap.  (corrected  in 

Errata). 


76 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


Giue  me  the  Boy,  I  am  glad  you  did  not  nurfe  him  : 
Though  he  do’s  beare  fome  fignes  of  me,  yet  you 
Haue  too  much  blood  in  him. 

Her.  What  is  this?  Sport? 

Leo.  Beare  the  Boy  hence,  he  thall  not  come  about  her, 
Away  with  him,  and  let  her  fport  her  felfe 
With  that  shee’s  big-with,  for  ’tis  Polixenes 
Ha’s  made  thee  fwell  thus. 

Her.  But  II’ d  fay  he  had  not  ; 

And  lie  be  fworne  you  would  beleeue  my  faying, 

How  e’re  you  leane  to  th’Nay-ward. 

Leo.  You  (my  Lords) 

Looke  on  her,  marke  her  well  :  be  but  about 
To  fay  the  is  a  goodly  Lady,  and 
The  iuftice  of  your  hearts  will  thereto  adde 
’Tis  pitty  fhee’s  not  honeft  :  Honorable  ; 

Prayfe  her  but  for  this  her  without-dore-Forme, 

(Which  on  my  faith  deferues  high  fpeech )  and  ftraight 
The  Shrug,  the  Hum,  or  Ha,  (thefe  Petty-brands 
That  Calumnie  doth  vfe;  Oh,  I  am  out, 


73 

75 


8o 


85 


90 

92 


73.  Iam ]  I'm  Pope-f,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

76.  this  ?  Sport P]  this,  sport  ? 
Theob.  + . 

78.  [some  bear  off  Mamillius.  Cap. 

79.  big-with']  big  with  F3F4. 

81.  But  It'd]  But  Eld  F4.  I’d 
but  Han. 


81.  had]  has  Ktly  conj. 

86.  Jhc]  Fx. 

88.  honeji :  honorable]  honest,  hon¬ 
ourable  Theob.  + .  honest-honorable  Wal¬ 
ker,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

89.  without-dore-Forme]  without-door 
form  Rowe. 


78,  79,  80.  her  .  .  .  her  selfe  .  .  .  shee’s  .  .  .  thee]  Malone  (Note  on  Cym.  Ill, 
iii,  104,  105)  considers  this  change  in  pronouns  an  ‘inaccuracy.’  It  is  the  punctuation 
which  is  at  fault.  There  should  be  a  full  stop  after  ‘  big-with.’  Then  it  will  be  mani¬ 
fest  that  the  preceding  lines  are  addressed  by  Leontes  to  his  attendants.  Pope  changed 
the  comma  to  a  colon ;  and  all  subsequent  editors  have  this  or  a  semicolon. _ Ed. 

81.  But  Il’d  say]  That  is,  ‘  Only  I  would  say,’  or,  perhaps,  ‘  I  need  but  say.’ 

88.  honest:  Honorable;]  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  22):  Write  honest-honorable-,  i.e. 

(if  I  mistake  not)  not  merely  honourable,  by  reason  of  her  birth,  dignity,  and  grace 
of  person  and  mind, — but  likewise  honest,  i.  e.  virtuous; — honourable  with  honesty. 
Compare  Hen.  VIII ;  I,  i, — <  As  I  belong  to  worship,  and  affect  In  honour  honesty  ’ ; 
and  Oth.  V,  ii,  306,—*  But  why  should  honour  outlive  honesty  ?’  [Perhaps. _ Ed.] 

89.  without-dore-Forme]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  97) :  Compare  Cym.  I,  vi,  15:— 
‘  All  of  her,  that  is  out  of  door,  most  rich  !’ 

92.  I  am  out]  Compare  Cor.  V,  iii,  41 : — ‘  Like  a  dull  actor  now,  I  have  forgot 
my  part  and  I  am  out.’ 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


77 


That  Mercy  do’s,  for  Calumnie  will  feare  93 

Vertue  it  felfe)  thefe  Shrugs,  thefe  Hum’s, and  Ha’s, 

When  you  haue  faid  fhee’s  goodly,  come  betweene,  95 

Ere  you  can  fay  fhee’s  honest  :  But  be’t  knowne 
(From  him  that  ha’s  moft  caufe  to  grieue  it  fhould  be) 

Shee’s  an  Adultreffe. 

Her.  Should  a  Villaine  fay  fo, 

(The  moft  replenifh’d  Villaine  in  the  World)  IOO 

He  were  as  much  more  Villaine  :  you  (my  Lord) 

Doe  but  miftake. 

Leo.  You  haue  miftooke  (my  Lady) 

Polixenes  for  Leontes  :  O  thou  Thing, 

(Which  He  not  call  a  Creature  of  thy  place,  105 

Leaft  Barbarifme  (making  me  the  precedent) 

Should  a  like  Language  vfe  to  all  degrees, 

And  mannerly  diftinguifhment  leaue  out, 

Betwixt  the  Prince  and  Begger:)  I  haue  faid 

Shee’s  an  Adultreffe,  I  haue  faid  with  whom  :  1 10 

More  ;  fhee’s  a  Traytor,and  Camillo  is 

A  Federarie  with  her,  and  one  that  knowes  112 


93.  do's]  doth  Han. 
feare]  fear  Rowe  ii. 

94.  felfe )  thefe]  self)  These  Theob.  + . 
96.  be’t]  be  it  Var.  ’73,  Rann,  Mai.  it 

be  Steev.  (‘corrected  in  MS.’  ap.  Cam.). 
98.  Adultreffe]  adult'ress  Han.  Coll. 

i,  iii,  Wh.  i.  Adulteress  Glo.  Cam.  Wh. 

ii,  Dtn. 

106.  Leaf]  Lest  Rowe. 

109.  Begger]  F2. 


1 12.  Federarie]  Federary  Rowe  i. 
Federaty  Rowe  ii.  feodary  Coll,  ii,  iii 
(MS),  fedary  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  fed¬ 
erate  Ktly  conj. 

and  one]  one  Han.  ay,  and  one 
Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  98). 

1 12,  1 13.  knowes  What]  knows  her 
To  be  what  Ktly.  knows  Of  her  what 
Id.  conj.  {Exp.  384c). 


98.  Adultresse]  Lady  Martin  (p.  351)  :  In  a  kind  of  stupor  Hermione  listens 
to  these  vituperations,  until  Leontes  brands  her,  to  the  wonder-stricken  circle  of  his 
lords,  as  an  ‘  adultress.’  Upon  this  the  indignant  denial  leaps  to  her  lips.  [But  at 
the  word  ‘villain’]  she  checks  herself.  The  name  ‘villain’  must  not  be  coupled 
with  his, — her  husband,  and  a  king, — and  with  a  voice  softened,  but  resolute,  she 
adds,  ‘  You,  my  lord,  do  but  mistake.’ 

105.  Creature  .  .  .  place]  Deighton  :  That  is,  one  occupying  your  lofty  position. 

111-115.  and  Camillo  .  .  .  those]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  98)  amends  and  arranges 
these  lines  thus : — ‘  and  Camillo  is  |  A  federary  with  her;  ay,  and  one  |  That  knows 
what  she  should  shame  to  know  herself,  |  But  with  her  most  vile  principal,  that  she  \ 
Is  a  bed-swerver,  e’en  as  bad  as  those,’  etc.  ‘  ay,  having  been  written,  as  usual,  I,  and 
therefore  more  easily  overlooked.’ 

1 12.  Federarie]  Steevens:  A ‘federary’  (perhaps  a  word  of  our  author’s  coin- 


;8 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


What  the  fhould  fhame  to  know  her  felfe, 

But  with  her  moft  vild  Principall  :  that  fhee’s 
A  Bed-fwaruer,  euen  as  bad  as  thofe 
That  Vulgars  giue  bold’ll;  Titles  ;  I,  and  priuy 
To  this  their  late  efcape. 

Her.  No  (by  my  life) 

Priuy  to  none  of  this  :  how  will  this  grieue  you, 
When  you  fhall  come  to  clearer  knowledge,  that 
You  thus  haue  publilh’d  me?  Gentle  my  Lord, 
You  fcarce  can  right  me  throughly,  then,  to  fay 


1 13 


1 15 


120 


122 


H3.  fhame)  be  asham'd  Han. 

her  felfe, ]  herself  with  none 
Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

114.  But... Principally  Om.  Cap. 
(closing  1.  1 13  with  that  she’s). 

II5-  Bed-fwaruer)  Bed  fwarver  F2, 
Rowe  i.  Bed-swerver  Rowe  ii. 


1 1 6.  That  Vulgars ]  That  vulgar  F  , 
Rowe,  Pope.  The  vulgar  Han. 

bold’fT)  bold  Steev.  boldest  Ktly. 
/,]  ay,  Rowe. 

122.  throughly,  then,)  F^F^.  through- 
ly,  then  F^.  throughly  than  Rowe  i. 
throughly  then  Cam.  Wh.  ii.  throughly 
_ _  then,  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 

age)  is  a  confederate,  an  accomplice.— Malone  :  We  should  certainly  read— a  feodary 
with  her.  There  is  no  such  word  as  ‘  federary.’— Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  A  clear  misprint 
for  feodary,  the  word  in  the  MS.  Steevens  calls  it  ‘  a  word  of  our  author’s  coinage  ’ 
but  it  was  certainly  a  word  of  the  old  printers’  manufacture  ;  for  that  Shakespeare  used 
t  e  right  word  there  is  abundant  evidence,  since  it  occurs  in  the  sense  of  confederate 
in  Mens,  for  Meas.  II,  iv,  122,  and  in  Cym.  Ill,  ii,  2I.-Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  <  Fedary  and 
federary  in  Shakespeare  are  the  same  word  differently  written  (having  no  connection 
whatever  with  feud  or  feudatory),  and  signify  a  colleague,  associate,  or  confederate.’ 
—Richardson’s  Diet,  in  v. :  But  Richardson  ought  to  have  said  that  the  term 
‘  ederary,’  which  the  Folio  gives  in  only  one  passage,  is  undoubtedly  an  error  of 
t  e  scribe  or  printer.— Deighton  :  Fedary  throws  the  emphasis  too  strongly  on  her. 

n  Hen.  V;  V.  11,  77,  we  have  ‘  a  cursorary  eye  ’for  ‘a  cursory  eye,’  and  there,  as 
here,  the  reduplicated  syllable  is  necessary  for  the  metre.  Shakespeare  also  uses 
contracted  forms  of  words,  e.g.  ignomy  for  ignominy ,  though  this  form  is  not  peculiar 
to  him.  In  Middleton,  The  Spanish  Gypsy  [I,  v],  we  have  <  temption  ’  for  ‘  tempta¬ 
tion.  [Dyce  is,  I  fear,  somewhat  too  dogmatic  in  his  assertion  that  ‘  federary  ’  is  an 
error  The  rhythm  of  the  line,  as  Deighton  says,  is  smoother  with  ‘  federary  ’  than 
with  fedary.  Walker  rearranges  these  lines,  as  we  have  just  seen,  and  finds  no 
often ce  m  ‘federary.’ — Ed.] 

1 14.  But  .  .  .  Puncipall]  Capell  (p.  167):  [These  words]  being  in  the  editor’s 
apprehension,  a  disgrace  to  the  passage,  to  metre  hurtful,  and  no  just  sentiment,  he  is 
bo-d  to  dismiss  them,  assuring  himself  of  pardon  from  all  who  weigh  them  consider¬ 
ately.  [Which  means  that  he  omits  them. — Ed.] 

1 16.  That]  For  ‘  that  ’  in  the  sense  of  to  whom,  see  Abbott,  §  201. 

•  "!;XUlfarS]  Walker  (Crit-  iii,  98):  Compare  Marmion,  The  Antiquary,  IV 
1 :  the  budding  rose  is  set  by;  But  stale,  and  fully  blown,  is  left  for  vulgars  To  rub 

e,r  sweaty  fingers  on.’  Chapman  and  Shirley,  Chabot,  I,  ii Love  him,  good 
vulgars,  and  abhor  me  still.’  [See  also,  if  necessary,  Abbott,  §  433.] 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


79 

123 


You  did  miftake. 

Leo.  No  :  if  I  miftake 
In  thofe  Foundations  which  I  build  vpon,  125 

The  Centre  is  not  bigge  enough  to  beare 
A  Schoole-Boyes  Top.  Away  with  her,  to  Prifon  : 


He  who  fhall  fpeake  for  her,  is  a 
But  that  he  fpeakes. 

Her.  There’s  fome  ill  Planet 

124.  No  :]  No,  Rowe.  No, no;  Steev. 
Var.  Sing.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly,  Huds.  No  ! 
Sta. 

I  miftake]  I  mistake.  Theob.  i. 

I  do  mistake  Han.  Cap. 

125.  thofe]  these  Pope  ii,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Var.  ’73. 

127.  her,  to]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cam.  her ! 
to  Wh.  ii.  her  to  Pope  et  cet. 

12S.  her,  is]  her' s  Walker  ( Crit.  iii, 
98),  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 


farre.off  guiltie, 

raignes  :  130 

128.  a  farre-off]  F2.  afar-off  F3, 
Cap.  far  off  Pope,  Han.  Warb.  Johns. 
Var.  ’73.  far  of  Theob.  afar  off  F4 
et  cet. 

129.  But]  In  Han.  By  Daniel  ap. 
Cam. 

130.  There's]  Thsre’s  F2.  There  is 
Rowe  ii. 

raignes]  reigns  F4. 


122.  to  say]  Abbott  (§  356) :  That  is,  by  saying.  [For  other  examples  in  this 
play  of  the  gerundive  use  of  the  infinitive,  see  II,  ii,  68;  III,  iii,  125,  and  V,  i,  24.] 

124.  No  :]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Steevens  printed  ‘  No,  no.’  There  is  no  re-duplica¬ 
tion  of  the  negative  in  the  old  copies,  nor  in  the  MS.  Single  ‘  No  ’  is  more  emphatic. 
— Dyce  (ed.  ii) :  *  Collier’s  random  assertion  [that  ‘  single  “  no  ”  is  more  emphatic  ’] 
is  the  reverse  of  the  truth.  Earlier  in  the  present  play  [I,  ii,  347]  we  have  “  No,  no, 
my  lord”  ;  and  in  Rom.  Jul.  IV,  iii,  “  No,  no; — this  shall  forbid  it.”  Hermione, 
it  is  true,  uses  “  single  No,”  but  that  not  being  sufficiently  emphatic,  she  strengthens  it 
with  an  oath.’ — W.  N.  Lettsom. 

126.  Centre]  Johnson:  That  is,  if  the  proofs  which  I  can  offer  will  not  support 
the  opinion  I  have  formed,  no  foundation  can  be  trusted. — Steevens  :  Compare, 
Milton,  Comus,  597  :  ‘  — if  this  fail,  The  pillar’d  firmament  is  rottenness,  And  earth's 
base  built  on  stubble.’ 

128,  129.  farre-off.  .  .  speakes]  Theobald:  Leontes  would  say:  ‘I  shall  hold 
the  person  in  a  great  measure  guilty,  who  shall  dare  to  intercede  for  her.  And  this, 

I  believe,  Shakespeare  ventured  to  express  thus  : *  1  is  far  of  guilty,’  etc.,  i.  e.  partakes 
far,  deeply,  of  her  guilt. — Heath  :  That  is,  he  will  be  considered  by  me  as  partici¬ 
pating  in  her  guilt,  at  least  in  a  distant  degree,  though  he  doth  but  barely  speak. 
Theobald’s  expression  is  certainly  not  English,  nor  is  it  the  sentiment  intended  to  be 
conveyed. — Johnson  :  That  is,  guilty  in  a  remote  degree. — Malone  :  ‘  But  that  he 
speaks  ’  means  ‘  in  merely  speaking.’ — Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Here  ‘  afar  off  guilty  ’  is 
explained  by  ‘guilty  in  a  remote  degree.’ — But  qy.  ‘  He  who  shall  speak  for  her  is 
so  far  guilty,’  etc.?  [‘Afar  off’  does  not  qualify  ‘guilty,’  Leontes  was  hardly  in 
the  mood  to  apportion  degrees  of  guilt.  ‘  Afar  off’  refers,  I  think,  to  any  one  who 
intercedes  for  the  Queen;  such  a  one,  however  far  removed  he  may  be,  is  ren¬ 
dered  ‘  guilty  ’  merely  by  speaking.  The  passage  in  Hen.  V;  I,  ii,  239  :— ‘  Shall  we 
sparingly  show  you  far  off  The  dauphin’s  meaning  ’  which  Malone  quotes  as  parallel. 


8o 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


I  muft  be  patient,  till  the  Heauens  looke 

With  an  afpeft  more  fauorable.  Good  my  Lords, 

I  am  not  prone  to  weeping  (as  our  Sex 
Commonly  are)  the  want  of  which  vaine  dew 
Perchance  fhall  dry  your  pitties  :  but  I  haue 
That  honorable  Griefe  lodg’d  here,  which  burnes 
Worfe  then  Teares  drowne:  ’befeech  you  all  (my  Lords) 
With  thoughts  fo  qualified,  as  your  Charities 
Shall  belt  inftru<5t  you,meafure  me  ;  and  fo 
The  Kings  will  be  perform’d. 

Leo.  Shall  I  be  heard  ? 

Her. Who  is’t  that  goes  with  me?  ’befeech  your  Highnes 
My  Women  may  be  with  me,  for  you  fee 
My  plight  requires  it.  Doe  not  weepe(good  Fooles ) 
There  is  no  caufe:When  you  fhall  know  your  Miftris 
Ha’s  deferu’d  Prifon,then  abound  in  Teares, 

As  I  come  out  j  this  A6tion  I  now  goe  on, 


131 


135 


140 


145 

147 


132.  an.,  fauorable']  aspect  of  more 
favour  Han. 

140.  [to  the  Guard.  Cap. 

141.  [seeing  them  delay.  Cap. 


142.  ’ befeech ]  F2F3.  befeech  F4. 

144.  [to  her  Ladies.  Johns. 

146.  Teares ,]  tears  Dyce,  Wh.  Sta. 
Cam. 


wherein  he  has  been  followed  by  several  editors,  has  not  the  same  meaning.  The 
French  ambassadors  ask  whether  or  not  they  shall  merely  hint  at  the  dauphin’s  mean¬ 
ing,  instead  of  uttering  his  insult  explicitly,  in  round  terms. — Ed.] 

132.  aspedt]  Murray  (New  Eng.  Diet.)  :  Accented  on  the  latter  syllable  by 
Shakespeare,  Milton,  Swift,  and  occasionally  by  modern  poets,  but  accented  on  the 
former  already  in  Tourneur,  1609.  In  Astrology,  it  is  the  relative  positions  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  as  they  appear  to  an  observer  on  the  earth’s  surface  at  a  given  time. 
(Properly,  aspect  is  the  way  in  which  the  planets,  from  their  relative  positions,  look 
upon  each  other,  but,  popularly,  the  meaning  is  transferred  to  their  joint  look  upon 
the  earth.) 

141.  Shall  I  be  heard]  In  line  127  Leontes  had  commanded,  ‘  Away  with  her, 
to  Prison !’  Petrified  by  astonishment,  none  of  his  courtiers  had  obeyed  the  com¬ 
mand.  He  now  asks  in  his  fury,  ‘  Shall  I  be  heard,’  i.  e.  obeyed  ?  When  Lear  dis¬ 
inherits  Cordelia  (I,  i,  128)  and  cries  ‘  Call  France !’  the  circle  of  courtiers  stand 
as  though  spell-bound,  as  they  do  here  about  Leontes,  until  Lear  shouts  <  Who  stirs  ?’ 
—Ed. 

144.  Fooles]  It  is  well  to  note  the  instances  where  ‘  fool  ’  is  used  as  a  term  of 
affection.  We  need  them  all,— to  reconcile  us  to  its  application  to  Cordelia  by  the 
dying  Lear,  instead  of  applying  it,  as  I  wish  it  could  be  applied,  to  the  faithful  Fool. 
— Ed. 

147.  Adtion]  Johnson:  This  word  is  here  taken  in  the  lawyer’s  sense,  for 
indictment,  charge,  or  accusation.  [Misled  by  this  note,  Schmidt  defines  ‘action’ 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


81 


Is  for  my  better  grace.  Adieu  (my  Lord)  148 

I  neuer  wifhed  to  fee  you  forry,  now 

I  truft  I  fhall  :  my  Women  come,  you  haue  leaue.  150 

Leo .  Goe,  doe  our  bidding  :  hence. 

Lord.  Befeech  your  Highneffe  call  the  Queene  againe. 

Antig.  Be  certaine  what  you  do(Sir)leaft  your  Iuftice 
Proue  violence,  in  the  which  three  great  ones  fufifer, 

Your  Selfe,  your  Queene,  your  Sonne.  155 

Lord.  For  her  (my  Lord) 

I  dare  my  life  lay  downe,  and  will  do’t  (Sir) 

Pleafe  you  t’accept  it,  that  the  Queene  is  fpotleffe 
Pth’  eyes  of  Heauen,  and  to  you  (I  meane 

In  this,  which  you  accufe  her.)  160 

Antig.  If  it  proue 

Shee’s  otherwife,  lie  keepe  my  Stables  where 
I  lodge  my  Wife,  lie  goe  in  couples  with  her:  163 


149.  forry,\  sorry  ;  Rowe  et  seq. 

150.  you  haue\  you've  Pope-K 

15 1.  [Ex.  Qu.,  guarded;  and  Ladies. 
Theob. 

152.  etc.  Lord.]  I.  L.  Cap. 

153.  leaf]  lejl  F3F4- 

158.  t' accept]  to  accept  Cap.  Var. 


Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Dyce  i,  Sta. 
Ktly,  Cam. 

159.  meane ]  mean.  F4. 

162.  my  Stables ]  my  Stable  F  ,  Rowe 
i,  Johns.  Var.  ’73,  ’78,  ’85,  Rann,  Huds. 
me  shackles  Bulloch,  my  stabler  or  my 
s fablers  Cam.  conj.  (withdrawn),  con¬ 
stables  Kinnear. 


here  by  lawsuit  /] — M.  Mason  (p.  127) :  We  cannot  say  that  a  person  goes  on  an  in¬ 
dictment,  charge,  or  accusation.  Hermione  means  only  4  What  I  am  now  about  to 
do.’— Steevens  :  Mason’s  supposition  may  be  countenanced  by  the  following  in 
Much  Ado,  I,  i,  299 :  ‘  When  you  went  onward  in  this  ended  action.'  [An  example 
of  the  need  of  a  vigilant  eye  in  regarding  Steevens’s  quotations.  The  4  action  ’  re¬ 
ferred  to  by  Claudio  is  the  military  action  from  which  Don  Pedro  has  just  returned, 
and,  of  course,  has  no  parallelism  whatever  with  Hermione’s  action.  It  is  not  clear 
that  Johnson  is  not  more  nearly  right  than  Mason.  The  interpretation  of  Mason 
implies  that  Hermione  goes  voluntarily,  whereas  no  one  goes  to  prison  of  his  own 
free  will.  The  word  ‘  prison  ’  suggested  ‘  action  ’ ;  but  there  is  not  thereby  involved 
the  whole  process  of  an  indictment,  trial,  and  conviction,  but  merely  enough  to  sug¬ 
gest  a  charge  or  an  accusation. — Ed.] 

154.  the  which]  See  Abbott,  §  270,  or  ‘the  whom,’  IV,  iv,  595. 

160.  In  this,  which]  For  other  examples  of  relative  sentences  where  the  prepo¬ 
sition  is  not  repeated,  e.  g.  4  In  this  (in  or  of)  which,’  etc.,  see  Abbott,  §  394. 

162,  163.  Stables  .  .  .  couples]  Hanmer  reads  stable-stand  in  his  text,  with 
the  following  note :  4  Stable-stand  (stabilis  statio  as  Spelman  interprets  it)  is  a  term  of 
the  Forest-Laws,  and  signifies  a  place  where  a  deer-stealer  fixes  his  stand  under  some 
convenient  cover,  and  keeps  watch  for  the  purpose  of  killing  deer  as  they  pass  by. 
From  the  place  it  came  to  be  applied  to  the  person,  and  any  man  taken  in  a  forest  in 
6 


82 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


[162,  163.  lie  keepe  my  Stables  .  .  .  couples] 
that  situation  was  presumed  to  be  an  offender  and  had  the  name  of  a  Stable-stand' 
[Hanmer  does  not  venture  on  the  applicability  of  his  amendment  to  the  present 
passage,  nor  why  Antigonus  should  speak  of  his  stable-stand,  seeing  that  to  have  a 
stable-stand  at  all  was  an  unlawful  act.  Yet  Capell  pronounced  the  emendation 
‘excellent’  and  adopted  it,  as  did  Warburton  also.] — Malone:  If  Hermione  prove 
unfaithful,  I’ll  never  trust  my  wife  out  of  my  sight ;  I’ll  always  go  in  couples  with 
her;  and  in  that  respect  my  house  shall  resemble  a  stable  where  dogs  are  kept  in 
pairs.  Though  a  kennel  is  a  place  where  a  pack  of  hounds  is  kept,  every  one,  I 
suppose,  as  well  as  our  author,  has  occasionally  seen  dogs  tied  up  in  couples  under 
the  manger  of  a  stable.  .  .  .  ‘  Stables  ’  or  ‘  stable,’  however,  may  mean  station , 
stabilis  statio,  and  two  distinct  propositions  may  be  intended.  I’ll  keep  my  station 
in  the  same  place  where  my  wife  is  lodged ;  I’ll  run  everywhere  with  her,  like  dogs 
that  are  coupled  together. — Collier  (ed.  i) :  The  meaning  is  not  very  clear,  unless 
we  take  ‘  stable  ’  in  its  etymological  sense  from  stabulum,  a  standing-place,  abode,  or 
habitation.  In  that  case,  Antigonus  only  says  he  will  take  care  never  to  allow  his 
wife  to  dwell  in  any  place  where  he  is  not.  The  Rev.  Mr  Barry  recommended  this 
interpretation  to  me ;  but  if  so,  we  ought  to  read  ‘  stables  ’  in  the  singular. — Dyce 
{Remarks,  p.  80)  :  A  more  wretched  ‘  interpretation  ’  than  Mr  Barry’s  could  hardly  be 
imagined.  Perhaps  Antigonus  means, — If  Hermione  prove  unchaste,  I  shall  then 
have  no  doubt  that  my  wife  is  inclined  to  play  the  wanton,  and  therefore  I  will  allow 
her  no  more  liberty  than  I  allow  my  horses,  or  my  hounds. — CoLlier  in  his  second 
edition  adopted  the  reading  of  his  MS :  ‘  I’ll  keep  me  stable,'  etc.  with  this  note : 
Antigonus  means  merely  that  he  will  take  care  to  keep  himself  constantly  near  his 
wife,  in  order  that  she  may  not  offend  in  the  way  unjustly  charged  against  Hermione. 
— R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  The  meaning  of  this  passage  seems  so  plainly  ‘  I  will 
degrade  my  wife’s  chamber  into  a  stable  or  dog  kennel,’  that  had  there  not  been 
much,  quite  from  the  purpose,  written  about  it,  it  would  require  no  special  notice. 
The  idea  of  horses  and  dogs  being  once  suggested  by  the  word  ‘  stable,’  the  speaker 
goes  on  to  utter  another  thought  connected  with  it :  ‘  I’ll  go  in  couples,’  etc. — R.  G. 
White  (ed.  ii) :  Incomprehensible,  but  not  corrupt.  All  efforts  at  explanation 
have  been  absurd  or  over-subtle.  Possibly  there  is  an  obscure  allusion  to  ‘  They 
were  fed  as  horses  in  the  morning;  every  one  neighed  after  his  neighbor’s  wife.’ 
— Jer.  v,  8.  ‘  Keep  ’  possibly  is  equivalent  to  guard,  shut  up, — a  use  of  the  word 

not  infrequent. — Halliwell  :  Antigonus  probably  intends  to  say  that,  if  Her¬ 
mione  is  false,  he  has  then  no  faith  in  his  own  wife,  and  will  keep  her  in  her 
chamber  with  the  same  strictness  that  he  does  a  horse  in  his  stables,  he  will  make 
a  stable  of  his  bed-chamber,  tie  his  wife  to  the  manger  or  rack.  The  allusion 
afterwards  to  going  in  couples  does  not  necessarily  refer  to  the  same  idea,  but 
may  be  spoken  either  with  a  generic  meaning,  or  with  a  distinct  allusion  to  hounds 
going  in  couples. — Staunton  :  A  prodigious  amount  of  nonsense  has  been  written 
on  this  unfortunate  passage,  but  not  a  single  editor  or  critic  has  shown  the  faintest 
perception  of  what  it  means.  The  accepted  explanation,  that  Antigonus  declares  he 
will  have  his  stables  in  the  same  place  with  his  wife ;  or,  as  some  writers  express  it, 
he  will  ‘  make  his  stable  or  dog-kennel  of  his  wife’s  chamber  ’ !  sets  gravity  com¬ 
pletely  at  defiance.  What  he  means, — and  the  excessive  grossness  of  the  idea  can 
hardly  be  excused, — is,  unquestionably,  that  if  Hermione  be  proved  incontinent  he 
should  believe  every  woman  unchaste ;  his  own  wife  as  licentious  as  Semiramis 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


83 


[162,  163.  lie  keepe  my  Stables  .  .  .  couples] 

(‘  Equum  adamatum  a  Semiramide,’  etc. — Pliny,  Nat.  Hist,  viii,  42),  and  where  he 
lodged  her  he  would  ‘  keep,’  that  is,  guard ,  or  fasten  the  entry  of  his  stables.  This 
sense  of  the  word  ‘  keep  ’  is  so  common,  even  in  Shakespeare,  that  it  is  amazing  no 
one  should  have  seen  its  application  here.  See  Com.  Err.  II,  ii,  208;  Hen.  VIII: 
V,  iv,  30;  Hatn.  IV,  v,  1 15;  Oth.  V,  ii,  365.  [This  interpretation  of  ‘keep’  ante¬ 
dates  R.  G.  White’s  second  ed.  Dyce  ( Gloss.)  quotes  the  foregoing  note  of  Staunton 
and  adds :  ‘  As  to  the  words  “  keep  my  stables,”  compare  also  the  following  passage 
in  Greene’s  James  the  Fourth  : — “  A  young  stripling  .  .  .  that  can  wait  in  a  gentle¬ 
man’s  chamber  when  his  master  is  a  mile  off,  keep  his  stable  when  ’tis  empty;  and  his 
purse  when  ’tis  full,”  etc.’—  Works,  p.  193,  ed.  Dyce,  1861. — It  is  not  clear  why 
Dyce  should  have  quoted  this  phrase  from  Greene.  It  occurs  in  the  ‘  bill  ’  wherein 
Slipper  sets  forth  his  own  qualities  as  a  servant,  and  is  a  specimen  of  heavy  wit  (but 
the  lightest  whereof  Greene  is  capable),  and  consists  of  a  series  of  anticlimaxes,  such 
as  ‘  a  young  stripling  of  the  age  of  thirty  years,’  who  can  ‘  work  with  the  sickest ,’ 
‘  keep  his  stable  when  it  is  empty]  and  winds  up  with  the  assertion  that  he  ‘  hath 
many  qualities  worse  than  all  these.’  In  fact,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  the  only  parallelism 
to  the  present  passage  lies  in  a  phrase  of  three  words,  repeated. — Ed.] — B.  Nichol¬ 
son  (N.  <Sr>  Qu.  1871,  IV,  viii,  41):  Antigonus,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  like  other 
noblemen,  had  some  at  least  of  his  horses  on  his  estates.  Recurring  to  them,  as  he 
afterwards  does  to  his  hounds,  he  exclaims, — ‘  As  my  stallions  and  mares  are  looked 
after,  kept  apart,  and  under  ward,  so  shall  my  wife  be  kept,’  ...  ‘  if  the  Queen  be 
false,  then  are  women  mere  animals,  and  holding  my  wife  as  a  bestial,  I  will  lodge 
and  keep  my  brood  mares  with  her,  and  her  as  them.’  The  transposition  of  his 
phrases  may  be  intended  to  express  the  first  and  mingled  outrush  of  his  vehemence, 
but  is  also  an  attempt  to  express  more  strongly  that  his  cattle  would  be  held  by  him 
equal  to  his  wife.  ‘  Keep,’  also  by  aptness  of  phrase,  is  used  in  both  its  senses, — of 
lodge,  and  of  shut  or  fasten.  [In  Shakcspeariana  (Feb.  1884,  p.  124)  Dr  Nichol¬ 
son  returned  to  this  passage  and  expressed  the  belief  that  the  key  to  it  is  to  be  found 
in  a  dictum  of  Aristotle  that  horses  and  mares  are  the  most  amorous  of  animals. — 
Cf.  Bartholome,  xviii,  c.  39.] — Ingleby  (Sh.  Hermeneutics ,  p.  77)  says  he  intends  to 
‘  settle  the  matter  for  good  and  all,’  but  throws  no  new  light  on  it,  beyond  his  asser¬ 
tion  that  ‘  the  phrase  to  keep  one's  stables  was  a  familiar  phrase  in  Shakespeare’s  time ; 
and  meant  to  keep  personal  watch  over  one’s  wife’s  or  one’s  mistress’s  chastity.’ 
When  a  phrase  is  a  ‘familiar’  one,  we  certainly  have  a  right  to  expect  an  abundance 
of  examples.  Ingleby  gives  only  one,  and  this  one  fails  to  bear  out  his  definition. 
It  is  from  Chapman’s  All  Fools,  IV,  ii : — ‘  your  wife  that  keeps  the  stable  of  your 
honour.’  He  also  quotes  from  Dyce’s  Glossary  the  words,  given  above,  from  Greene’s 
James  the  Fourth ,  and  says  Dyce  did  not  understand  them.  It  is  remarkable  that 
this  ‘  familiar  ’  phrase  escaped  Gifford,  Collier,  Dyce,  and  Staunton. — Perring  ( Hard 
Knots,  etc.  p.  178)  has  a  note  on  this  passage,  but  as  he  says  he  sees  no  difficulty,  he 
cannot  be  expected  to  solve  any,  nor  does  he. 

[In  obscure  passages  like  the  present,  an  explanation,  in  order  to  be  accepted,  must 
carry  instant  conviction.  It  is  needless  to  remark  that  of  none  of  the  explanations 
here  recorded  can  this  be  affirmed.  A  comfort,  however,  remains  to  us,  that,  what¬ 
ever  the  precise  meaning,  enough  can  be  surmised  of  its  unsavory  drift  to  render  us 
quite  indifferent  were  the  whole  speech,  creditable  as  it  is  to  the  head  and  heart  of 
Antigonus,  wholly  expunged.  There  is,  let  me  add,  one  suggestion  which  has  not 


84 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


Then  when  I  feele,and  fee  her, no  farther  truft  her: 

For  euery  ynch  of  Woman  in  the  World,  165 

I,euery  dram  of  Womans  flefh  is  falfe, 

If  fhe  be. 

Leo.  Hold  your  peaces. 

Lord.  Good  my  Lord. 

Antig.  It  is  for  you  we  fpeake,not  for  our  felues:  170 

You  are  abus’d,  and  by  fome  putter  on, 

That  will  be  damn’d  for’t :  would  I  knew  the  Villaine, 

I  would  Land-damne  him  :  be  fhe  honor-flaw’d,  173 


164.  Then]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope  i,  Mai. 
Var.  Than  Pope  ii  et  cet. 

farther ]  Cap.  Mai.  Wh.  Sta. 
Cam.  further  Ff  et  cet. 

166.  f]  /  F4.  Ay,  Rowe. 

169.  Lord .]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  lord ! 
Han.  lord, —  Theob.  et  cet. 


171.  abus'd,  and  by]  abus'd,  by  Ff. 
abused  by  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

173-  Land-damne]  F2F3>  land-damm 
Theob.  ii,  Han.  Warb.  land-dam  Johns. 
lant-dam  Huds.  land-drum  Bulloch. 
lent-damn  Nicholson  (Withdrawn,  N.  & 
Qu.  3,  xi,  435).  Land-damn  F4  et  cet. 


been  urged,  which  can  only  claim  for  itself  that  it  is  not  more  absurd  than  its  fellows. 
It  is,  that  stables  were  used  not  only  for  horses  but  also  for  homed  cattle.  WTiere 
Paulina  lodged,  were  she  unchaste,  would  be  a  fitting  stable  for  her  husband. 
Further  elaboration  can  be  safely  left  to  the  reader,  who,  after  wading  through  this 
long  note,  may  well  sigh  :  ‘  an  ounce  of  civet,  good  apothecary.’ — Ed.] 

164.  Then]  Malone:  Modem  editors  read,  Than;  certainly  not  without  ground, 
for  than  was  formerly  spelt  ‘  then  ’ ;  but  here,  I  believe,  the  latter  word  was  intended. 
— Knight  :  We  think  the  sentence  is  comparative  :  I  will  trust  her  no  farther  than 
I  see  her.  [Unquestionably. — Ed.] 

I7* I-  putter  on]  Staunton:  This  appears  to  have  been  a  term  of  reproach, 
implying  an  instigator,  or  plotter.  It  occurs  again  in  Hen.  VIII :  I,  ii,  24. 
[In  Schmidt  will  be  found  many  examples  where  to  put  on  means  to  instigate.] 

173.  I  would  Land-damne  him]  Hanmer:  Probably  this  means  the  taking 
away  a  man's  life.  For  Land  or  Lant  is  an  old  word  for  the  secretion  of  the  kid¬ 
neys,  and  to  stop  the  common  passages  and  functions  of  Nature  is  to  kill. _ Capell 

{Gloss.):  Rectius — land-damm,  to  pit,  or  bury;  damm  or  stop  up  with  Land,  i.e. 
Earth. — Johnson  :  <  Land-damn  ’  is  probably  one  of  those  words  which  caprice 
brought  into  fashion,  and  which,  after  a  short  time,  reason  and  grammar  drove  irre¬ 
coverably  away.  It,  perhaps,  meant  no  more  than  I  will  rid  the  country  of  him,  con¬ 
demn  him  to  quit  the  land. — Heath  (p.  309)  :  I  profess  my  utter  ignorance  of  the 
meaning,  unless  the  poet  possibly  might  have  written  :  ‘  I  would  half  damn  him,’  i.  e. 

I  would  give  him  his  portion  for  this  world.— Rann:  Bury  him  alive,  stop  him  up 
with  earth.  [Rann  has  received  the  credit,  which  belongs  to  Capell.  of  having  first 
suggested  this  meaning  of  ‘land-damn.’  Accordingly,  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  speaks 
of  ‘  Rann’s  conjecture,’  and  says  that  it  is  ‘  not  without  reason,  or  the  support  which 
he  neglected  to  give  it.  See  Tit.  And.  V,  iii,  179:  “  Set  him  breast-deep  in  earth 
and  famish  him,”  etc.’  Staunton  and  Dyce  refer  to  <  Rann’s  conjecture,’  and  both 
give  White’s  quotation  from  Tit.  And.  (Dyce  with  credit  to  White.)] — Malone  :  I  am 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


8  5 


[173.  I  would  Land-damne  him] 

persuaded  that  this  is  a  corruption,  and  that  either  the  printer  caught  the  word  damn 
from  the  preceding  line,  or  that  the  transcriber  was  deceived  by  similitude  of  sounds. 
I  believe  we  should  read — ‘land -dam'  ;  i.e.  kill  him;  bury  him  in  earth.  [See 
Capell’s  definition. — Ed.] — Steevens  :  I  think  we  might  not  unsafely  read  :  ‘  I’d 
laudanum  him,’ — i.  e.  poison  him  with  laudanum.  So,  in  Jonson’s  Silent  Woman  : 
‘  Have  I  no  friend  that  will  make  her  drunk,  or  give  her  a  little  laudanum,  or 
opium  ?’  The  word  is  much  more  ancient  than  the  time  of  Shakespeare.  I  owe 
this  remark  to  Dr  Farmer.  [It  is  hard  to  believe  that  the  ‘  Puck  of  Commentators  ’ 
did  not  take  a  malicious  pleasure  in  thus  recording  the  solemn  nonsense  of  his  learned 
friend.  Although  he  adopted  the  emendation,  he  knew  well  enough  that  it  would  not 
be  associated  with  his  name. — Ed.] — Knight:  Farmer’s  conjecture  is,  we  suppose, 
intended  for  a  joke. — Collier  (ed.  i)  :  ‘  Lamback  ’  occurs  in  various  writers  and 
means  to  beat ;  but  it  can  hardly  have  been  mistaken  by  the  printer,  and  it  would  not 
be  forcible  enough  for  Antigonus’s  state  of  mind.  It  occurs  in  the  unique  drama  of  The 
rare  Triumphs  of  Love  and  Fortune,  1589  : — ‘  I  would  lamback  the  devil  out  of  you, 
for  all  your  geared  [Act  IV.]  Again  in  Munday  and  Chettle’s  Death  of  Robert  Earl 
of  Huntington,  1601  : — ‘  And  with  this  dagger  lustily  lambackt.’  [V,  i;  Collier,  in  a 
note,  suggests  that  ‘  lambackt  ’  should  be  lambeaked,  to  cudgel ;  this  word  Hazlitt  in  his 
ed.  of  Dodsley  adopts.  Collier,  in  his  Second  Edition,  tells  us  that  his  MS  Corrector 
had  erased  ‘  Land-damme  ’  and  substituted  lamback;  wherefore  Collier  adopted 
lamback  in  his  text ;  ‘  because  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  compositor’s  eye  caught 
the  word  ‘  damn’d  exactly  above  in  the  preceding  line,’  and  hence  changed  lam¬ 
back  to  ‘  land-damme.’  ‘  I  would  lamback  him,’  says  Collier,  ‘  means  I  would  beat 
or  belabour  him,  but  how  it  came  to  mean  that  is  doubtful.’  In  his  Third  Edition 
Collier  returned  to  ‘land-damn.’] — Dycf.  ( Remarks ,  p.  81):  Farmer’s  conjecture  is 
undoubtedly  (excepting  Mr  Collier’s)  the  worst  which  has  been  offered  on  this 
passage.  That  of  Hanmer  is  at  least  in  keeping  with  the  grossness  of  the  lines 
which  follow.  In  the  word  ‘  land-damn  ’  there  appears  to  be  an  incurable  corrup¬ 
tion  ;  but  I  may  just  notice  that  a  similar  compound  occurs  in  the  once-popular  poem 
of  Warner: — ‘Hence  countrie  Loutes  land-lurch  their  Lords.’ — Albion’s  England, 
p.  219,  ed.  1596. — Halliwell:  Unless  there  be  a  corruption  in  the  text,  this  word 
can  merely  mean,  either,  to  condemn  to  quit  the  land,  to  banish,  or  to  curse  through¬ 
out  the  land ;  the  latter  explanation  better  suiting  the  energetic  denunciation  obviously 
intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the  speaker.  It  is  barely  possible  some  corruption  of  the 
word  may  be  preserved  in  one  of  the  following  rustic  terms : — ‘  Landan,  lantam, 
rantan  are  used  by  some  Glostershire  people  in  the  sense  of  scouring  or  correcting  to 
some  purpose,  and  also  of  rattling  and  rating  severely,  but  no  certain  idea  can  be 
affixt  to  these  cant  phrases.’ — MS  Glossary,  compiled  about  1780. — Walker  (Crit. 
iii,  99)  :  It  seems  possible  that  Shakespeare  may  have  written  live-damn.  ‘  He  is 
sure  to  be  damned  for  his  villainy  sooner  or  later ;  and  were  it  in  my  power  I  would 
damn  him  alive, — inflict  the  torments  of  hell  on  him,  while  yet  living.’ — Liue-land. 
D  and  e  are  often  confounded  at  the  end  of  words.  At  any  rate  live-damn  may, 
perhaps,  served  as  a  makeshift,  till  the  true  reading  be  discovered.  ...  It  may  be 
also  observed  that  the  hyphen  may,  perhaps,  be  a  corruption ;  as  is  the  case  in  many 
other  passages  of  the  Folio,  where  the  printers,  not  knowing  what  to  make  of  the 
word  in  the  MS,  substituted  a  conjectural  one  of  a  compound  form. — Clark  and 
Wright  ( Cambridge  Edition ):  With  the  sense  to  beat,  which  Collier  assigns  to 


86 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ix,  sc.  i. 


I  haue  three  daughters  :  the  elded;  is  eleuen; 

The  fecond,  and  the  third,  nine  :  and  fome  due  :  175 

If  this  proue  true,  they’l  pay  for’t.  By  mine  Honor 

lie  gell’d  em  all  :  fourteene  they  (hall  not  fee  177 


175-  nine  :  and  fome  fine]  nine  :  and 
fonnes  five  F2F3.  nine  :  and  fons  five 
F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  nine,  and  some  five 
Theob.  et  seq. 


177.  gell'd  em]  F2.  gel'd  'em  F3F4. 
geld ’em  Rowe+,  Var.  ’73,  Sing.  Dyce, 
Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  Ktly.  geld  them  Cap.  et 
cet. 


lamback,  it  seems  an  anticlimax  after  the  threat  in  the  line  preceding. — Keightley 
{Exp.  201) :  There  is  also  a  vulgar  term  lambaste. — Cartwright:  Read:  ‘I  would 
hang  him,  But  be  she,’  etc. — Huntley  ( Gloss.  Cotswold  Dialect)  :  Landam.  To 
abuse  with  rancour;  Damn  through  the  land. — Thorncliffe  {N.  6°  Qu.  1875,  V, 
iii,  464)  :  Forty  years  ago  an  old  custom  was  still  in  use  in  this  district  [Buxton], 
When  any  slanderer  was  detected,  or  any  parties  discovered  in  adultery,  it  was  usual 
to  lan-dan  them.  This  was  done  by  the  rustics  traversing  from  house  to  house  along 
the  ‘  country-side  ’  blowing  trumpets  and  beating  drums,  or  pans,  and  kettles.  When  an 
audience  was  assembled,  the  delinquents’  names  were  proclaimed,  and  they  were  thus 
land-damned. — H.  Wedgwood  {N.  and  Qu.  1875,  V,  iv,  3)  :  Thorncliffe’s  explana¬ 
tion  carries,  to  me  at  least,  complete  conviction.  ...  It  is  hardly  doubtful  that  landan, 
like  randan,  or  rantan,  is  a  mere  representation  of  continued  noise. — Schmidt  [Er- 
lauterungen,  etc.  p.  281)  :  The  Folio  reads  :  ‘  I  would  land — damn  him.’  Perhaps  the 
dash  should  be  after  ‘would,’  and,  in  the  MS,  it  read: — ‘Would  I  knew  the  villain, 
I  would — Lord,  damn  him  !’  [Dr  Schmidt  repeated  this  in  his  Lexicon  ! — Ed.] — 
Ingleby  (Sh.  Hermeneutics,  p.  1 55 ) :  Land-damning  might  mean  the  ‘drier  death 
ashore’  mentioned  by  Proteus  in  Two  Gent.  I,  i. — Pf.rring  (p.  180)  cites  Cym.  I,  ii, 
15-26,  and  remarks  : — ‘  Land-damn  him  ’  in  the  light  of  this  passage  would  contain  a 
deal  in  a  small  compass, — the  challenge  Antigonus  would  have  sent  him ;  the  duel  which 
he  would  have  fought  with  him  ;  the  resolution  with  which  he  would  have  held  his  own 
ground;  the  fiery  vigour  with  which  he  would  have  forced  him  to  give  him  some  of 
his  ground;  the  stunning  blow  which  he  would  have  dealt  him  till  he  had  measured 
his  length  on  the  ground;  and,  having  left  him  no  ground  to  stand  upon,  whether  he 
would  damn  him  further  and  forbid  his  body  interment,  we  need  not  pursue — the 
land-damning  would  have  been  thorough  and  complete.  The  illiterate  multitude  of 
Shakespeare’s  day  (and  we  are  no  better  off  than  they,  so  far  as  accurate  knowledge 
of  this  word  goes)  would  understand  the  meaning  and  significance  of  the  last,  if 
they  could  not  of  the  first  portion  of  this  mysterious  compound. —  Mackay  ( Gloss.) 
shows  that  in  bucolic  terms  for  scourging,  the  Gaelic  tongue  is  superior  to  ours.  [I  am 
happy  to  agree  with  Perring ;  we  can  all  grasp  the  meaning  of  the  last  half  of  ‘  Land- 
damne,’  and  1  would  add,  that  to  understand  half  of  Shakespeare’s  meaning  in  a 
difficult  passage  is  something  to  be  not  a  little  proud  of. — Ed.] 

1 75  -  second  .  .  .  flue]  Theobald  restored  the  true  punctuation  to  this  line,  with 
the  note  that  ‘  the  eldest  was  eleven  years  of  age,  the  second,  nine,  and  the  third,  some 
five  ’ ;  justifying  the  use  of  ‘  some  ’  by  Lear,  I,  i,  20 :— ‘  a  son  by  order  of  law,  some 
year  elder  than  this  ;  and  lb.  I,  ii,  5  : — *  I  am  some  twelve  or  fourteen  moonshines 
lag  of  a  brother.’ — Malone  :  Shakespeare  undoubtedly  wrote  ‘  some  ’ ;  for  were  we, 
with  F2,  to  read  ‘  sons  five,’  then  the  second  and  third  daughter  would  both  be  of  the 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


87 

To  bring  falfe  generations  :  they  are  co-heyres,  -178 

And  I  had  rather  glib  my  felfe,  then  they 

Should  not  produce  faire  iffue.  180 

Leo.  Ceafe,  no  more  : 

You  fmell  this  bufineffe  with  a  fence  as  cold 
As  is  a  dead-mans  nofe  :  but  I  do  fee’t,  and  feel’t, 

As  you  feele  doing  thus  :  and  fee  withall 

The  Inftruments  that  feele.  185 

Antig.  If  it  be  fo, 

We  neede  no  graue  to  burie  honefty, 

There’s  not  a  graine  of  it,  the  face  to  fweeten 
Of  the  whole  dungy-earth. 

Leo.  What?  lacke  I  credit  ?  1 90 

Lord.  I  had  rather  you  did  lacke  then  I  (my  Lord) 

Vpon  this  ground  :  and  more  it  would  content  me 

To  haue  her  Honor  true,  then  your  fufpition  193 


179.  glib\  lib  Grey,  unsib  Heath. 

183.  dead-mans ]  dead  man's  Rowe. 
but  I  do ]  /  Pope  +  ,  Var.  ’73, 

Steev. 

184.  thus  :]  this,  Lettsom  (ap.  Dyce), 
Huds. 

thus .-]  thus;  [Laying  hold  of 
his  arm.  Han.  thus,  [Striking  him. 
Rann. 

184,  185.  and. ..feele]  Erased  by  Coll. 
MS. 


185.  that]  I  Han.  that  you  Huds. 
[Sinking  his  brows.  Johns,  (cor¬ 
rected  to  Striking  in  Append.). 

189.  dungy-earth]  dungy  earth  Rowe. 
191.  Lord.]  Antig.  Theob.  conj. 

193.  her]  your  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Han. 
then]  than  F  et  seq. 
fufpition]  Ff.  suspicion,  Coll. 
Dyce,  Cam.  Dtn.  suspicion;  Rowe  et 
cet. 


same  age ;  which,  as  we  are  not  told  that  they  were  twins,  is  not  very  reasonable  to 
suppose.  Besides,  daughters  are  by  the  law  of  England  ‘  co-heirs,’  but  sons  never. 

179.  glib]  To  geld. 

184,  185.  As  .  .  .  feele]  Heath  (p.  209):  The  instruments  we  employ  in  doing 
any  thing  do  not  feel,  but  are  felt.  ...  I  propose ‘  The  instruments  of  that  you 
feel.  The  king  had  said  that  he  both  saw  and  felt  the  wrong  that  had  been  done 
him,  and  he  now  adds,  just  as  you  feel  the  impression  on  your  sense  at  the  present 
moment,  and  not  only  feel  it,  but  at  the  same  time  see,  too,  the  instruments  which  are 
the  cause  or  occasion  of  this  your  feeling ;  that  is,  in  short,  I  see  and  feel  my  wrong 
with  the  same  certainty,  as  you  see  and  feel  the  present  object  of  those  senses.  To 
preserve  the  metre,  I  read  in  the  reply  of  Antigonus  If  so. — Capell  :  The  king  cer¬ 
tainly  makes  free  with  some  part  of  Antigonus’  face  (his  ‘nose,’  probably),  and  4  feel' 
has  a  double  sense  in  that  speech;  it’s  philosophical  and  proper  one,  first ;  and  the 
second  4  feel  ’ — touch,  a  sense  given  it  vulgarly ;  for  it  is  of  that  speaker’s  fingers  that 
the  last  ‘feel’  is  predicated;  see  ‘  So  sure  as  this  beard’s  gray.’— II,  iii,  196.  [Dr 
Johnson  said  that  if  Capell  had  only  come  to  him,  he  would  have  ‘  endowed  his 
purposes  with  words.’] — Malone:  I  see  and  feel  my  disgrace,  as  you  Antigonus, 


88 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


Be  blam’d  for’t  how  you  might. 

Leo.  Why  what  neede  we  195 

Commune  with  you  of  this  ?  but  rather  follow 
Our  forcefull  inftigation  ?  Our  prerogatiue 
Cals  not  your  Counfailes,  but  our  naturall  goodneffe 
Imparts  this  :  which,  if  you,  or  ftupified, 

Or  feeming  fo,  in  skill,  cannot,  or  will  not  200 

Rellifh  a  truth,  like  vs  :  informe  your  felues, 

We  neede  no  more  of  your  aduice  :  the  matter, 

The  Ioffe,  the  gaine,  the  ord’ring  on’t, 

Is  all  properly  ours* 1 

Antig.  And  I  with  (my  Liege)  205 

You  .had  onely  in  your  filent  iudgement  tride  it, 


196.  of]  for  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
this?]  this,  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii,  Dtn. 
but]  not  Han. 

198.  Counfailes]  Counfels  F3F4. 

199,  200.  or. ..skill]  In  parenthesis, 
Theob.  et  seq. 


201.  Rellifh  a]  Relish  as  Cap.  Var. 
Rann,  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

203,  204.  The. ..Is  all]  One  line, 
Theob.  et  seq. 

204.  Is  all  properly]  Is  properly  all 
Pope,  are  all  Properly  Han. 

ours-]  F,. 


now  feel  me,  on  my  doing  thus  to  you,  and  as  you  now  see  the  instruments  that  feel, 

i.  e.  my  fingers.  Leontes  must  here  be  supposed  to  lay  hold  of  either  the  beard  or 
arm,  or  some  other  part,  of  Antigonus. — Henley  suggests  that,  perhaps  Leontes 
makes  the  sign  on  his  forehead  to  which  Staunton  refers  at  I,  ii,  255. 

196.  but  rather  follow]  Abbott  (§  385) :  The  general  rule  is  that  after  but  the 
finite  verb  is  to  be  supplied  without  the  negative,  as  in  Macb.  Ill,  i,  47  : — 1  To  be 
thus  is  nothing,  But  to  be  safely  thus  (is  something).’  In  the  present  case,  the  nega¬ 
tive  is  implied  in  the  first  verb  through  the  question,  1  Why  need  we  ?’  i.  e.  ‘  We  need 
not.’  The  second  verb  must  not  be  taken  interrogatively,  and  thus  it  omits  the  nega¬ 
tive  :  ‘  Why  need  we  commune  with  you  ?  we  need  rather  follow  our  own  impulse.’ 
Else,  if  both  verbs  be  taken  interrogatively,  ‘  but  ’  must  be  taken  as  ‘  and  not  ’ :  ‘  Why 
need  we  commune  with  you,  and  not  follow  our  own  impulse  ?’ 

197.  prerogatiue]  Davis  (p.  127) :  The  Tudor  and  Stuart  conception  of  the 
extent  of  the  prerogative  is  asserted  here.  It  took  more  than  a  century  and  a  half 
to  quell  the  exorbitant  pretensions  of  the  English  sovereigns  in  this  respect. 

199.  which]  Abbott  (§  249) :  Here  *  which  ’  means  as  regards  which,  and  in  this 
and  in  other  places  approximates  to  that  vulgar  idiom  which  is  well  known  to  readers 
of  Martin  Chwzzlewit. — Deighton  attributes  the  confusion  of  construction  to  the 
parenthesis :  ‘  or  stupefied  ...  in  skill.’  There  is  another  similar  example  in  V,  i, 
168: — ‘whom  ...  I  desire  ...  to  look  on  him.’  Capell  in  the  present  case 
obviates  confusion  by  reading  1  as  a  truth,’  in  line  201,  which  is  an  improvement  and 
would  be  allowable  if  the  passage  were  capable  of  no  other  explanation. — Ed. 

200.  in  skill]  That  is,  cunning,  design,  purpose. 

201.  your  selues,]  There  should  be  no  comma  here,  I  think. 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


89 

Without  more  ouerture.  207 

Leo .  How  could  that  be  ? 

Either  thou  art  moft  ignorant  by  age, 

.Or  thou  wer’t  borne  a  foole  :  Camilla’s  flight  210 

Added  to  their  Familiarity 

(Which  was  as  groffe,  as  euer  touch’d  coniefture, 

That  lack’d  fight  onely,  nought  for  approbation 
But  onely  feeing,  all  other  circumftances 

Made  vp  to’th  deed)  doth  pufh-on  this  proceeding.  215 

Yet,  for  a  greater  confirmation 

(For  in  an  A6te  of  this  importance,  ’twere 

Moft  pitteous  to  be  wilde)  I  hane  difpatch’d  in  port, 

To  facred  Delpkos,  to  App olio’s  Temple, 

Cleomines  and  Dion ,  whom  you  know  220 

Of  fluff’ d-fufficiency  :  Now,  from  the  Oracle 


214.  feeing,  all~\  feeing  all  F3F4, 
Rowe,  seeing ;  all  Theob. 

215.  pufh-on\  pufh  on  Ff  et  seq. 

218.  pitteous~\  pittious  FSF3.  pitious 

F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  piteous  Theob. 


218.  I  hane~]  Ft.  /’w  Han. 

220.  Cleomines]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope  +  . 
Dion]  Deon  Ff,  Rowe. 

221 .  fluff ' dfufficiency\  Fa.  fluff'd 
fuffciency  F3F4. 


207.  ouerture]  That  is,  openness,  disclosure,  publicity. 

212.  touch’d  coniecfture]  ‘  Conjecture  ’  is  the  subject  of  ‘  touch’d.’  not  the  object. 
Their  familiarity  was  as  clear  as  conjecture  could  reach,  that  lacked  no  proof  but 
sight.  Schmidt  here  interprets  ‘  touch  ’  by  move,  arouse,  with  ‘  conjecture  ’  in  the 
accusative.  But  it  was  not  the  grossness  which  aroused  conjecture,  but  conjecture 
that  estimated  the  amount  of  grossness. — Ed. 

213.  lack’d  .  .  .  approbation]  Johnson:  ‘Approbation’  in  this  place  is  put  for 
proof.  Staunton  considers  ‘  sight  only  ’  as  parenthetical,  and  incloses  it  between 
commas.  His  punctuation  does  not  essentially  affect  the  meaning,  which  is,  as  he 
says  in  a  note  : — ‘  That  wanted,  seeing  excepted,  nothing  for  proof.’  His  punctuation 
is  further  complicated  by  putting  a  semi-colon  after  ‘  approbation.’  The  punctuation 
of  the  Folio  cannot,  I  think,  be  improved. — Ed.] 

218.  wilde]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  279)  conjectures  wide,  i.  e.  wide  of  the  truth,  and 
gives  many  instances  where  the  Folio  prints  ‘  wild  ’  for  wide.  But  inasmuch  as  ‘  wilde  ’ 
may  very  well  mean  here,  as  it  means  elsewhere,  rash,  headlong,  it  is  safest  to  adhere 
to  the  text. — Ed. 

218.  I  hane  dispatch’d,  etc.]  In  Dorastus  and  Fawnia,  Bellaria  (Hermione) 
fell  down  on  her  knees  and  besought  the  king  to  send  to  the  Isle  of  Delphos,  to  the 
Oracle.  Accordingly,  Lloyd  (p.  139)  observes  : — ‘  Shakespeare  made  the  reference 
to  the  Oracle  originate  with  the  accuser,  and  this  proof  of  respect  for  it,  on  his  part, 
renders  his  sense  of  his  impiety  in  insulting  it,  and  consequent  confession  of  guilt  and 
subjection  to  its  predictions,  consistent  and  natural.’ 

221.  stuff ’d-sufficiency]  Johnson:  That  is,  of  abilities  more  than  enough. — 


9o 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


They  will  bring  all,  whofe  fpirituall  counfaile  had 
Shall  flop,  or  fpurre  me.  Haue  I  done  well  ? 

Lord.  Well  done  (my  Lord.) 

Leo.  Though  I  am  fatisfide,  and  neede  no  more 
Then  what  I  know,  yet  fhall  the  Oracle 
Giue  reft  to  th’mindes  of  others  ;  fuch  as  he 
Whofe  ignorant  credulitie,  will  not 
Come  vp  to  thftruth.  So  haue  we  thought  it  good 
From  our  free  perfon,  fhe  fhould  be  confinde, 

Leaft  that  the  treachery  of  the  two,  fled  hence, 

Be  left  her  to  performe.  Come  follow  vs, 

We  are  to  fpeake  in  publique  :  for  this  bufineffe 
Will  raife  vs  all. 

Antig.  To  laughter,  as  I  take  it, 

If  the  good  truth,  were  knowne.  Exeunt 


222 


225 


230 


235 


226.  Then']  Than  F4  et  seq.  231.  Leajf]  Lejl  F^. 

229.  haue  we]  we  have  Ff,  Rowe,  235.  [Aside.  Han.  et  seq. 

Pope,  Han. 


Boswell:  So  in  Dallington’s  Method  of  Travel T. — ‘I  remember  a  countriman  of 
ours  well  seene  in  arts  and  language,  well  stricken  in  years,  a  mourner  for  his  second 
wife;  a  father  of  marriageable  children,  who  with  other  his  booke  studies  abroad, 
joyned  also  the  exercise  of  dancing;  it  was  his  hap  in  an  honourable  Bal  (as  they 
call  it)  to  take  a  fall,  which  in  mine  opinion  was  not  so  disgracefull  as  the  dancing 
itselfe,  to  a  man  of  his  stuff  el  [This  irrelevant  extract  would  not  have  been  repeated 
here,  had  it  not  been  quoted  by  subsequent  editors. — Ed.] 

223.  spurre  me]  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Hanmer  printed  ‘  spur  me  on,’ — rightly,  I  sus¬ 
pect. 

225-227.  Though  I  ...  to  th’mindes  of  others]  Hudson  (p.  19) :  Which 
means  simply  that  he  is  not  going  to  let  the  truth  of  the  charge  stand  in  issue,  and 
that  he  holds  the  Divine  authority  to  be  a  capital  thing,  provided  he  may  use  it,  and 
need  not  obey  it ;  that  is,  if  he  finds  the  god  agreeing  with  him  in  opinion,  then  the 
god’s  judgement  is  infallible ;  if  not,  then  in  plain  terms,  he  is  no  god.  And  they 
who  have  closely  observed  the  workings  of  jealousy  know'  right  well  that  in  all  this 
Shakespeare  does  not  one  whit  ‘  overstep  the  modesty  of  Nature.’ 

227.  such  as  he]  It  is  not  a  little  strange  that  modem  editors,  in  their  fondness 
for  superfluous  stage-directions,  have  not  here  inserted :  ‘  Pointing  to  Antigonus.’ 
—Ed. 

230.  free  person]  Schmidt  :  That  is,  accessible  to  all. — Deighton  :  ‘  Free  ’  for 
the  sake  of  the  antithesis  with  ‘  confined.’ 

231.  fled]  For  this  participial  use  of  a  passive  verb,  see  Abbott,  §  295. 

232.  left  her  to  performe]  Johnson  :  He  has  before  declared,  that  there  is  a 
plot  against  his  life  and  crown ,  and  that  Hermione  is  federary  with  Polixenes  and 
Camillo. 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


91 


Scena  Secunda. 


Enter  Paulina,  a  Gentleman ,  Gaoler ,  Emilia. 

Paul.  The  Keeper  of  the  prifon,  call  to  him  : 

Let  him  haue  knowledge  who  I  am.  Good  Lady, 

No  Court  in  Europe  is  too  good  for  thee, 

What  doft  thou  then  in  prifon  ?  Now  good  Sir, 

You  know  me,  do  you  not  ? 

Gao.  For  a  worthy  Lady, 

And  one,  who  much  I  honour. 

1.  Scena]  Scaena  F2F3. 

A  Prison.  Pope.  See  Note,  line  66. 

2.  Enter...]  Enter  Paulina  and  a 
Gentleman.  Rowe  (with  other  Attend¬ 
ants.  Han.  et  seq.  subs.). 

Gaoler]  Goaler  F3F4,  Rowe  +  . 

3.  him  .•]  him.  [Exit  Gent.  Rowe. 
him  ;  [to  an  Att.  Cap. 

4.  knowledge ]  the  knowledge  Rowe. 

who ]  whom  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

2.  Enter  Paulina]  Lady  Martin  (p.  353) :  Paulina,  the  wife  of  Antigonus,  a 
lady  of  high  position,  henceforth  fills  a  most  important  part  in  the  drama,  and  should 
be  impersonated  in  any  adequate  representation  of  the  play  by  an  actress  of  the  first 
order.  She  is  a  woman  of  no  ordinary  sagacity,  with  a  warm  heart,  a  vigorous  brain, 
and  an  ardent  temper.  Her  love  for  Hermione  has  its  roots  in  admiration  and  rever¬ 
ence  for  all  the  good  and  gracious  qualities  of  which  the  queen’s  daily  life  has  given 
witness.  She  has  been  much  about  her  royal  mistress,  and  much  esteemed  and 
trusted  by  her.  Leontes,  knowing  this,  obviously  anticipates  that  she  will  not  remain 
quiet  when  she  hears  of  the  charge  he  has  brought  against  the  queen,  and  that  he  has 
thrust  her  into  prison.  Accordingly,  he  has  given  express  orders  that  Paulina  is  not 
to  be  admitted  to  the  prison,  and  this  fresh  act  of  cruelty  she  learns  from  the  governor 
only  when  she  arrives  there  in  the  hope  of  being  some  comfort  to  her  much-wronged 
mistress. 

6.  prison?]  See  Textual  Note. — Collier  reads  Enter  Jailor,  and  thus  com¬ 
ments  :  ‘  So  called  in  the  old  copies ;  from  which  there  is  no  reason  to  vary,  by  call¬ 
ing  the  *  Jailor  ’  keeper,  as  has  been  done  by  modern  editors.  [Capell  substituted 
Keeper  for  ‘  Gaoler,’  I  suppose,  because  he  is  so  called  by  Paulina. — Ed.] 

9.  who]  The  change  by  F2  of  this  1  who  ’  to  whom  seems  to  show  that  not  until 
nine  years  after  Ft  was  printed  were  compositors  fully  aware  that  in  certain  cases  the 
relative  pronoun  must  be  inflected.  Abbott,  §  274,  gives  many  examples  of  the  over¬ 
sight.  It  is  not  worth  while  to  change  it  here.  It  misleads  no  one.  If  the  MS 
were  read  aloud  to  the  compositors  of  F,,  as  is  highly  probable,  the  m  needed  for 
*  who  ’  was  heard,  as  it  still  may  be,  in  the  m  of  the  following  ‘  much.’ — Ed. 


9 

6.  prifon  ?]  prison  ?  [Enter  Keeper. 
Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Knt. 

7.  not?]  not?  [Re-enter  Gent,  with 
the  Goaler  or  Keeper.  Rowe  et  seq. 
(subs.). 

8.  etc.  Gao.]  Goa.  F3F4,  Rowe-f. 
Kee.  or  Keep.  Cap.  et  cet. 

9.  who ]  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Sta.  Cam.  Huds. 
whom  Ff  et  cet. 


92 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Pan.  Pray  you  then,  IO 

Conduct  me  to  the  Queene. 

Gao.  I  may  not  (Madam) 

To  the  contrary  I  haue  expreffe  commandment. 

Pan.  Here’s  a-do,  to  locke  vp  honefty  &  honour  from 
Th’acceffe  of  gentle  vifitors.  Is’t  lawfull  pray  you  1 5 

To  fee  her  Women  ?  Any  of  them?  Emilia  ? 

Gao.  So  pleafe  you  (Madam) 

To  put  a-part  thefe  your  attendants,  I 
Shall  bring  Emilia  forth. 

Pan.  I  pray  now  call  her  :  20 

With-draw  your  felues. 

Gao.  And  Madam, 

I  muft  be  prefent  at  your  Conference. 

Pan.  Well  :  be’t  fo  :  prethee. 

Heere’s  fuch  a- doe,  to  make  no  ftaine,  a  ftaine,  25 


12,  13.  I... contrary]  One  line,  Cap. 
Var.  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll. 
Dyce,  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Sta.  Ktly. 

14.  Here’s  a-do]  Closing  line  13,  Cap. 
Var.  Rann,  Mai,  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll. 
Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Sta.  Separate  line,  Cam. 
Wh.  ii. 

14-16.  Here' s... Emilia  ?]  Lines  end, 
honour  ...  vifitors  ...  Women  ...  Emilia  ? 
Johns. 

14-17.  Here' s...  {Madam)]  Lines  end, 
a-do,  ...from  ...  lawfull,.. .them ? ...Mad¬ 
am,  Han.  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Dyce. 

14-19.  Here’s... forth]  Lines  end,  ado, 
. .  .f-om . . .  lawfull,  ...them  ? ...  put. . .  bring 
...forth.  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

15.  Th'acceffe]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Coll. 
Sing.  Wh.  The  access  Cap.  et  cet. 

Is't]  Is  it  Johns.  Var.  Rann,  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Ktly. 

17-  So  pleafe]  If  it  so  please  Han. 


18.  apart]  a  part  F^.  apart  Cap. 
et  seq. 

20,  21.  I. ..felues]  Lines  divided  at 
now  Cap.  Var.  Rann. 

20.  pray  now]  pray  you  now  Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap. 
Var.  Rann,  Steev. 

21.  [Exeunt  Gent.  &c.  Theob. 

21- 24.  With  draw  ...  prethee.  J  Lines 
end,  be. ..well .-...prethee.  Han. 

22.  23.  Lines  divided  at  present  Mai. 

22- 26.  And... colouring.]  Lines  end, 
must  ...  Conference  ...  ado,  ...  colouring. 
Cap. 

23.  your]  all  your  Han. 

24.  Well :  be't]  Ff,  Cap.  Coll.  Dyce, 
Wh.  Cam.  Well,  well;  Be  it  Han. 
Well ;  be  it  Rowe  et  cet. 

24,  25.  [Enter  Emilia.  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 
Opposite  line  26,  Johns,  et  seq. 

24.  [Exit  Gaoler.  Johns. 

25.  Heere's]  Here  is  Cap.  Var. 


21.  your  selues]  Knight  :  In  these  speeches  we  follow  the  metrical  arrangement 
of  the  original,  which  is  certainly  not  improved  by  the  botching  which  we  find  in  all 
modern  editions. 

25,  26.  no  staine  .  .  .  colouring]  Deighton  :  There  is  here  a  pun  upon  the 
word  ‘colour’  in  its  literal  sense,  with  reference  to  ‘stain,’  and  its  metaphorical 
sense  of  palliating,  giving  a  specious  appearance.  [The  punctuation  of  Ft  needs 
revision.  The  Cambridge  Edition  and  its  followers  have  no  commas  in  the  line  at 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


93 
2  6 


As  paffes  colouring.  Deare  Gentlewoman, 

How  fares  our  gtacious  Lady  ? 

Emil.  As  well  as  one  fo  great,  and  fo  forlorne 
May  hold  together  :  On  her  frights,  and  greefes 
(Which  neuer  tender  Lady  hath  borne  greater)  30 

She  is,  fomething  before  her  time,  deliuer’d. 

Pan.  A  boy  ? 

Emil.  A  daughter,  and  a  goodly  babe, 

Lufty,  and  like  to  liue  :  the  Queene  receiues 

Much  comfort  in’t  :  Sayes,  my  poore  prifoner,  35 

I  am  innocent  as  you, 

Pau.  I  dare  be  fworne: 

Thefe  dangerous,  vnfafe  Lunes  i’th’King,  befhrew  them:  38 


26,  27.  D ear e...  Lady  ?]  One  line, 
Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

26.  [Enter  Emilia.  Johns.  Re-enter 
Keeper  with  Emilia.  Cap. 

27.  our]  one  Fs. 
gtacious ]  F  . 


30.  borne']  born  F^,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Cap. 

36.  I  am]  I'm  Pope-K 
38.  i'th']  o'  the  Cap.  conj.  Var.  Rann, 
Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Knt. 


all ;  which  is  good,  but  perhaps  not  as  helpful  as  it  might  be.  All  other  editions  have 
a  comma  only  after  ‘  stain  ’  at  the  end  of  the  line,  which  is,  I  think,  wrong.  If  a 
comma  be  needful  at  all,  it  should  follow  the  first  4  staine,’  as  in  the  Folio,  inasmuch 
as  the  sense  is :  4  Here’s  such  a  fuss,  to  make  that  which  is  no  stain  at  all,  a  stain  so 
black  that  it  cannot  be  coloured.’ — Ed.] 

31.  something]  Walker  ( Crit .  i,  222)  in  speaking  of  the  variable  accent  of 
something  and  nothing,  adds :  4  Note  that  Surrey  always  lays  the  stronger  accent 
in  the  final  syllable  of  such  words.’  So  in  the  present  passage :  She  is,  some¬ 
thing,  etc.;  as  if  4  she  had  said  “some  whit  before,”  etc.’  So  also  in  IV,  iv,  416, 
Perdita  says:  4 1  cannot  speak  So  well  (nothing  so  well),’  etc. 

37.  sworne]  Lady  Martin  (p.  354):  This  Paulina  exclaims  in  her  hot  anger; 
and  in  the  words  that  follow  shows  her  clear  common-sense  and  fearless  courage,  of 
which  she  gives  remarkable  proofs  at  a  later  stage.  From  first  to  last  she  regards  the 
conduct  of  Leontes  as  simple  madness. 

38.  vnsafe  Lunes  i’th’King]  Theobald:  I  have  nowhere,  but  in  our  author, 
observed  this  word  adopted  in  our  tongue,  to  signify  frenzy,  lunacy.  But  it  is  a 
mode  of  expression  with  the  French, — il y  a  de  la  lune,  i.  e.  he  has  got  the  moon  in 
his  head ;  he  is  frantick.  Cotgrave  :  Lune,  folie.  [Cotgrave  also  gives  :  4 II  y  a  de 
la  lune.  He  is  a  foolish,  humorous,  hare-braind,  giddie-headed  fellow.’] — Steevens  : 
A  similar  expression  occurs  in  The  Revenger’s  Tragedy,  1608  [II,  ad fn.]  :  4 1  know 
’twas  but  some  peevish  moon  in  him.’ — M.  Mason:  The  old  copy  reads;  ‘lunes  in 
the  king,’  which  should  not  have  been  changed.  The  French  phrase  has:  4  dans  la 
tfite ;’  and  the  passage,  quoted  by  Steevens  from  The  Revenger's  Tragedy  has  4  some 
peevish  moon  in  him.’ — Schmidt  :  4  Lunes  ’  has  been  substituted  by  modern  editors 
for  4  lines  ’  in  Merry  Wives,  IV,  ii,  22,  and  Tro.  and  Cres.  II,  iii,  139 ;  for  4  lunacies  ’ 


94 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


He  muft  be  told  on’t,  and  he  fhall  :  the  office 

Becomes  a  woman  belt.  He  take’t  vpon  me,  40 

If  I  proue  hony-mouth’d,  let  my  tongue  blitter. 

And  neuer  to  my  red-look’d  Anger  bee 
The  Trumpet  any  more  :  pray  you  {Emilia) 

Commend  my  belt  obedience  to  the  Queene,  44 

39.  on’t \  of  it  Pope,  Han.  41.  hony  -  mouth’ d]  honey  -  mouth 

he  fhall ]  shall  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 

40.  take’s]  take  it  F  . 


in  Ham.  Ill,  iii,  7. — Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  MS  changes  ‘  unsafe  ’  to  unsane,  which 
certainly  is  more  appropriate,  and  to  say  that  the  king’s  ‘  lunes  ’  are  ‘  dangerous  ’  and 
unsafe  is  mere  tautology.  [Is  there  not  tautology  also  in  ‘  unsane  lunes  ’  ?] — Staun¬ 
ton  .  The  old.  text  needs  no  alteration  ;  ‘  dangerous  ’  like  its  synonym  ‘  perilous  ’  was 
sometimes  used  for  biting,  caustic,  mischievous ;  and  in  some  such  sense  may  very 
well  stand  here. — Grosart,  in  his  edition  of  Greene’s  Prose  Works,  says  that  two  in¬ 
stances  of  the  use  of  this  word  are  to  be  therein  found.  The  passages  are  as  follows  : 
‘  The  more  she  stroue  against  the  streame  the  lesse  it  did  preuaile,  the  closer  shee 
couered  the  sparke,  the  more  it  kindled :  yea,  in  seeking  to  vnlose  the  Lunes,  the  more 
shee  was  intangled.’ — Mamillia :  The  second  part,  1593  (p.  189,  ed.  Grosart). 
‘  Loue,  yea,  loue  it  is  (o  Pharicles )  and  more  if  more  may  be  that  hath  so  fettered 
my  freedome  and  tyed  my  libertie  with  so  short  a  tedder,  as  either  thou  must  be  the 
man  which  must  vnlose  me  from  the  lunes,  or  else  I  shal  remaine  in  a  lothsome 
Laberinth  til  the  extreme  date  of  death  deliuer  me.’ — Id.  (p.  198).  Whereon  Grosart 
remarks  (p.  332)  •  ‘  The  context  in  Greene  shows  Clarinda  in  very  lunacy  and  frenzy 
of  love-passion  for  Pharicles.  .  .  .  Neither  Dr  Schmidt  in  his  Lexicon,  s.  v.,  nor 
Dyce  in  his  great  Glossary,  nor  any  of  the  editors,  has  been  able  to  adduce  another 
example  of  the  word.  This  is  only  one  of  a  multitude  of  instances  wherein  Greene 
sheds  light  on  Shakespearian  words  and  cruxes.’  Had  Greene’s  learned  editor  turned 
to  Strutt’s  Sports  and  Pastimes,  Bk.  I,  chap,  ii,  sec.  ix,  and  read,  in  the  ‘  Caparison  of  a 
Hawk  ’ :  *  The  jesses  were  made  sufficiently  long  for  the  knots  to  appear  between 
the  middle  and  the  little  fingers  of  the  hand  that  held  them,  so  that  the  lunes,  or 
small  thongs  of  leather,  might  be  fastened  to  them  with  two  tyrrets,  or  rings ;  and  the 
lunes  were  loosely  wound  round  the  little  finger  ’  (quoted  in  Cent.  Diet.),  I  think  he 
would  not  have  been  so  sure  that  he  had  found  the  same  word  in  both  Greene  and 
Shakespeare.  The  recurrence  of  the  phrase  ‘  unloose  the  lunes,’  in  the  two  passages, 
should  have  put  him  on  his  guard,  as  well  as  its  occurrence  in  The  Carde  of  Fancic 
(p.  120,  ed.  Grosart) : — ‘  no  Hauke  so  haggard,  but  will  stoop  at  the  lure  :  no  Niesse 
[an  eyas]  so  ramage  [wild]  but  will  be  reclaimed  to  the  Lunes.’ — Ed. 

40,  41.  me,  .  .  .  blister.]  The  comma  and  the  period  should  change  places. 

44-  Commend]  Deighton  :  ‘  In  this  idiomatic  or  formal  phrase  this  word  [com¬ 
mend]  has  acquired  a  somewhat  peculiar  signification.  The  resolution  would  seem 
to  be,  Give  my  commendation  to  him,  or.  Say  that  I  commend  myself  to  him,  mean¬ 
ing  that  I  commit  and  recommend  myself  to  his  affectionate  remembrance.  So,  we 
have  the  Latin,  “  Me  totum  tuo  amorr  fideique  commendo  ”  (Cicero,  Epist.  ad  Att. 
iii,  20);  and  “Tibi  me  totum  commendo  atque  trado”  (Id.  Epist.  Earn,  ii,  6).  At 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


If  fhe  dares  truft  me  with  her  little  babe, 

He  fhew’t  the  King,  and  vndertake  to  bee 
Her  Aduocate  to  th’lowd’ft.  We  do  not  know 
How  he  may  foften  at  the  fight  o’th’Childe  : 

The  filence  often  of  pure  innocence 
Perfwades,  when  fpeaking  failes. 

Emil.  Moft  worthy  Madam, 
your  honor,  and  your  goodneffe  is  fo  euident, 

That  your  free  vndertaking  cannot  miffe 
A  thriuing  yffue  :  there  is  no  Lady  liuing 
So  meete  for  this  great  errand  ;  pleafe  your  Ladifhip 
To  vifit  the  next  roome,  lie  prefenrly 
Acquaint  the  Queene  of  your  moft  noble  offer, 

Who,  but  to  day  hammered  of  this  defigne, 

But  durft  not  tempt  a  minifter  of  honour 
Leaft  fhe  fhould  be  deny’d. 

Paul.  Tell  her  ( Emilia ) 


95 

45 


50 


55 


60 


47.  to  th’]  to  ’ tk  Ff.  to  the  Cap. 

towd  ft]  loudest  Var.  Rann,  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta. 

52.  is  fo~\  are  so  Coll.  (MS). 

54.  there  m]  there's  Han.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 


56.  presenrly]  Ft. 

58.  hammered  of]  Ff,  Rowe,  ham¬ 
mer’d  on  Han.  hammer’d  of  Pope  et 
cet. 

60.  Leaf]  Left  Rowe. 


the  same  time,  in  considering  the  question  of  the  origin  and  proper  meaning  of  the 
English  phrase,  the  custom  of  what  was  called  Commendation  in  the  Feudal  System 
is  not  to  be  overlooked ;  the  vassal  was  said  to  commend  himself  to  the  person  whom 
he  selected  for  his  lord.  Commend  is  etymologically  the  same  word  as  command ; 
and  both  forms,  with  their  derivatives,  have  been  applied,  in  Latin  and  the  modem 
tongues  more  exclusively  based  upon  it,  as  well  as  in  English,  in  a  considerable 
variety  of  ways.’ — Craik,  Eng.  of  Shakespeare ,  279. 

45.  dares]  Skeat  (Diet.) :  The  present  tense,  I  dare,  is  really  an  old  past  tense, 
so  that  the  third  person  is  he  dare  (cf.  he  shall,  he  can ) ;  but  the  form  he  dares  is  now 
often  used,  and  will  probably  displace  the  obsolescent  he  dare,  though  grammatically 
as  incorrect  as  he  shalls  or  he  cans. 

53.  free]  Schmidt  places  the  present  use  of  this  word  under  ‘  guiltless,  innocent, 
harmless.’  [The  value  of  Schmidt’s  Lexicon  lies  in  its  separation  of  the  verbal  and 
substantive  uses  of  the  same  word.  But  the  manifold  divisions  and  subdivisions  of 
meaning,  when  not  based  on  English  authority,  are  to  be  accepted  with  caution. 
Thus  here,  to  suppose  that  Emilia  characterises  the  undertaking  as  innocent  is  to  give 
a  patronising,  commendatory  air  in  her  address  to  Paulina,  quite  uncalled  for.  The 
‘free  undertaking’  is  the  freely  offered  undertaking. — Ed.] 

56.  presenrly]  That  is,  instantly. 

58.  hammered  of]  For  examples  of  the  use  of  of  where  we  should  now  use  on, 
see,  if  necessary,  Abbott,  §  175. 


96 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  n,  sc.  ii. 

62 


lie  vfe  that  tongue  I  haue  :  If  wit  flow  from’t 
As  boldneffe  from  my  bofome,  le’t  not  be  doubted 
I  fhall  do  good, 

Emil.  Now  be  you  blefl:  for  it.  65 

lie  to  the  Queene  :  pleafe  you  come  fomething  neerer. 

Gao.  Madam,  iFt  pleafe  the  Queene  to  fend  the  babe, 

I  know  not  what  I  fhall  incurre,  to  paffe  it, 

Hauing  no  warrant. 

Pan.  You  neede  not  feare  it  (fir)  70 

This  Childe  was  prifoner  to  the  wombe,  and  is 
By  Law  and  proceffe  of  great  Nature,  thence 
Free’d,  and  enfranchis’d,  not  a  partie  to 
The  anger  of  the  King,  nor  guilty  of 

(If  any  be)  the  trefpaffe  of  the  Queene.  75 

Gao.  I  do  beleeue  it. 

Paul.  Do  not  you  feare  :  vpon  mine  honor,  I 
Will  Hand  betwixt  you,  and  danger.  Exeunt  78 


62.  from't]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Dyce, 
Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  Huds.  Rife,  from  it 
Var.  ’73  et  cet. 

63.  lit]  let ’t  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap.  Dyce, 
Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  Huds.  Rife,  let  it  Var. 
’73  et  cet. 

71.  This]  The  Rowe  + ,  Var.  Rann, 


Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Dyce,  Huds. 

76-78.  I  do  ...  danger]  Lines  end: 
upon... danger  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Var. 
Sing.  Ktly. 

78.  betwixt]  ’twixt  Pope  +  ,  Var. 
Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly, 
Dyce  ii,  iii. 


62.  wit]  Generally,  in  Shakespeare,  this  means  intellectual  power,  which,  to  suit 
the  passage,  can  be  here  modified  into  keenness,  tact,  address. — Ed. 

63.  le’t]  Note  the  typographical  care  with  which  the  absorption  of  the  t  of  ‘  let  ’  is 
indicated.  See  II,  i,  18. 

66.  please  .  .  .  neerer]  The  only  explanation  which  I  can  find  for  this  sentence 
is  that  Paulina  is  not  actually  inside  the  Prison,  but  stands  without  at  the  Gate  or 
Entrance,  and  Emilia  asks  her  to  enter  or  to  come  further  within  it.  If  this  be  so 
the  Scene  should  not  be  laid,  as  it  is  in  many  Editions  since  the  days  of  Pope,  in 
‘  A  Prison.’  It  would  be  better,  I  think,  to  place  it  ‘  At  the  Gate  of  a  Prison the 
Gaoler  says,  ‘  I  shall  bring  Emelia  forth,'  which  does  not  sound  as  if  they  were  all 
within  the  Prison.  Moreover,  Paulina’s  very  first  words,  ‘  The  keeper  of  the  prison, 
call  to  him,'  betoken  that  she  is  outside  the  prison  and  is  summoning  him  to  the 
entrance.  Capell,  followed,  substantially,  by  many  editors  also,  places  the  Scene  in 
an  ‘  Outer-room  of  a  Prison  ’  which  would,  perhaps,  explain  the  Gaoler’s  words,  but 
hardly  account  for  Paulina’s  and  Emilia’s. — Ed. 

68.  to  passe  it]  Abbott,  §  356  :  That  is,  I  know  not  what  penalty  I  shall  incur  as 
the  consequence  of,  or  for,  letting  it  pass.  [See  II,  i,  122.] 

73>  74-  partie  to  .  .  .  guilty  of]  For  other  examples  of  accented  monosyllables, 
see  Abbott,  §  457. 

77,  78.  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  100)  expresses  his  approval  of  the  present  metrical 


act  ii,  sc.  iii.j 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


97 


Scczna  Tertia. 


5 


Enter  Leontes ,  Sen/ants,  Paulina ,  Antigonus , 
and  Lords . 

Leo.  Nor  night,  nor  day,  no  reft  :  It  is  but  weakneffe 
To  beare  the  matter  thus  :  meere  weakneffe,  if 
The  caufe  were  not  in  being  :  part  o’th  caufe, 

She,  th’Adultreffe  :  for  the  harlot-King 
Is  quite  beyond  mine  Arme,  out  of  the  blanke 


1.  Scsena...]  Scena...  F^.  Scene  iv. 
Pope  +  . 

The  Palace.  Pope. 

2.  Enter...]  Enter  Leon.  Ant.,  Lords 
and  other  Attendants.  Rowe.  Ant.  and 
Lords,  waiting,  and  other  Attend.  En¬ 
ter  Leon.  Cap. 


8 

5.  meere']  mear  F4,  Rowe  i. 
weakneffe ,  if]  weakness.  If  Coll. 

Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

6.  being:]  being ,  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  Ktly,  Huds.  Wh.  ii  (subs.). 

7.  harlot-King]  harlot  king  Cap.  et 
seq. 


division  of  these  lines,  in  preference  to  that  adopted  by  Capell,  and  then  goes  on  to 
say :  ‘  I  notice  this  passage,  because  it  gives  me  occasion  to  remark,  that  Shakespeare 
very  frequently  concludes  his  scenes  with  a  seven-syllable  line ;  so  that  any  objection 
to  such  an  arrangement  of  the  lines  in  such  a  situation,  as  being  out  of  place,  is 
unfounded.  See  the  present  play,  Lear,  Macbeth,  and  Othello.  Note,  too,  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  The  Two  Noble  Kinsmen,  as  bearing  upon  the  question  how  far  the  Fifth 
Act  of  that  play  belongs  to  Shakespeare. 

7.  harlot-King]  Skeat  (Diet.) :  ‘Harlot’  was  originally  used  of  either  sex 
indifferently ;  in  fact,  more  commonly  of  men  in  Middle  English.  It  has  not,  either, 
a  very  bad  sense,  and  means  little  more  than  ‘  fellow.’  ‘  He  was  a  gentil  harlot  and 
a  kind.’ — Chaucer,  C.  T.  649.  Of  disputed  origin,  but  presumably  Teutonic,  viz. 
from  the  Old  High  German,  karl,  a  man.  This  is  a  well-known  word,  appearing 
also  as  Icelandic  karl,  a  man,  fellow,  Anglo-Saxon  ceorl,  a  man,  and  in  the  modern 
English,  churl.  The  suffix  is  the  usual  French  diminutive  suffix  -ot,  as  in  bill-ot  from 
bille ;  it  also  appears  in  the  English  personal  name  Charlotte,  which  is  probably  the 
very  same  word.  We  actually  find  the  whole  word  carlot  in  As  You  Like  It,  III,  v, 
108.  [Unfortunately,  this  note  is  not  given  in  As  You  Like  It,  in  this  edition.  It 
never  occurred  to  me  to  look  for  ‘  carlot  ’  under  harlot. — Ed.] 

8.  Arme]  Johnson  :  Beyond  the  aim  of  any  attempt  that  I  can  make  against 
him.  ‘  Blank  ’  and  ‘  level  ’  are  terms  of  archery. — Douce  :  ‘  Blank  ’  and  ‘  level  ’ 
mean  mark  and  aim  ;  but  they  are  terms  of  gunnery,  not  archery.  [It  is  hazardous 
to  make  a  positive  assertion  with  regard  to  Shakespeare’s  language.  Compare  ‘  a  well- 
experienced  archer  hits  the  mark  His  eye  doth  level  at.’ — Pericles,  I,  i,  164.] — Field 
(Sh.  Soc.  Papers,  iii,  136)  :  ‘  Arm  ’  is  here  a  misprint  for  aim.  We  have  ‘  arm  ’  also 
for  aim  in  Tro.  and  Cres.  V,  vii,  6,  and  in  Ham.  IV,  vii,  24.  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) : 
Although  an  object  may  be  out  of  point-blank  shot,  nothing  can  be  said  to  be  beyond 

7 


98 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii.  sc.  iii. 


And  leuell  of  my  braine  :  plot-proofe  :  but  fhee, 

I  can  hooke  to  me  :  fay  that  fhe  were  gone,  io 

Giuen  to  the  fire,  a  moity  of  my  reft 
Might  come  to  me  againe.  Whofe  there  ? 

Ser.  My  Lord. 

Leo.  How  do’s  the  boy  ? 

Ser.  He  tooke  good  reft  to  night  :  ’tis  hop’d  15 

His  fickneffe  is  difcharg’d. 

Leo.  To  fee  his  Nobleneffe, 

Conceyuing  the  difhonour  of  his  Mother. 

He  ftraight  declin’d,  droop’d,  tooke  it  deeply, 

Fatten’d,  and  fix’d  the  fhame  on’t  in  himfelfe  :  20 

Threw-off  his  Spirit,  his  Appetite,  his  Sleepe, 


12.  Whofe]  Fa.  Who’s  F3F4. 

[Enter  an  Att.  Rowe. 

13.  Ser.]  Atten.  Rowe.  1.  A.  Cap. 
Lord.]  Lord.  Enrer.  F  .  Lord. 

Enter.  F3F4.  lord  ?  [advancing]  Cap. 

15,  16.  reft-... His]  Lines  divided: — 
rest  To-night,  ' tis  hop’d  his  Han.  rest 
to-night ;  and  it  is  hop' d  His  Cap.  rest 
to-night ;  ’  Tis  hop'd,  his  Steev.  et  seq. 
(subs.). 


17.  To  fee]  Closing  line  16,  Steev. 
Var. 

Nobleneffe ,]  nobleness !  Rowe  et 

seq. 

18.  Mother.]  Mother,  Ff  et  seq. 

19.  declin’d]  declin'd  and  Han.  de¬ 
clin’d  upon' t  Cap. 

deeply]  most  deeply  Han.  deeply 
and  Ktly. 

21.  Threw-off]  F2.  Threw  off  F3F4. 


aim.  We  can  aim  at  the  moon.  Those  who,  for  the  sake  of  the  integrity  of  the  meta¬ 
phor,  would  read  ‘beyond  mine  aim,'  should  also  read  ‘  shot  proof’  for  ‘plot  proof.’ 

9.  but  shee]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

17,  etc.  Walker  ( Vers .  p.  23) :  I  suspect  we  should  write  and  arrange, — ‘ — to 
see  |  His  nobleness !  Conceiving  the  dishonour  |  Of ’s  mother,  he  straight  declin’d,’ 
etc.  Possibly,  however,  as  in  many  other  passages  of  this  play,  something  is  lost. 

18-22.  Conceyuing  .  .  .  languish’d]  Bucknill  (p.  128) :  Leontes’  descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  sickness  of  the  young  prince,  occasioned  by  grief  at  the  shame  of  his 
mother,  gives  exactly  the  symptoms  to  be  expected  in  such  a  case  of  nervous  dis¬ 
turbance  in  a  child,  arising  from  grief  and  shame.  [Leontes  is  trying  to  justify  to 
himself  his  own  brutality  by  attributing  to  Mamillius  emotions  far  beyond  his  tender 
years.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  so  young  a  child,  however  precocious  intel¬ 
lectually,  would  know  anything  of  the  real  disgrace  imputed  to  his  mother;  all  that 
he  saw  and  appreciated  were  the  terrifying  looks  and  brutal  violence  of  his  father 
and  his  mother’s  grief ;  added  to  this,  came  the  separation  from  his  mother,  and  his 
little  heart  broke. — Ed.] 

19.  deeply]  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  As  this  word  can  hardly  be  considered  as  a  trisyl¬ 
lable  here  (see  Walker’s  Vers.  p.  23),  the  line  would  seem  to  be  imperfect.  [But 
Dyce  did  not  fathom  the  resources  of  Prosody.  Abbott  (§  484)  thus  scans;  4  He 
straight  |  declin  |  ed,  dro  \  op'd,  tobk  |  it  deeply ;’  presumably  to  give  an  effect  of 
gradual  wilting.] 


act  ii,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


99 


And  down-right  languifh’d.  Leaue  me  folely  :  goe,  22 

See  how  he  fares  :  Fie,  fie,  no  thought  of  him, 

The  very  thought  of  my  Reuenges  that  way 

Recoyle  vpon  me  :  in  himfelfe  too  mightie,  25 

And  in  his  parties,  his  Alliance  ;  Let  him  be, 

Vntill  a  time  may  ferue.  For  prefent  vengeance 
Take  it  on  her  :  Camillo,  and  Polixenes 
Laugh  at  me  :  make  their  paftime  at  my  forrow: 

They  fhould  not  laugh,  if  I  could  reach  them,  nor  30 

Shall  fhe,  within  my  powre. 

Enter  Paulina. 

Lord.  You  muft  not  enter. 

Paid.  Nay  rather  (good  my  Lords)  be  fecond  to  me  : 

Feare  you  his  tyrannous  pafsion  more  (alas)  35 


23.  fares  .•] fares,  Rowe,  fares.  [Exit 
Att.]  Theob,  et  seq. 

25.  Recoyle']  Recoyl  F  F  .  Recoils 
Han.  Ktly. 

26.  And  ]  Om.  Cap.  Rann. 

Alliance ]  alliances  Cap.  conj. 

Rann. 


26,  27.  him  be,  Vntill']  Han.  divides 
and  reads :  him  Be  ’till. 

27.  ferue.]  ferve,  Ff,  Rowe. 

31.  Scene  v.  Pope  +  . 

32.  Enter...]  Enter.. .with  a  Child. 
Rowe. 

33.  Lord.]  1.  Lord.  Mai. 


22.  solely]  M.  Mason:  That  is,  leave  me  alone. 

23.  him]  Collier  :  That  is,  of  Polixenes,  to  whom  the  thoughts  of  Leontes  nat¬ 
urally  revert  without  naming  him.  Coleridge  called  this,  in  his  lectures,  we  think,  in 
1812,  an  admirable  instance  of  propriety  in  soliloquy,  where  the  mind  leaps  from  one 
object  to  another,  however  distant,  without  any  apparent  interval ;  the  operation  here 
being  perfectly  intelligible  without  mentioning  Polixenes.  The  king  is  talking  to 
himself,  while  his  lords  and  attendants  stand  at  a  distance. 

24.  25.  thought  of  my  Reuenges  .  .  .  Recoyle]  For  other  examples  of  a  lack 
of  agreement  between  the  verb  and  its  nominative  arising  from  proximity,  see  Ab¬ 
bott,  §  412. 

26.  And  in  his  parties,  his  Alliance  ;  Let  him  be,]  Through  an  oversight  of 
the  compositor  of  F2  this  line  was  dropped  from  the  text ;  the  other  Folios  followed 
and  did  the  same ;  and  so  likewise  Rowe,  who  printed  from  F+.  Pope  restored  it. 

26.  Alliance]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. — Capell  (p.  168)  was  convinced  that 
■alliance’  is  a  plural,  wherein  he  was  right,  and  that  it  should  be  alliances,  wherein 
he  was  wrong ;  and  in  order  so  to  read  it  in  his  text  he  omitted  ‘  And  ’  at  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  line.  ‘  Alliance  ’  is  one  of  that  class  of  words  in  Shakespeare  where  the 
sibilant  termination  of  the  singular  does  duty  for  the  plural  and  even  for  the  genitive ; 
e.g.  Portia  says,  ‘  Are  there  balance  here  to  weigh  the  flesh  ’ ;  and  the  Nurse  says  to 
Juliet,  1  He  is  hid  at  Laurence  cell.’ — Ed. 

27.  serue]  This  absolute  use,  in  connection  with  time,  is  a  common  phrase,  equiv¬ 
alent  to  until  the  chance  come. 


IOO 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  iii. 


Then  the  Queenes  life  ?  A  gracious  innocent  foule,  36 

More  free,  then  he  is  iealous. 

Antig.  That’s  enough. 

Ser.  Madam  ;  he  hath  not  flept  to  night,  commanded 
None  fhould  come  at  him.  40 

Pan.  Not  fo  hot  (good  Sir) 

I  come  to  bring  him  fleepe.  ’Tis  fuch  as  you 

That  creepe  like  fhadowes  by  him,  and  do  fighe 

At  each  his  needleffe  heauings  :  fuch  as  you 

Nourifh  the  caufe  of  his  awaking.  I  45 

Do  come  with  words,  as  medicinall,  as  true  ; 

(Honeft,  as  either;,)  to  purge  him  of  that  humor, 

That  preffes  him  from  fleepe. 

Leo.  Who  noyfe  there,  hoe  ? 

Pau.  No  noyfe  (my  Lord)  but  needfull  conference,  50 

About  fome  Gofsips  for  your  Highneffe. 

Leo.  How  ?  52 


36,  37.  Then. ..then]  Then. ..than  F+. 

38.  That's  enough ]  As  an  Aside, 
Cap. 

39.  Ser.]  Atten.  [within]  Theob.  2. 
A.  Cap. 

Madam  /]  Madam  F4. 


40.  at  him]  near  him  Rowe. 

46.  medicinal l]  med’cinal  Cap.  Var. 
Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Dyce,  Sta.  Huds. 

49.  Who]  What  Ff. 

50.  [Coming  forward.  Coll.  ii. 


37-  free]  This  is  something  more  than  merely  ‘  innocent,’  which  Paulina  has  just 
termed  the  queen.  It  must  mean  ‘  more  free  from  that  particular  taint  which  is  the 
ground  of  her  husband’s  jealousy.’ — Ed. 

43.  creepe]  Bucknill  (p.  129)  quotes  Miss  Nightingale  as  saying  ( Notes  on 
Nursing ,  p.  26)  that  slight  noises  which  excite  attention  are  far  more  destructive  to 
the  repose  of  a  patient  than  much  louder  noises  which  are  decided  and  undisguised ; 
‘  walking  on  tip-toe,  doing  anything  in  the  room  very  slowly,  are  injurious  for  exactly 
the  same  reasons.’  ‘  These  remarks,’  adds  Bucknill,  ‘  which  would  appear  as  novel 
as  they  are  excellent,  have,  however,  been  anticipated  by  Shakespeare  [in  this  pres¬ 
ent  passage],  which  shows  that  he  was  keenly  alive  to  the  disturbance  which  these 
muffled  sounds  occasion  to  a  restless  patient.’ 

46.  medicinall]  I  cannot  believe  that  Shakespeare  ever  intended  that  this  word 
should  be  pronounced  either  m'ed’cinal  or  medicinal.  It  is  quite  possible  to  read  this 
line  without  a  jar,  and  yet  throw  the  accent  on  the  second  syllable  of  ‘  medicinal,’ 
care  being  taken  to  show  that  ‘  as  medicinal  ’  is  a  parenthesis  by  a  slight  pause  before 
and  after  it. — Ed. 

47.  Honest]  Paulina  here  refers  to  herself.  She  is  as  honest  in  intention  as 
either  healing  or  truth. — Ed. 

51.  Gossips]  That  is,  sponsors  whom  your  Highness  will  need  for  your  child  at 
an  approaching  baptism. 


ACT  II,  sc.  iij.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


IOI 


Away  with  that  audacious  Lady.  Antigonus ,  53 

I  charg’d  thee  that  the  thould  not  come  about  me, 

I  knew  the  would.  55 

Ant.  I  told  her  fo  (my  Lord) 

On  your  difpleafures  perill,  and  on  mine, 

She  thould  not  vifit  you. 

Leo .  What?  canft  not  rule  her  ? 

Paul.  From  all  difhoneftie  he  can  :  in  this  60 

(Vnleffe  he  take  the  courfe  that  you  haue  done) 

Commit  me,  for  committing  honor,  truft  it, 

He  thall  not  rule  me: 

Ant.  La-you  now,  you  heare, 

When  the  will  take  the  raine,  I  let  her  run,  65 

But  thee’l  not  ftumble. 


53.  Antigonus,]  Antigonus.  F3F4. 

61,  62.  (  Vnlejfe... honor]  In  parenthe¬ 
sis,  Pope  et  seq.  (subs.). 

62.  truft  if]  trust  me  Han. 

64.  La-you]  Ff,  Rowe.  Lo-you 


Pope  +  ,  Var. ’73.  La' you  Cap.  Lo you 
Var.  ’78,  Rann,  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Huds. 
Lo,you  Coll.  La'  you  Var.  ’85  et  cet. 

65.  raine]  rain  F3F4.  rein  Rowe. 


62.  Commit]  Deighton  :  Of  course  ‘  commit  ’  and  ‘  committing  ’  are  used  in  two 
different  senses,  and  in  the  latter  case  the  sarcasm  consists  in  applying  to  the  word 
‘  honour  ’  a  term  which  is  properly  applied  to  what  is  dishonourable,  sinful,  criminal. 
[The  Text.  Notes  show  that  Pope,  followed  by  all  editors,  properly  enlarged  the 
parenthesis  so  as  to  include  ‘  Commit  me,  for  committing  honor.’  Of  course  ‘  Com¬ 
mit  ’  means,  as  it  still  means,  imprison. — Ed.] 

64.  La-you]  Earle  (§  197) :  ‘  La  ’  is  that  interjection  which  in  modem  English 
is  spelt  lo.  It  was  used  in  Saxon  times,  both  as  an  emotional  cry,  and  also  as  a  sign 
of  the  respectful  vocative.  ...  In  modern  times  it  has  taken  the  form  of  lo  in  liter¬ 
ature,  and  it  has  been  supposed  to  have  something  to  do  with  the  verb  to  look.  In 
this  sense  it  has  been  used  in  the  New  Testament  to  render  the  Greek  Idov,  that  is, 
‘  Behold  !’  But  the  interjection  la  was  quite  independent  of  another  Saxon  exclama¬ 
tion,  viz.  loc,  which  may  with  more  probability  be  associated  with  locian ,  to  look. 
The  fact  seems  to  be  that  the  modem  lo  represents  both  the  Saxon  interjections  la 
and  loc,  and  that  this  is  one  among  many  instances  where  two  Saxon  words  have 
been  merged  into  a  single  one.  .  .  .  While  lo  became  the  literary  form  of  the  word, 
la  has  still  continued  to  exist  more  obscurely,  at  least  down  to  a  recent  date,  even  if 
it  be  not  still  in  use.  La  may  be  regarded  as  a  sort  of  feminine  lo.  In  novels  of 
the  close  of  the  last  century  and  the  beginning  of  this,  we  see  la  occurring  for  the 
most  part  as  a  trivial  exclamation  by  the  female  characters.  [If  in  New  England 
much  of  the  pronunciation  of  Shakespeare’s  day  has  survived  (as  has  been  main¬ 
tained),  this  should  be  pronounced  Law.  It  is  still  in  every  day  use,  with  also  a 
plural  form,  Laws. — Ed.] 

66.  stumble]  Stearns  (p.  146) :  It  is  said  that  even  a  stumbling  horse  will  not 
stumble  when  going  at  full  speed. 


102 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  iii. 

67 


Paul.  Good  my  Liege,  I  come  : 

And  I  befeech  you  heare  me,  who  profeffes 
My  felfe  your  loyall  Seruant,  your  Phyfitian, 

Your  moft  obedient  Counfailor  :  yet  that  dares  70 

Leffe  appeare  fo,  in  comforting  your  Euilles, 

Then  fuch  as  moft  feeme  yours.  I  fay,  I  come 
From  your  good  Queene. 

Leo.  Good  Queene  ? 

Paul.  Good  Queene  (my  Lord)good  Queene,  75 

I  fay  good  Queene, 

And  would  by  combate,  make  her  good  fo,  were  I 
A  man,  the  worft  about  you.  78 


67.  come  .•]  come —  Rowe. 

68.  profeffes]  profess  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Cap. 
Var.  Rann,  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Glo.  Wh.  ii,  Huds. 

70.  dares ]  dare  Steev.  Var.  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Glo.  Wh.  ii,  Huds. 

72.  feeme]  seems  Pope  ii,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Var.  ’73. 

75-  Good  Queene  (my  Lord)]  Sepa¬ 


rate  line,  Pope  +  ,  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 

75,  76.  One  line,  Cap.  et  seq.  (except 
Cam.  Wh.  ii). 

77.  make  her]  make  it  Heath. 
make... were]  make  it  good  too, 

were  Daniel. 

good  fo,  were]  good,  were  Rowe. 
good,  so  were  Theob,  et  seq. 

78.  man,  the]  man — the  Wh. 


68.  professes]  The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  The  verb  being  thus  put  in  the  third 
person  gives  the  excellent  effect  of  Paulina’s  speaking  of  another,  while  she  thus 
confidently  speaks  of  herself  and  her  own  fidelity.  [The  difficulty;  in  accepting  the 
text  of  the  Folio  is  that  ‘  professes  ’  is  not  followed  by  himself,  but  by  ‘  myself.’ — Ed.] 
71.  comforting]  M.  Mason  (p.  127)  :  This  is  here  used  in  the  legal  sense  of 
comforting  and  abetting  in  a  criminal  action. 

71.  comforting  your  Euilles]  Capell  (p.  168) :  That  is,  encouraging  you  by  a 
vicious  compliance  to  persist  in  those  evils ;  in  this,  says  the  speaker,  I  have  less 
power  to  shew  my  obedience  than  have  some  about  you  whom  you  take  for  your 
greatest  friends ;  the  words  detain’d  the  editor  something,  and  (he  suppos’d)  would 
do  others,  which  occasion’d  this  comment. 

78.  the  worst]  Warburton  :  Paulina  supposes  the  king’s  jealousy  to  be  raised 
and  inflamed  by  the  courtiers  about  him.  Surely  then,  she  could  not  say,  that  were 
she  a  man,  the  worst  of  these,  she  would  vindicate  her  mistress’s  honour  against  the 
king’s  suspicions,  in  single  combat.  Shakespeare,  I  am  persuaded,  wrote  ‘  A  man, 
on  tfi  worst  about  you,’  i.  e.  were  I  a  man,  I  would  vindicate  her  honour,  on  the 
worst  of  these  sycophants  that  are  about  you.  [Whereupon  Edwards  (p.  58)  re¬ 
marks  :]  But  surely  this  emendation  is  for  want  of  understanding  English.  If  the 
text  had  been,  ‘  a  man  the  best  about  you,’  there  would  have  been  a  necessity  for  some 
alteration;  but  ‘the  worst’  man  here,  does  not  signify  the  wickedest;  but  the  weak¬ 
est,  or  least-warlike ;  so  a  better  man,  the  best  man,  in  company  frequently  refers  to 
courage  and  skill  in  fighting;  not  to  moral  goodness.  [The  Cam.  Ed.  notes  that 
Warburton’s  reading  was  adopted  by  Hanmer;  Hanmer’s  text  does  not  so  read  in 
my  copies  of  either  his  First  or  of  his  Second  Edition. — Ed.] 


act  ii,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


103 


Leo.  Force  her  hence. 

Pau.  Let  him  that  makes  but  trifles  of  his  eyes  80 

Firft  hand  me  :  on  mine  owne  accord,  He  off, 

But  firft,  lie  do  my  errand.  The  good  Queene 
(For  fhe  is  good)hath  brought  you  forth  a  daughter, 

Heere  ’tis  \  Commends  it  to  your  blefsing. 

Leo.  Out  :  85 

A  mankinde  Witch  ?  Hence  with  her,  out  o’dore  : 

A  moft  intelligencing  bawd. 

Paul.  Not  fo  : 

I  am  as  ignorant  in  that,  as  you, 

In  fo  entitling  me  :  and  no  leffe  honeft  90 

Then  you  are  mad  :  which  is  enough,  He  warrant 
(As  this  world  goes)  to  paffe  for  honeft: 

Leo.  Traitors  ; 

Will  you  not  pufh  her  out  ?  Giue  her  the  Baftard, 

Thou  dotard,  thou  art  woman-tyr’ d  :  vnroofted  95 

By  thy  dame  Partlet  heere.  Take  vp  the  Baftard, 


82 .  firft,]  firfi  ;  Ff. 

84.  [Laying  down  the  child.  Rowe 
et  seq. 

86.  Witch  ?]  Witch  !  Rowe. 

93.  Traitors ;]  Traitors!  Rowe. 

94.  [To  Ant.  Rowe. 

Bajtani,']  bastard.  Rowe. 


95.  dotard, ]  dotard,  [To  Ant.]  Mai. 
thou  art ]  that  art  Cap. 

thou  art  woman-tyr' d]  thou,  art 
woman-tyr' d  ?  Tyrwhitt,  MS  ap.  Cam. 
tyr'd  ]  tir'd  Y^. 

96.  thy  dame]  the  dame  Rowe  ii. 


86.  mankinde]  Theobald:  That  is,  one  as  bold  and  masculine,  as  if  she  were 
a  man.  So  in  Jonson’s  Silent  Woman  [V,  i]  when  Morose  is  teased  by  his  new 
wife’s  she-friends,  he  cries  out  in  desperation,  *  O  mankind  generation.’  And  so 
Beau,  and  FI.  in  their  Monsieur  Thomas  [IV,  vi]  :  ‘  ’Twas  a  sound  knock  she  gave 
me ;  The  mankind  girl.’ — Johnson  :  A  mankind  woman  is  yet  used  in  the  midland 
counties,  for  a  woman  violent,  ferocious,  and  mischievous.  It  has  the  same  sense  in 
this  passage.  Witches  are  supposed  to  be  mankind,  to  put  off  the  softness  and  deli¬ 
cacy  of  women ;  therefore  Sir  Hugh,  in  The  Merry  Wives,  says  of  a  woman  sus¬ 
pected  to  be  a  witch,  ‘  that  he  does  not  like  when  a  woman  has  a  beard.’ — Dyce 
(  Gloss.) :  That  is,  masculine,  violent,  termagant.  The  epithet  was  applied  even  to 
beasts,  in  the  sense  of  ‘  ferocious,’  etc. ;  ‘  Manticore.  A  rauenous  and  mankind 
Indian  beast.' — Cotgrave  ;  ‘  Thoe.  A  kind  of  strong  .  .  .  Wolfe  ...  a  great  friend  vnto 
men,  whom  he  .  .  .fights  for,  against  other  mankind  wild  beasts.' — Id. 

87.  intelligencing]  That  is,  one  who  acts  as  an  intermediary;  referring  to 
Polixenes  and  Hermione,  as  we  see  by  Paulina’s  retort. 

95.  woman-tyr’d]  Steevens  :  That  is,  peck'd  by  a  woman :  hen-pecked.  The 
phrase  is  taken  from  falconry  [‘  frequently  applied  to  other  birds  of  prey,  as  well  as  to 
hawks ;’  ‘  meaning  to  pull,  to  tear,  to  seize  eagerly.’ — Dyce,  Gloss,  s.  v.  tire]. 

96.  Partlet]  Steevens  :  This  is  the  name  of  the  hen  in  the  old  story  of  Reynard 


104 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  iii. 

97 


Take’t  vp,  I  fay  :  giue’t  to  thy  Croane. 

Paul.  For  euer 

Vnvenerable  be  thy  hands,  if  thou 
Tak’ft  vp  the  Princeffe,  by  that  forced  bafeneffe  ioo 

Which  he  ha’s  put  vpon’t. 

Leo.  He  dreads  his  Wife. 

Paul.  So  I  would  you  did  :  then  ’twere  part  all  doubt 
Youl’d  call  your  children,  yours. 


Leo. 

A  neft  of  Traitors. 

105 

Ant. 

I  am  none,  by  this  good  light. 

Pau. 

Nor  I  :  nor  any 

But  one  that’s  heere  :  and  that’s  himfelfe  :  for  he, 

The  facred  Honor  of  himfelfe,  his  Queenes, 

His  hopefull  Sonnes,  his  Babes, betrayes  to  Slander,  no 

Whofe  fling  is  fharper  then  the  Swords ;  and  will  not 

97.  thy  Croane ]  the  Croane  Ff,  Rowe.  ioo.  forced ]  falsed  Coll.  conj. 

99.  be  thy]  by  the  F^.  Iio.  his  Babes~\  this  babe's  Cap. 

the  Fox. — ITai.liweli.  :  Partlet  is  tlie  name  of  one  of  the  cock’s  favourite  hens  in 
Chaucer’s  Nonne  Prestis  Tale.  [‘  — the  fairest  hiewed  on  hir  throte  Was  cleped  fayre 
damysel  Pertilote.’ — 50,  ed.  Morris.] 

97.  Croane]  Steevens  :  ‘A  ‘crone’  is  an  old  toothless  sheep;  thence  an  old 
woman. 

99.  hands]  See  I,  ii,  34,  where  Walker’s  note  is  given  in  regard  to  ‘  the  s  inter¬ 
polated  at  the  end  of  a  word.’  The  present  is  one  of  the  examples  which  he  gives 
(p.  252)  of  this  s.  He  would  read  hand,  ‘for’  he  says,  ‘“upon’t”  does  not  relate 
to  princess,  but  to  hand.'  Wherein  I  cannot  but  think  that  he  is  wrrong.  Apart  from 
the  objection,  somewhat  trivial  to  be  sure,  that  no  one  would  attempt,  with  only  one 
hand,  to  pick  up  a  small  baby,  it  was  not  the  mere  act  of  taking  up  the  Princess 
which  would  render  his  hands  for  ever  unvenerable,  but  to  take  it  up  as  a  bastard. 
See  the  next  note. — Ed. 

100.  forced  basenesse]  Johnson:  Leontes  had  ordered  Antigonus  to  take  up 
the  bastard.  Paulina  forbids  him  to  touch  the  Princess  under  that  appellation. 

‘  Forced  ’  is  false,  uttered  with  violence  to  the  truth. — Malone  :  A  base  son  was  a 
common  term  in  our  author’s  time.  So  in  King  Lear :  ‘  Why  brand  they  us  With 
base  ?  with  baseness  ?  bastardy  ?’  [Qu.  was  not  the  pronunciation  base-tardy  ? — Ed.] 

106.  by  this  good  light]  Is  it  too  fanciful  to  suppose  that  this  unusual  oath  was 
suggested,  though  the  subtle  law  of  association,  by  the  passionate  exclamation  of 
Leontes :  ‘  A  nest  of  traitors  ’  ?  Is  there  not  somewhat  of  concealment  in  the  idea 
of  a  nest  which  prompts  Antigonus  to  swear  by  the  light  of  day  which  shines  every¬ 
where  and  reveals  all  things  ?  or  is  it  that  Shakespeare  merely  wishes  us  to  be  made 
conscious  of  the  bright  light  of  heaven  shining  down  on  this  dark  and  tragic  scene  ? 
—Ed. 

hi.  Swords]  Douce:  Compare  Cym.  Ill,  iv,  35:  ‘ — slander,  Whose  edge  is 
sharper  than  the  sword.’ 


ACT  II,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


105 


(For  as  the  cafe  now  ftands,  it  is  a  Curfe  1 12 

He  cannot  be  compell’d  too’t)  once  remoue 
The  Root  of  his  Opinion,  which  is  rotten, 

As  euer  Oake,  or  Stone  was  found.  115 

Leo .  A  Callat 

Of  boundleffe  tongue,  who  late  hath  beat  her  Husband, 

And  now  bayts  me  :  This  Brat  is  none  of  mine , 

It  is  the  Iffue  of  Polixenes. 

Hence  with  it,  and  together  with  the  Dam,  120 

Commit  them  to  the  fire. 

Paid.  It  is  yours  : 

And  might  we  lay  th’old  Prouerb  to  your  charge, 

So  like  you,  ’tis  the  worfe.  Behold  (my  Lords) 

Although  the  Print  be  little,  the  whole  Matter  1 25 

And  Coppy  of  the  Father:  (Eye,  Nofe,  Lippe, 

1 15.  found ]  found  Ff,  Rowe  i.  121.  them]  it  Cap.  conj. 

1 13.  compell’d  too’t]  That  is,  on  account  of  his  supreme,  autocratic  posi¬ 
tion. 

1 14,  1 1 5.  is  rotten,  As]  For  other  examples  of  the  omission  of  the  first  as,  see 
Abbott,  §  276.  In  this  present  phrase,  however,  it  is  not  impossible  to  suppose  that 
the  first  as  is  absorbed  in  *  is.’ — Ed. 

116.  Callat]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.) :  Many  have  suggested  its  identity  with  Fr. 
caillette,  ‘  foole,  ninnie,  noddie,  naturall’  (Cotgrave),  dim.  of  caille,  quail  (esteemed  a 
silly  bird) ;  but  this  does  not  quite  answer  phonetically,  does  not  quite  suit  the  sense, 
and  was  in  French  applied  to  men  as  readily  as  to  women.  Others  have  thought  of 
Fr.  calotte,  a  kind  of  small  bonnet  or  cap  covering  only  the  top  of  the  head,  but  no  evi¬ 
dence  appears  connecting  this  especially  with  a  ‘  callet.’  The  Gael,  and  Ir.  caille, 
girl,  has  been  also  suggested.  It  is  not  certain  which  is  the  earlier  sense ;  perhaps 
‘scold,’  as  in  the  verb,  and  ‘  callety,’  i.  e.  dialectic,  scolding,  ‘  ill-tongued.’ — Dyce 
(  Gloss. )  :  A  trull,  a  drab,  a  jade.  (‘  Goguenelle  :  A  fained  title,  or  tearme,  for  a  wench  ; 
like  our  Gixie,  Callet,  Minx,  etc.’— Cotgrave.) 

1 1 7.  118.  beat  .  .  .  bayts]  These  two  words  were  pronounced  alike.  ‘  A  quibble,’ 
says  Dr  Johnson,  in  his  Preface,  ‘  was  to  Shakespeare  the  fatal  Cleopatra  for  which 
he  lost  the  world  and  was  content  to  lose  it.’ — Ed. 

118.  Brat]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.):  Of  uncertain  origin;  Wedgwood,  E.  Milller, 
and  Skeat  think  it  the  same  word  as  Brat,  cloth  used  as  an  over-garment,  but  evi¬ 
dence  of  the  transition  of  sense  has  not  been  found.  In  16th  and  17th  centuries 
sometimes  used  without  contempt,  though  nearly  always  implying  insignificance;  the 
phrase  beggar's  brat  has  been  common  from  the  first. 

123.  old  Prouerb]  Staunton  :  Overbury  quotes  this  *  old  proverb  ’  in  his  charac¬ 
ter  of  ‘  A  Sargeant  ’ : — ‘  The  deuill  cals  him  his  white  Sonne  ;  he  is  so  like  him,  that 
hee  is  the  worst  for  it,  and  hee  lokes  [ takes — ed.  1627,  Ed.]  after  his  father. 
Works,  ed.  1616. 


io6 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  iii. 


The  trick  of’s  Frowne,  his  Fore-head,  nay,  the  Valley, 
The  pretty  dimples  of  his  Chin,  and  Cheeke;  his  Smiles: 
The  very  Mold,  and  frame  of  Hand,  Nayle,  Finger. ) 
And  thou  good  Goddeffe  Nature,  which  haft  made  it 
So  like  to  him  that  got  it,  if  thou  haft 
The  ordering  of  the  Mind  too,  ’mongft  all  Colours 
No  Yellow  in’t,  leaft  the  fufpeft,  as  he  do’s, 

Her  Children,  not  her  Husbands. 


134 


130 


12/ 


127.  of’s]  of  his  Var.  Rann,  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 


128.  of  his  Chin ]  of's  chin  Dyce. 
Chin,  and~\  Om.  Ritson. 
his  Smiles ]  Om.  Cap.  Rann. 


Valley']  valleys  Han.  Cap.  Rann, 
Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 


Separate  line,  Glo.  Rife,  Wh.  ii,  Dtn. 


128.  pretty\  Om.  Han. 


134.  Her\  Om.  Anon.  (Gent.  Mag. 


dimples  of  ]  dimples,  of  Cap. 


1789)  ap.  Cam. 


127.  trick]  That  is,  lineament.  It  is  properly  a  term  in  Heraldry.  lIn  Trick  :  An 
expression  used  to  denote  a  method  of  taking  down  arms  by  sketching  them,  letters 
or  other  abbreviations  being  employed  to  mark  their  tinctures,  and  numerals  to 
denote  the  repetition  of  a  charge.’ — Glossary  of  Terms  Used  in  British  Heraldry, 
Oxford,  1847. 

127.  the  Valley]  It  is  possible  that  Hanmer  is  right  in  changing  this  to  valleys, 
albeit  that  it  may  very  well  refer  to  some  characteristic  of  a  frowning  forehead  (which 
let  us  hope  Perdita  outgrew). — Ed. 

1 28.  his  Smiles]  For  the  adroit  disposition  of  these  two  words,  so  as  to  avoid  the 
bugbear  of  a  twelve-syllabled  line,  see  Textual  Notes. 

130.  which]  For  other  examples  of  ‘  which  ’  for  who  or  that,  see  Abbott,  §  265. 

133.  Yellow]  Johnson:  The  colour  of  jealousy. — Hunter  (i,  418) :  ‘  That  there 
is  a  nationall  as  well  as  a  personal  respect  cannot  be  denyd,  and  colours  rather  than 
other  are  vulgarly  appropriated  to  special  uses,  as  symbolical  to  them,  so  far  forth  as 
a  kind  of  superstition  is  growne  uppon  the  avoyding,  for  you  shal  seldome  see  a 
bridgegroom  wed  in  yellow,  or  a  forsaken  lover  walk  in  blew.  To  mourn  in  black  is 
as  nationall  a  custome  as  for  the  grave  and  civill  to  go  therein.  Who  sees  not  what 
a  religion  there  is,  as  it  were,  in  the  use  of  colours  ?  At  a  Saint  George’s  feast,  a  tilt 
or  triumph,  no  man  will  usurp  his  majesties  known  colours ;  yellow  and  red.' — Bolton’s 
Elements  of  Armouries,  1610,  p.  131. 

134.  not  her  Husbands]  Malone:  In  the  ardour  of  composition  Shakespeare 
seems  to  have  forgotten  the  difference  of  sexes.  No  suspicion  that  the  babe  in  ques¬ 
tion  might  entertain  of  her  future  husband’s  fidelity  could  affect  the  legitimacy  of  her 
offspring.  However  painful  female  jealousy  may  be  to  her  who  feels  it,  Paulina, 
therefore,  certainly  attributes  to  it,  in  the  present  instance,  a  pang  that  it  can  never 
give. — Steevens  :  I  regard  this  circumstance  as  a  beauty  rather  than  a  defect.  The 
seeming  absurdity  in  the  last  clause  of  Paulina’s  ardent  address  to  Nature  was 
undoubtedly  designed,  being  an  extravagance  characteristically  preferable  to  languid 
correctness,  and  chastised  declamation. — The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  In  Paulina  the 
poet  has  given  us  a  perfect  picture  of  one  of  those  ardent  friends  whose  warmth  of 
temper  and  want  of  judgement  injure  the  cause  they  strive  to  benefit.  Paulina,  by 


act  II,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


107 


Leo.  A  groffe  Hagge  :  135 

And  Lozell,  thou  art  worthy  to  be  hang’d, 

That  wilt  not  ftay  her  Tongue. 

An  tig.  Hang  all  the  Husbands 
That  cannot  doe  that  Feat,you’le  leaue  your  felfe 
Hardly  one  Subieft.  I4° 

Leo.  Once  more  take  her  hence. 

Paul.  A  moft  vnworthy,and  vnnaturall  Lord 
Can  doe  no  more. 

Leo.  lie  ha’  thee  burnt. 

Paul.  I  care  not  :  I45 

It  is  an  Heretique  that  makes  the  fire, 

Not  flie  which  burnes  in’t.  lie  not  call  you  Tyrant  :  147 

135.  Hagge:']  Hag!  Rowe.  144-  ha!  thee]  have  thee  Var.  Rann, 

137.  That  wilt]  Thou  wilt  Rowe  ii,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Sta. 

p0pe  146.  an  Heretique]  F2.  a  heretic 

141.  once  more]  once  more ,  Theob.  Sing.  Ktly.  an  Heretick  or  heretic  I'  3I’4 

et  cet. 

her  persevering  iterance  of  the  word  ‘  good ’  excites  Leontes  opposition,  and  lashes 
him  into  fury ;  and  now,  when  she  has  made  a  moving  appeal  in  her  reference  to  the 
infant’s  inheritance  of  its  father’s  look,  smile,  and  features,  she  cannot  refrain  from 
merging  into  reproach,  ending  in  actual  extravagance. 

136.  Lozell]  Reed:  ‘A  Losel  is  one  that  hath  lost,  neglected,  or  cast  off  his 
owne  good  and  welfare,  and  so  is  become  lewde  and  carelesse  of  credit  and  honesty.’ 
Verstegan’s  Restitution ,  1605,  p.  335.— Halliwell  :  ‘  Lozel  ’  is  a  variation  of  lorel, 
a  term  for  a  bad  worthless  fellow  derived  from  the  Anglo-Norman.  ‘  Lorel,  or  lozel,  or 
lurdene,  lurco.’ — Prompt.  Parv.  Cocke  Lorel  is  called  Cocke  Losel  in  the  rare  tract 
called  Doctour  Doubble  Ale.  ‘  Maschefouyn,  a  chuffe,  boore,  lobcocke,  lozell,  one 
that’s  fitter  to  feed  with  cattell,  then  to  converse  with  men.’— Cotgrave. 

138.  Hang  .  .  .  subject]  W.  Aldis  Wright  {Cam.  Ed.)  records  an  Anony¬ 
mous  Conjecture  to  the  effect  that  this  speech  of  Antigonus  is  spoken  aside.  The 
plausibility  of  this  conjecture  is  no  whit  diminished  in  the  eyes  of  the  present  Editor 
by  the  fact  that  it  occurred  to  him  independently ;  what  adds  to  its  likelihood  is  that 
Leontes,  by  reiterating  his  previous  command,  conveys  the  impression  that  he  has  not 
heard  Antigonus  speak. — Ed. 

144.  ha’  thee]  The  change  to  ‘  have  thee  ’  cannot  be  justified.— Ed. 

146,  147.  It  is  an  Heretique  .  .  .  burnes  in’t]  Hudson  (p.  26) :  If  Paulina’s 
faults  were  a  thousand  times  greater  than  they  are,  I  could  pardon  them  all  for  this 
one  little  speech ;  which  proves  that  Shakespeare  was,  I  will  not  say  a  Protestant, 
but  a  true  Christian,  intellectually  at  least,  and  far  deeper  in  the  spirit  of  his  religion 
than  a  large  majority  of  the  Church’s  official  organs  were  in  his  day,  or,  let  me  add, 
have  been  any  day  since.  And  this  was  written,  be  it  observed,  at  a  time  when  the 
embers  of  the  old  ecclesiastical  fires  were  not  yet  wholly  extinct,  and  when  many  a 
priestly  bigot  was  deploring  the  lay  ascendency  which  kept  them  from  being  re¬ 
kindled. 


io8 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  xi,  sc.  iii. 


But  this  moft  cruell  vfage  of  your  Queene 

(Not  able  to  produce  more  accufation 

Then  your  owne  weake-hindg’d  Fancy)fomthing  fauors 

Of  Tyrannie,  and  will  ignoble  make  you  , 

Yea,  fcandalous  to  the  World. 

Leo.  On  your  Allegeance, 

Out  of  the  Chamber  with  her.  Were  I  a  Tyrant, 

Where  were  her  life  ?  fhe  durft  not  call  me  fo, 

If  fhe  did  know  me  one.  Away  with  her. 

Paul.  I  pray  you  doe  not  pufh  me,  lie  be  gone. 
Looke  to  your  Babe(my  Lord) ’tis  yours:  Ioue  fend  her 
A  better  guiding  Spirit.  What  needs  thefe  hands? 

You  that  are  thus  fo  tender  o’re  his  Follyes, 

Will  neuer  doe  him  good,  not  one  of  you. 

So,  fo  :  Farewell,  we  are  gone.  Exit. 

Leo.  Thou(Traytor)haft  fet  on  thy  Wife  to  this. 

My  Child?  away  with’t?  euen  thou,  that  haft 
A  heart  fo  tender  o’re  it,  take  it  hence, 

And  fee  it  inftantly  confum’d  with  fire. 

Euen  thou,  and  none  but  thou.  Take  it  vp  ftraight: 
Within  this  houre  bring  me  word  ’tis  done, 

(And  by  good  teftimonie)  or  lie  feize  thy  life, 


148 

150 


155 


160 


165 


169 


I  S°-  fomthing]  sometimes  Rowe. 

152.  to  the ]  to  all  the  Pope,  Han. 

155.  durjl]  doji  F^. 

158.  Ioue]  God  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 
her]  him  Heath. 

159'  better  guiding ]  better-guiding 

Walker. 

needs']  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 
neede  F2.  need  F3F4  et  cet. 


160.  o’re]  o’  Anon. 

162.  Scene  vi.  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 
Johns. 

164.  with't?]  with't.  Rowe,  -with.' t ! 
Cap. 

thou,]  thou,  thou  Theob.  Warb. 

Johns. 

168.  ’tis]  it  is  Pope,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Var.  ’73. 


150.  hindg’d]  This  cannot  refer  to  the  metal  double  joints  to  which  we  are 
accustomed  on  modern  doors,  but  rather  to  the  hooks  or  staples  on  which  doors  were 
anciently  hung,  and  of  which  we  have  possibly  a  survival  in  the  ‘  hook-and-eye  ’ 
hinges  on  which  gates  swing.  Cotgrave  gives  ‘  Gonds  d'vne porte.  The  hookes,  or 
hindges  of  a  doore.’  Skeat  (Diet.)  :  <  So  called,  because  the  door  hangs  upon’it; 
from  M.  E.  hengen,  to  hang.’ — Ed. 

160,  165.  tender  o’re]  Except  in  these  two  places,  Shakespeare  nowhere  uses  the 
phrase  tender  over.  There  is,  ‘  So  tender  of  rebukes’  in  Cym.  Ill,  v,  40.  If  this 
play  were  dictated  to  the  compositors,  in  the  printing  office,  whereof  we  have  indica¬ 
tions  elsewhere,  it  is  not  impossible  that  ‘  tender  0  ’  was  misheard  ‘  tender  o’re.’ _ Ed 

169.  seize]  The  legal  term. 


act  ii,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


109 


With  what  thou  elfe  call’ft  thine  :  if  thou  refufe,  170 

And  wilt  encounter  with  my  Wrath,  fay  fo  ; 

The  Baftard-braynes  with  thefe  my  proper  hands 
Shall  I  dath  out.  Goe,  take  it  to  the  fire, 

For  thou  fett’ft  on  thy  Wife. 

Antig.  I  did  not,  Sir  :  175 

Thefe  Lords,  my  Noble  Fellowes,if  they  pleafe, 

Can  cleare  me  in’t. 

Lords.  We  can  :  my  Royall  Liege, 

He  is  not  guiltie  of  her  comming  hither. 

Leo.  You’re  lyers  all*.  I8° 

Lord.  Befeech  your  Highneffe,  giue  vs  better  credit: 

We  haue  alwayes  truly  feru’d  you,  and  befeech’  182 


170.  what  thou  elfe  call' ff\all  that's 
Han.  (reading  And. ..seize,  as  one  line). 

172.  Baflard -  braynes]  bastard's 
brains  Heath,  Walker,  Huds.  Wh.  ii. 
174.  fett'fl]  sett'd’st  Han. 

176.  Thefe]  The  Pope,  Han. 

180.  You're]  You  are  Var.  Rann, 
Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Wh.  i. 


18 1.  Lord.]  Lords.  Rowe.  I  L.  Cap. 

182.  We  haue ]  We've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii. 

befeech ’]  White.  beseech  you 
Rowe  +  ,  Var.  ’73,  Coll,  ii  (MS),  Ktly, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Cam.  Huds.  Dtn.  befeech 
Ff  et  cet. 


17 1.  wilt]  For  other  examples  of  the  future  for  the  subjunctive,  see  Abbott, 

§  348. 

172.  Bastard-braynes]  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  think,  with 
Mr  W.  N  Lettsom  [anticipated  by  Heath,  p.  210— Ed.],  that  the  true  reading  is 
<  bastard's  brains for  it  is  unquestionable  that,  occasionally  throughout  the  Folio,  a 
hyphen  has  usurped  the  place  of  the  final  s ;  see  Walker,  Crit.  i,  261. 

175.  I  did  not,  Sir]  I  can  recall  no  other  play  of  Shakespeare’s  wherein  the 
courtiers  address  their  sovereign  in  such  downright  speech  as  in  this. — Ed. 

178,  179.  Lords.  We  .  .  .  hither]  It  must  be  confessed  that  there  is  some¬ 
thing  slightly  unnatural  in  this  harmonious  chorus  of  ‘  Lords.’  Rowe  changed 
*  Lords  ’  to  Lord,  and  Capell  specified  1  Lord.  An  Anonymous  conjecture,  recorded 
in  the  Cam.  Ed  is  certainly  plausible.  It  suggests  that,  with  one  voice  the  Lords  all 
say  ‘  We  can,’  which  is  not  too  great  a  tax  either  on  their  unanimity  or  on  our  cre¬ 
dulity.  Then  the  ‘  First  Lord  ’  assumes  the  office  of  spokesman  and  completes  the 
sentence. — Ed. 

181.  Lord.]  The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  It  is  worthy  of  observation  that  the  cha¬ 
racter  of  this  speaker  is  delineated  with  so  much  moral  beauty  throughout  (from  that 
speech  of  chivalrous  loyalty  to  his  queen,  and  courageous  loyalty  to  his  king  :  ‘  For 
her,  my  Lord,  I  dare  my  life  lay  down,’  etc.,  II,  i;  down  to  the  present  earnest  re¬ 
monstrance),  that  in  the  play  of  any  other  dramatist  it  would  have  assumed  name 
and  shape  as  a  personage  of  importance ;  whereas,  in  Shakespeare’s  wealth  of  re¬ 
source,  and  care  in  finishing  even  the  most  subordinate  parts  among  his  dramatis 
persons,  it  merely  figures  as  ‘  First  Lord.’ 

182.  beseech’]  The  apostrophe  marks  an  elision  of  you.  If  this  was  sufficiently 


THE  WINTERS  TALE  [ACT  n>  sc.  iii. 


So  to  efteeme  of  vs  :  and  on  our  knees  we  begge, 

(As  recompence  of  our  deare  feruiees 

Paft,  and  to  come)  that  you  doe  change  this  purpofe, 

Which  being  fo  horrible,  fo  bloody,  muft 

Lead  on  to  fome  foule  Iffue.  We  all  kneele. 

Leo.  I  am  a  Feather  for  each  Wind  that  blows  : 
Shall  I  liue  on,  to  fee  this  Baftard  kneele, 

And  call  me  Father  ?  better  burne  it  now, 

Then  curfe  it  then.  But  be  it  :  let  it  liue. 

It  fhall  not  neyther.  You  Sir,  come  you  hither  : 

You  that  haue  beene  fo  tenderly  officious 
With  Lady  Margerie,  your  Mid.wife  there, 

To  faue  this  Baftards  life ;  for  ’tis  a  Baftard, 

So  fure  as  this  Beard’s  gray.  What  will  you  aduenture, 


183 

185 


190 


195 


183.  So... knees]  One  line,  Han.  Ab¬ 
bott  (§  499). 

of  vs  ;  and  on ]  us :  on  Anon, 
ap.  Cam. 

1&p  feruices~\  service  Han. 

187.  IVe  a li ]  Lords.  He  all  Anon, 
ap.  Cam. 

kneele.]  kneel —  Rowe  +  ,Var.’73. 


187.  [they  kneel.  Johns. 

188,  190.  Feather. ..Father]  Father... 

Feather  father  ...father  Rowe. 

192.  [lo  Ant.  Rowe. 

194.  Mid-wife ]  mild  wife  Cap.  conj. 
Rann. 

196.  this]  thy  Coll.  (Egerton  MS), 
Dyce.  your  Coll.  (MS)  ap.  Cam. 


clear  to  readers  three  hundred  years  ago,  it  is  a  rather  humiliating  confession  of  infe¬ 

rior  intelligence  that  we  at  this  late  day  should  require  to  have  the  you  inserted  in 
full.  The  same  elision  is  indicated  in  ‘  Please  ’your  Highnesse  ’  in  line  231  below 
See  II,  i,  18. — Ed.  ’ 


185.  and  to  come]  Deighton:  ‘Recompense,’  strictly  speaking,  can  be  only  for 
what  is  past ;  the  word  we  use  in  such  a  sense  in  regard  to  the  future  is  earnest. 

188.  I  am,  etc.]  The  constant  plea  of  an  obstinate,  headstrong  man  on  the  point 
of  yielding. — Ed.  ^ 


194.  Mid-wife]  Capell  (p.  169):  It  is  possible,  certainly,  that  this  may  be  the 
Author’s  word;  and  Paulina’s  bringing  the  child  in  be  held  a  bringing  it  forth  by  the 
person  to  whom  ’tis  given;  but  this  conceit  is  so  poor,  that  he  ought  not  be  saddl’d 
with  it;  especially  when  means  are  at  hand  to  clear  him  of  such  a  blemish  by  a  read¬ 
ing  of  such  likelihood  as  is —mild  wife;  terms  which,  taken  ironically,  agree  with  all 
the  conceptions  of  her  which  the  speaker  entertain’d  at  this  time. 

196.  this]  Theobald  {Nichols,  ii,  360)  :  I  suspect  we  ought  to  read,  ‘  his  beard,’ 
1.  ■?.  Antigonus’s ;  the  king  cannot  mean  his  own.  It  is  plain  from  I,  i,  that  the  prince 
was  a  very  young  boy;  and  the  king  says  that  looking  upon  the  child,  he  was  moved 
to  throw  off  twenty-three  years;  so  that  allowing  the  child  to  be  eight  years  old  the 
father  could  be  but  thirty-one.  How  old  Antigonus  might  be,  can  scarce  be  deter¬ 
mined,  neither,  with  certainty.  The  Shepherd  speaks  of  him  as  an  ‘  old  man  ’  ,•  but 
ow  he  knew  him  to  be  old,  I  cannot  tell.  Malone  :  The  king  must  mean  the  beard 
of  Antigonus,  which,  perhaps,  both  here  and  on  the  former  occasion  [II,  i,  1S4],  it 


act  ii,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


1 1 1 


To  faue  this  Brats  life  ? 


197 


Antig.  Any  thing  (my  Lord,) 

That  my  abilitie  may  vndergoe, 

And  Nobleneffe  impofe  :  at  leaft  thus  much  ; 
lie  pawne  the  little  blood  which  I  haue  left, 
To  faue  the  Innocent  :  any  thing  poffible. 


200 


Leo.  It  fhall  be  poffible  :  Sweare  by  this  Sword 
Thou  wilt  performe  my  bidding. 


Antig.  I  will  (my  Lord.) 


205 


Leo.  Marke,  and  performe  it  :  feeft  thou  ?  for  the  faile 
Of  any  point  in’t,  fhall  not  onely  be 
Death  to  thy  felfe,  but  to  thy  lewd-tongu’d  Wife, 
(Whom  for  this  time  we  pardon,)  We  enioyne  thee, 


209 


200.  at  leajl]  at  loft  Ff. 

202.  any  thing]  what's  Han. 


208.  lewd-tongu'd]  loud-tongued 
Anon.  ap.  Cam. 


was  intended  he  should  lay  hold  of.  .  .  .  He  cannot  mean  his  own  beard. — Collier 
(ed.  ii)  :  The  old  MS  corrector  of  Lord  Ellesmere’s  F,  altered  ‘this’  to  thy ,  which, 
probably,  was  the  true  reading.  Leontes  could  not,  of  course,  refer  to  his  own  beard ; 
and  in  order  to  make  ‘  this  beard  ’  intelligible,  he  must  have  touched  or  plucked  that 
of  Antigonus. — Halliwell  :  Leontes  is  rather  rough  with  Antigonus,  and  he  may 
be  supposed  to  seize  his  beard  as  he  speaks  these  words. — Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  That  there 
is  nothing  objectionable  in  ‘  thy  beard  ’  and  ‘  will  you  adventure  ’  being  so  placed  in 
juxtaposition,  might  be  shown  by  many  passages  of  Shakespeare  ;  e.g.  we  find  ‘  Mark 
your  divorce  .  .  .  thou  art  too  base.’ — IV,  iv,  466.  [If  personal  accentuation  of  his 
remarks  on  the  part  of  Leontes  were  as  common  as  we  may  be  led  to  infer  from 
this  and  the  preceding  incident,  where  Capell  suggests  that  the  king  pulls  Anti- 
gonus’s  nose,  it  would  go  far  to  explain  the  familiar  outspoken  language  which  ap¬ 
parently  reigns  at  this  Court. — Ed.] 

203.  Sword]  Halliwell  :  It  was  anciently  the  custom  to  swear  by  the  cross  on 
the  handle  of  a  sword,  or  by  the  sacred  name  of  Jesus,  which  was  sometimes  en¬ 
graven  on  the  top  of  the  blade  or  on  the  pommel  of  the  sword.  According  to  a  MS 
of  the  time  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  in  the  Sloane  Collection,  the  oath  taken  by  a  Master 
of  Defence,  when  his  degree  was  conferred  upon  him,  commenced  as  follows : 
‘  First,  you  shall  sweare,  so  help  you  God  and  halidome,  and  by  all  the  Christendome 
which  God  gave  you  at  the  fount-stone,  and  by  the  crosse  of  this  sword  which  doth 
represent  unto  you  the  crosse  which  our  Saviour  suffered  his  most  paynful  deathe 
upon,’  etc.  [See  notes  in  this  ed.  in  Ham.  I,  v,  147.] 

206.  the  faile]  Failure,  which  we  should,  perhaps,  now  use,  Shakespeare  never 
used.  It  is,  so  says  SkeAT,  ‘  an  ill-coined  and  late  word,  used  by  Burke,  On  the 
Sublime,  pt.  iv,  §  24.  Bradley,  however  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Failure ),  says :  First  found 
in  17th  c.  in  form  failer,  an  adopted  form  of  Anglo-French  failer,  for  French  faillir, 
to  fail.  .  .  .  Subsequently  the  ending  was  variously  confused  with  the  suffixes  -or, 
-our,  ure,  but  the  original  form  did  not  become  obsolete  until  the  end  of  the  century.’ 
•Fail  ’  is  used  again  in  V,  i,  36. 


1 12 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  ii,  sc.  iii. 


As  thou  art  Liege-man  to  vs,  that  thou  carry  210 

This  female  Baftard  hence,  and  that  thou  beare  it 
To  fome  remote  and  defart  place,  quite  out 
Of  our  Dominions  ;  and  that  there  thou  leaue  it 
(Without  more  mercy)  to  it  owne  protection, 

And  fauour  of  the  Climate  :  as  by  ftrange  fortune  21 5 

It  came  to  vs,  I  doe  in  Iuftice  charge  thee, 

On  thy  Soules  perill,and  thy  Bodyes  torture, 

That  thou  commend  it  ftrangely  to  fome  place, 

Where  Chance  may  nurfe,  or  end  it  :  take  it  vp. 

Antig.  I  fweare  to  doe  this:  though  a  prefent  death  220 

Had  beene  more  mercifull.  Come  on  (poore  Babe) 

Some  powerfull  Spirit  inftru6f  the  Kytes  and  Rauens 
To  be  thy  Nurfes.  Wolues  and  Beares,they  fay, 

(Calling  their  fauageneffe  afide)haue  done 

Like  offices  of  Pitty.  Sir,  be  profperous  225 

214.  more ]  much  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  218.  firangely  to  fome ]  to  some  stran- 

it  owne]  Fa,  Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  ii,  ger  Han. 

Rife,  Dtn.  219.  Chance~\  change  F3F<t 

214.  it  owne]  Rolfe  :  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  only  instance  in  which  its  occurs 
in  our  present  Bible  (Lev.  xxv,  5),  the  ed.  of  1611  has  ‘it  owne;’  and  in  the  Ge¬ 
neva  version  of  1579  we  find  ‘it  owne  accorde  ’  in  Acts  xii,  10,  So  in  Sylvester’s 
Du  Bartas,  1605  :  ‘  By  little  and  little  it  owne  selfes  consumer.  [  The  Second  Day  of 
the  first  Week,  p.  10,  ed.  1632.]  ’  These  and  similar  instances  would  seem  to  show 
that  the  old  possessive  it  was  often  retained  in  this  expression  after  it  had  gone  out  of 
general  use;  and  they  justify  us  in  assuming  that  ‘  it  own  ’  is  what  Shakespeare  prob¬ 
ably  wrote  here.  Its  own  (or  it's  own),  of  which  we  have  a  solitary  instance  in  I,  ii, 
310,  above,  maybe  the  printers’  variation  from  the  MS;  though  it  is  not  improbable 
that  the  poet  may  have  written  it  so.  [See  I,  ii,  183,  310.] 

215,  218.  strange  .  .  .  strangely]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  288)  has  collected  a 
number  of  instances  where  ‘  strange  ’  has  the  sense  of  extraneous,  foreign.  Thus 
here,  ‘  “  strange  ”  is  alien,  foreign  ;  it  being,  as  Leontes  maintains,  the  child  of  a  for¬ 
eigner.’— Johnson,  however,  paraphrases  ‘strangely,’  in  line  218:  ‘Commit  it  to 
some  place,  as  a  stranger,  without  more  provision.’ — Delius  sees  in  the  passage  a 
reminiscence  of  Dorastus  and  Fawnia :  ‘  that  seeing  (as  he  thought)  it  came  by 
fortune,  so  he  would  commit  it  to  the  charge  of  Fortune.’ 

222.  Rauens]  Grey  (i,  253) :  Alluding  to  1  Kings,  xvii,  2,  3,  4. 

225.  Sir,  be  prosperous]  Roderick  (p.  250) :  Antigonus  takes  his  leave  with 
two  wishes.  The  first,  that  the  king  may  enjoy  more  prosperity  than  such  a  deed  as 
this  of  exposing  the  child  could  with  any  right  demand,  or  in  reason  expect  (for  this 
must  be  the  meaning  of— ‘be  prosperous  in  more  than  this  deed  does  require  ’).  The 
second  wish  is,  that  the  blessing  of  Heaven  may  protect  the  poor  child,  condemned  to 
be  exposed,  against  the  intended  effects  of  its  father’s  cruelty.  Read  as  follows : _ 


ACT  ii,  sc.  iii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  1 1 3 

In  more  then  this  deed  do’s  require  ;  and  Bleffing  226 

Againft  this  Crueltie,  fight  on  thy  fide 

(Poore  Thing,  condemn’d  to  Ioffe.)  Exit. 

Leo.  No  :  lie  not  reare 

Anothers  Iffue.  Enter  a  Seruant.  230 

Seru.  Pleafe  ’your  Highneffe,  Ports 
From  thofe  you  fent  to  th’Oracle,  are  come 
An  houre  rtnce  :  Cleomines  and  Dion, 

Being  well  arriu’d  from  Delphos,are  both  landed, 

Halting  to  th’Court.  235 

Lord.  So  pleafe  you  (Sir)  their  fpeed 
Hath  beene  beyond  accompt. 

Leo.  Twentie  three  dayes 
They  haue  beene  abfent  :  ’tis  good  fpeed  :  fore-tells 
The  great  Apollo  fuddenly  will  haue  240 

The  truth  of  this  appeare  :  Prepare  you  Lords, 

Summon  a  Seffion,that  we  may  arraigne 
Our  moft  difloyall  Lady  :  for  as  the  hath 
Been  publikely  accus’d,  fo  fhall  fhe  haue 

A  iuft  and  open  Triall.  While  fhe  hues,  245 


227.  fide~\  side  !  Theob. 

228.  [Exit  with  the  child.  Rowe. 

229.  reare ]  rare  F2.  rear  F3F4> 

230.  Seruant]  Messenger  Rowe. 

231.  Pleafe  ’ your ]  F2.  Pleafe  your 

W 

233.  Cleomines]  Cleomenes  Cap. 


236.  Lord.]  I.L.  Cap. 

237.  accompt ]  account  F^. 

239.  ’ tis... fpeed .•]  ’ tis... fpeed  F 4.  this 
good  speed  Pope  + ,  Rann.  ’  Tis  good 
speed ,  and  or  ’  Tis  good  speed,  it  Ktly 
conj. 

240.  The  great]  That  great  Rann. 


‘  In  more  than  this  deed  does  require  !  And  blessing  Against  his  cruelty  ( addressing 
himself  to  the  child)  fight  on  thy  side,’  etc. 

228.  losse]  Malone  :  That  is,  to  exposure,  similar  to  that  of  a  child  whom  its 
parents  have  lost.  I  once  thought  that  4  loss  ’  was  here  licentiously  used  for  destruc¬ 
tion  ;  but  that  this  was  not  the  primary  sense  here  intended,  appears  from  III,  iii,  57, 
58  :  4  Poor  wretch,  That  ...  art  thus  exposed  To  loss  and  what  may  follow  !’ 

231.  Please’]  Note  the  apostrophe  indicating  the  elision  of  you,  which,  were  it 
present,  would  make  the  phrase  parallel  to  4  please  you  (Sir)  ’  in  line  236.  See 
II,  i,  18. 

234,  235.  are  .  .  .  Hasting]  The  lack  of  the  conjunction  and  may  be  evaded  by 
punctuating  :  4  are,  both  landed,  Hasting,’  etc. 

237.  beyond  accompt]  That  is,  beyond  any  of  which  we  have  account,  unpre¬ 
cedented.  It  can  hardly  mean,  beyond  computation.  Possibly,  the  modern  news¬ 
paper  phrase  quite  corresponds  to  it :  to  break  the  record. — Ed. 

239.  ’tis]  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  I  should  have  followed  Pope  in  substituting  this,  had 
not  that  word  occurred  in  the  next  line  but  one.  And  qy.  4  That  great  ’  ?  (4  The  ’ 
8 


14 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  i. 

246 


My  heart  will  be  a  burthen  to  me.  Leaue  me, 
And  thinke  vpon  my  bidding.  Exeunt. 


A  Pus  Tertius.  Scena  Prima. 


Enter  Cleomines  and  Dion. 

Cleo.  The  Clymat’s  delicate,  the  Ayre  moft  fweet, 
Fertile  the  Ifle,  the  Temple  much  furpaffing 
The  common  prayfe  it  beares., 


246.  burtheri\  Fa,  Cap.  Knt,  Wb. 
Cam.  Rife,  burden  F3F4  et  cet. 

247.  Exeunt.]  Exeunt  severally, 
Theob. 

1.  Scena]  Scsena  F3F4. 

A  Part  of  Sicily  near  the  Sea-side. 
Theob.  The  same.  A  Street  in  some 


5 

Town.  Cap.  Delphi,  near  the  temple 
of  Apollo.  Hal.  A  Sea-port  in  Sicilia. 
Cam. 

2.  Enter...]  Enter. ..with  Attendants. 
Johns. 

4.  IJle\  soil  Warb.  conj.,  Han.  Cap. 


having  been  caught  from  the  next  line);  yet  in  III,  ii,  145  we  ‘ the  great  Apollo.’ 
[Anticipated  by  Rann.] 

246.  burthen]  Lady  Martin  (p.  358) :  He  had  yet  to  learn  how  much  heavier 
a  burden  his  heart  would  have  to  bear. 

247.  thinke  vpon]  This  is  more  than  merely  ‘  meditate  upon  my  bidding it  is, 
rather,  ‘  have  regard  to  my  bidding  ’  or,  as  Deighton  paraphrases  it :  ‘  take  care  that 
it  is  performed.’ 

1.  Adtus  Tertius]  Theobald  ( Nichols ,  ii,  361)  :  I  think  this  ought  rather  to  be 
the  last  scene  of  the  Second  Act.  We  find,  at  II,  iii,  234,  that  Cleomines  and  Dion 
are  arrived  from  Delphos,  but  at  line  28  of  the  present  scene,  they  are  not  yet  arrived 
to  Court,  but  want  fresh  horses  for  their  last  stage  ;  and  yet  the  very  next  scene  opens 
with  the  session  convened  for  the  queen’s  trial,  the  determination  of  wThich  was  to 
await  the  answer  of  the  Oracle.  This  hurries  the  action  on  with  somewhat  too  much 
precipitation ;  and,  besides,  the  interval  of  an  Act  is  absolutely  necessary,  for  placing 
the  benches,  and  other  formalities,  requisite  to  represent  a  Court  of  Judicature. 
[Theobald  did  not  repeat  this  in  his  subsequent  edition.]— Koppel  (Sh.  Jhrbueh,  ix, 
289) :  The  ‘  Sea-port  in  Sicilia’  of  the  Cam.  Ed.  is  erroneous;  for  in  the  last  scene  of 
the  preceding  Act  the  messenger  has  already  reached  the  Court  who  had  left  them  at 
the  harbour,  and  since  they  were  hasting  thence  on  their  way  to  the  Court,  they  could 
not  possibly  be  still  at  the  sea-port.  Moreover,  if,  while  still  at  the  sea  port,  they 
called  for  ‘  fresh  horses ,’  we  should  have  to  assume  that  they  had  performed  a  sea- 
voyage  on  horseback. — Halliwell  :  The  present  scene  takes  place  apparently  in 
Delphi,  soon  after  Cleomenes  and  Dion  had  visited  the  Oracle,  the  allusion  to  the 
happy  issue  of  the  journey  referring  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  object  of  their 
mission,  not  necessarily  including  their  return  to  Sicily.  It  is  to  be  assumed  the 
temple  was  some  distance  from  the  sea,  and  they  required  fresh  horses,  not  for  their 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


1 15 

6 


Dion.  I  fhall  report, 

For  moft  it  caught  me,  the  Celeftiall  Habits, 

(Me  thinkes  I  fo  fhould  terme  them )  and  the  reuerence 
Of  the  graue  Wearers.  0 ,  the  Sacrifice, 

How  ceremonious ,  folemne,and  vn-earthly  10 

7.  it~\  they  Han.  Rowe,  sacrifice —  Theob.  sacrifice! 

9.  Sacrifice, ~\  Sacrifice.  Ff.  sacrifice ;  Cap. 

last  stage  in  Sicily,  but  to  take  them  with  the  utmost  rapidity  down  to  their  ship.  The 
opening  words  of  Cleomenes  seem  conclusively  to  show  that  the  scene  was  near  the 
temple  of  the  Oracle.  [It  adds  greatly  to  Halliwell’s  argument  that  Cleomenes  says 
4  The  climate  is  delicate,’  not 4  was  delicate.’ — Ed.] 

i.  Lady  Martin  (p.  358) :  Here  follows  one  of  those  exquisite  scenes  with  which 

Shakespeare  so  often  enriches  his  plays,  in  the  creative  exuberance  of  his  imagination, 

and  prompted  by  the  subtle  sense  of  what  is  wanted  to  put  his  audience  in  the  right 
mood  for  what  is  next  to  follow.  After  all  the  prophetic  vehemence  of  Paulina  and  the 
insane  passion  of  Leontes,  he  seems  to  have  felt  that  something  in  a  gentler  strain  was 
needed  to  calm  the  emotions  of  his  hearers,  and  lift  them  into  a  serener  air,  before 
showing  Hermione  upon  her  trial. 

4.  Isle]  Warburton  :  But  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi  was  not  an  island,  but 
in  Phocis,  on  the  continent.  Either  Shakespeare,  or  his  editors,  had  their  heads 
running  on  Delos,  an  island  of  the  Cyclades.  If  it  was  the  editor’s  blunder,  then 

Shakespeare  wrote  : * i. * *  4 * 6 7  Fertile  the  soil ,’ — which  is  more  elegant,  too,  than  the  present 
reading. — Johnson  :  Shakespeare  is  little  careful  of  geography.  There  is  no  need 
of  this  emendation  in  a  play  of  which  the  whole  plot  depends  upon  a  geographical 
error,  by  which  Bohemia  is  supposed  to  be  a  maritime  country. — Theobald  was  the 
first  to  note  that  in  representing  Delphi  as  on  an  island  and  in  giving  Bohemia  a  sea- 
coast  Shakespeare  merely  followed  Greene’s  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

6,  7.  I  shall  report,  For  most]  Warburton  :  What  will  he  report  ?  And  what 
means  the  reason  of  his  report,  that  the  celestial  habits  most  struck  his  observation  ? 
We  should  read,  4  It  shames  report.  Foremost  it,’  etc.  Cleomines  had  just  before 
said,  that  the  4  temple  much  surpassed  the  common  praise  it  bore.’  The  other,  very 
naturally,  replies — it  shames  report ,  as  far  surpassing  what  report  said  of  it.  He  then 
goes  on  to  particularise  the  wonders  of  the  place :  4  Foremost,  or  first  of  all,  the 
priests’  garments,  then  their  behaviour,  their  act  of  sacrifice,  etc.,  in  reasonable  good 
order.  [There  is  no  need  of  refuting  any  of  Warburton’s  dogmatic  perversions. 
His  contemporaries  paid  but  little  heed  to  them  (as  shown  by  the  financial  failure  of 
his  edition),  and  posterity  still  less.  Like  much  else,  they  find  a  place  in  this  edition 
merely  as  belonging  to  the  History  of  Shakespearian  Criticism. — Ed.] 

7.  it  caught]  Johnson  :  4  It  ’  may  relate  to  the  whole  spectacle. 

10.  ceremonious]  Walker  ( Crit .  ii,  73)  adduces  examples  from  Shakespeare’s 
contemporaries  to  prove  4  that  ceremony  and  ceremonious  were  pronounced  by  our 
ancient  poets, — very  frequently,  at  least, — cer'mony  and  cer’monous.'  In  a  footnote, 
Lettsom  observes  that,  4  Some  of  the  writers  quoted  by  Walker  seem  to  have  even 
pronounced  cermny,  cermnous. — Staunton  (noted  by  Lettsom)  had  already  antici¬ 
pated  Walker  in  detecting  this  pronunciation.  On  4  ceremony  ’  in  Alts  Well,  II,  iii,  185, 
he  remarks,  4  It  has  never,  that  we  are  aware,  been  noticed  that  Shakespeare  usually 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  i. 


1 1 6 


It  was  i’th’Ofifring  ? 

Cleo.  But  of  all,  the  burft 
And  the  eare-deafP  ning  Voyce  o’th’ Oracle, 

Kin  to  loues  Thunder,  fo  furpriz’d  my  Sence, 

That  I  was  nothing. 

Dio .  If  th’euent  o’th’Iourney 
Proue  as  fucceffefull  to  the  Queene(0  be’t  fo) 

As  it  hath  beene  to  vs,  rare,  pleafant,  fpeedie, 

The  time  is  worth  the  vfe  on’t. 

Cleo.  Great  Apollo 

Turne  all  to  th’beft  :  thefe  Proclamations, 

So  forcing  faults  vpon  Hermione , 

I  little  like. 

Dio.  The  violent  carriage  of  it 
Will  cleare,  or  end  the  Bufmeffe,  when  the  Oracle 
(Thus  by  Apollo’s  great  Diuine  feal’d  vp  ) 

Shall  the  Contents  difcouer  :  fomething  rare 

Euen  then  will  rufh  to  knowledge.  Goe:  frefh  Horfes, 

And  gracious  be  the  iffue.  Exeunt. 


11.  Offring offering!  Rowe. 

12.  of  all,  the ]  of  all  the  F4. 

1 8.  fpeedie ,]  speedy  ;  Rowe,  Pope. 

19.  time...vfe]  use. ..time  Han.  Warb. 
Cap. 

21.  befl  .•]  best!  Rowe. 


25.  Bufmeffe, business;  Theob. 

27.  difcouer .•]  discover,  Johns. 

28.  Goe. ..Horfes,']  Go — fresh  horses — 
Johns.  [To  an  Attendant]  Go. ..horses, 
Dyce  ii. 


pronounces  cere  in  ceremony,  ceremonies,  ceremonials  (but  not  in  ceremonious,  cere¬ 
moniously)  as  a  monosyllable,  like  cere-cloth,  cerement .’  In  all  the  examples  which 
Staunton  quotes,  the  word  in  question  comes  at  the  end  of  the  line,  never  the  true 
place  to  test  pronunciation.  If,  as  Staunton  says,  Shakespeare  does  not  contract  cere- 
monious,  his  observation  does  not  apply  to  the  present  line,  where,  if  anywhere,  a  con¬ 
traction  is  somewhere  needed;— unless  we  are  willing  tamely  to  submit  to  the  odium 
of  a  line  of  twelve  syllables,— a  humiliation  which  is,  I  think,  inevitable  if  we  are  to 
hear  in  the  measure  of  the  line  the  solemn  march  of  the  sacrificial  priests. _ Ed. 

13,  14.  eare-deaff’ning  .  .  .  Thunder]  Has  Shakespeare  any  authority  for  this 
fine  description  of  the  utterance  of  an  oracle,  other  than  the  hint  in  Dor.  and  Fawn.  ? 

17.  successefull]  In  F,  the  first  u  is  imperfect,  and  its  imperfection  is  faithfully 
reproduced  in  Booth’s  Reprint.  A  microscopic  examination  shows  that  in  my  copy 
of  Fj  it  is  u  and  not  n. 

19.  time  ,  .  .  on’t]  Johnson  gives  this  a  selfish  interpretation  by  paraphrasing 
it:  ‘the  time  which  we  have  spent  in  visiting  Delos  [sic]  has  recompensed  us  for  the 
trouble  of  so  spending  it.’  But  Malone  gives  the  better  meaning :  ‘  If  the  event 
prove  fortunate  to  the  Queen  ...  the  happy  issue  of  our  journey  will  compensate 
for  the  time  expended  in  it,  and  the  fatigue  we  have  undergone.’ 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


II 7 


Sccena  Secunda . 


Enter  Leontes ,  Lords ,  Officers  :  Hermione  {as  to  her 
Triall')  Ladies  :  Cle online s ,  Dion. 


Leo.  This  Seffions(to  our  great  griefe  we  pronounce)  4 


1.  Scene  represents  a  Court  of  Justice. 
Theob.  At  the  upper  end,  a  Throne; 
Lords,  on  either  Hand,  Judges,  and 
other  Officers,  seated ;  People  attending. 
Cap. 

2.  Enter...]  Leontes,  Lords,  and 


Officers  appear  properly  seated.  Theob. 

3.  Cleomines,  Dion]  Om.  Rowe,  et 
seq. 

4.  Sejfions ]  session  Theob  + ,  Cap.  Var. 
Rann,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

pronounce ]  pronounce  it  Ktly. 


2.  Lady  Martin  (p.  359) :  This  is  a  scene  which  makes  a  large  demand  upon  the 
resources  of  an  actress,  both  personal  and  mental.  With  enfeebled  health,  and  placed 
in  a  most  ignominious  position,  Hermione  must  be  shown  to  maintain  her  queenly 
dignity,  and  to  control  her  passionate  emotion  under  an  outward  bearing  of  resigned 
fortitude  and  almost  inconceivable  forbearance. 

In  my  early  studies  for  the  impersonation  of  Hermione,  and  in  my  acting  of  the 
character,  I  used  to  find  myself  imagining  the  procession  of  the  queen  and  her  suite 
through  the  streets,  ‘  i’  the  open  air,’  from  the  prison,  where  she  had  spent  the  last 
few  weeks,  to  the  Hall  of  Justice.  Her  ladies  are  by  her  side,  not  weeping  now,  for 
their  mistress  had  shown  them  how  to  bear  affliction.  The  fragile  form,  the  sad,  far¬ 
away  looking  eyes,  the  pale  but  lovely  face,  so  stricken  with  suffering,  reveal  too  well 
all  that  she  has  been  passing  through.  Whatever  impression  of  the  queen’s  guilt 
may  have  been  raised  in  the  people’s  mind  by  the  sudden  flight  of  Polixenes  and  his 
followers,  her  look  and  bearing,  I  felt,  must  dispel  every  thought  save  that  of  the  cruel 
indignity  with  which  she  had  been  treated.  No  taunting  voice  would  be  raised.  The 
rumour  would  have  gone  abroad  that  the  young  Prince  Mamillius  had  been  denied 
access  to  her,  that  the  newly  born  babe,  her  one  solace  in  her  prison,  had  been  taken 
from  her  and  cast  out  to  die  a  cruel  death.  The  people  would  think,  too,  of  the  in¬ 
decent  haste  which  was  now  hurrying  her  to  her  trial  before  the  Court  of  Justice, 
with  no  allowance  for  the  time  of  rest,  which,  after  the  pains  of  maternity,  ‘  ’longs  to 
women  of  all  fashion.’  Had  she  turned  her  head  towards  the  crowd,  she  would 
have  seen  the  men  with  bowed  heads  and  looks  of  reverence  and  pity, — the  women 
with  streaming  eyes  bent  tenderly  and  sympathisingly  upon  her.  But,  no !  her 
thoughts  were  away  upon  the  scene  that  awaited  her.  Would  her  strength  avail  for 
the  strain  which  she  knew  was  presently  to  be  put  upon  it,  when  alone,  unaided,  she 
must  plead  her  cause,  with  more  than  her  life, — her  honour, — at  stake,  and  with  him 
for  her  accuser  who  should  best  have  known  how  her  whole  nature  belied  his  accusa¬ 
tion  ?  Sorely,  indeed,  does  she  need  that  the  heavens  shall  look  ‘  with  an  aspect  more 
favourable  ’  upon  her. 

4.  Sessions]  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  As  Mr  W.  N.  Lettsom  observes,  in  the  concluding 
speech  of  Act  II.  we  have  ‘summon  a  session.' 


1 1 8 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 

5 


Euen  pufhes  ’gainft  our  heart.  The  partie  try’d, 

The  Daughter  of  a  King,  our  Wife,  and  one 
Of  vs  too  much  belou’d.  Let  vs  be  clear’d 
Of  being  tyrannous,  fince  we  fo  openly 
Proceed  in  Iuftice,  which  fhall  haue  due  courfe, 

Euen  to  the  Guilt,  or  the  Purgation  :  IO 

Produce  the  Prifoner. 

Officer.  It  is  his  Highneffe  pleafure,  that  the  Queene 
Appeare  in  perfon,  here  in  Court.  Silence.  1 3 


5.  Euen]  Ever  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

7.  belou'd.]  belov' d,  Rowe. 

10.  Purgation  .•]  purgation.  Rowe. 
13.  Silence.]  Silence.  Enter  Ff.  Given 
to  a  Crier,  after  line  14.  Cap.  (after  line 
13).  Dyce,  Huds.  As  a  stage-direction, 


Coll.  As  part  of  the  Officer's  speech, 
Rowe  et  cet. 

13.  [Hermione  is  brought  in  guarded ; 
Paulina  and  Ladies  attending.  Theob. 
Enter  Hermione,  to  the  Bar ;  Paulina, 
and  Ladies,  with  her;  Officers  preced¬ 
ing.  Cap. 


5.  pushes]  Steevens  :  Compare  Macb.  Ill,  i,  116: — ‘ — every  minute  of  his 
being  thrusts  Against  my  near’st  of  life.’ 

10.  Euen]  Roderick  (Edwards,  Canons,  p.  251) :  This  word  is  to  be  here  under¬ 
stood,  not  as  an  adverb,  etiam,  but  as  an  adjective,  erqualis  ;  ‘  Justice  shall  have  its 
due  course ;  equal  to  the  guilt,  or  the  innocence,  which  shall  appear  in  the  queen  upon 
her  trial.’  ‘  It  may  be  so,’  says  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i),  ‘but  the  phrase  in  its  ordinary 
sense, — that  justice  shall  have  its  course,  whether  it  lead  to  the  guilt  or  acquittal  of 
the  prisoner, — is  at  least  as  pertinent  and  forcible.’  With  this  view,  Deighton  and 
the  present  Editor  agree. 

10.  Purgation]  I  am  tempted  to  believe  that  this  sentence  is  unfinished.  If  it  be 
so,  it  indicates,  as  the  preceding  sentences  indicate,  the  excessive  perturbation  of  mind 
in  Leontes. — Ed. 

13.  Silence]  Capell  (p.  170):  This  Crier  is  of  the  editor’s  framing;  and 
‘  Silence ’  brought  from  a  line  above,  where  ’tis  of  the  officer’s  uttering  after  ‘court;' 
the  reasons  are  plain  enough.  [Which,  being  interpreted,  means  that  Capell  intro¬ 
duces  a  ‘  Crier  ’  who  proclaims  ‘  Silence  !’  after  Leontes  has  said,  ‘  Read  the  indict¬ 
ment.’] — Collier  :  Modern  editors  have  chosen  to  take  ‘  Silence  ’  as  an  exclamation 
of  the  officer ;  so  it  might  be  ;  but  the  printer  of  F,  did  not  so  understand  it,  and  the 
editor  of  F2,  when  supplying  an  obvious  omission,  did  not  think  fit  to  alter  the  read¬ 
ing.  The  word  Silence  was  probably  meant  to  mark  the  suspense  that  ought  to  be 

displayed  by  all  upon  the  stage,  on  the  entrance  of  Hermione  to  take  her  trial. _ 

Dyce  ( Remarks ,  p.  82)  :  That  the  word  belongs  either  to  the  Officer,  or  to  a  Crier,  is 
proved  by  the  following  passage  in  Henry  VIII.  at  the  opening  of  the  trial  of  Queen 
Katherine : — ‘  Wol.  Whilst  our  commission  from  Rome  is  read,  Let  silence  be  com¬ 
manded.  K.  Hen.  What’s  the  need  ?  It  hath  already  publicly  been  read  .  .  .  you 
may  then  spare  that  time.  Wol.  Be’t  so.— Proceed.’  If  the  ‘  commission  from  Rome  ’ 

had  been  read  in  court,  the  Crier  would  have  previously  proclaimed  ‘  Silence  !’ _ 

Cambridge  Editors  :  There  is  no  reason  why  ...  the  officer  who  has  already 
spoken  should  not  also  command  silence.  [It  is  of  small  moment  by  whom  the  com- 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


II9 

Leo.  Reade  the  Indiflment. 

Officer.  Hermione,  Queene  to  the  worthy  Leontes,  King  15 
of  Sicilia ,  thou  art  here  accufed  and  arraigned  of  High  Trea- 
fon,  in  committing  Adultery  with  Polixenes  King  of  Bohemia , 
and  confpiring  with  Camillo  to  take  away  the  Life  of  our  Soue- 
raigne  Lord  the  King ,  thy  Roy  all  Husband:  the  pretence  whereof 
being  by  circumjlances  partly  layd  open ,  thou{ Hermione)  con-  20 
trary  to  the  Faith  and  Allegeance  of  a  true  Subiecl  ,didfl  coun- 
faile  and  ayde  them,  for  their  better  fafetie,  to  flye  away  by 
Night. 

Her.  Since  what  I  am  to  fay,  muft  be  but  that 
Which  contradidls  my  Accufation, and  25 

The  teftimonie  on  my  part,  no  other 
But  what  comes  from  my  felfe,it  fhall  fcarce  boot  me 
To  fay,  Not  guiltie  :  mine  Integritie 
Being  counted  Falfehood,  fhall  (as  I  expreffe  it) 

Be  fo  receiu’d.  But  thus,  if  Powres  Diuine  30 

Behold  our  humane  Adlions  (as  they  doe) 

15.  Officer.]  Off.  [reads.]  Cap.  22.  flye]  flee  F3F4. 

19.  pretence]  practice  Walker  ( Crit.  26.  The]  Om.  Pope  ii. 

ii,  245).  31.  humane ]  human  Rowe. 

20.  circumftances]  circumftance  Ff, 

Rowe  i. 

mand  is  given ;  it  is  sufficient  that  a  certaim  amount  of  formality  is  maintained  to  aid 
the  illusion  that  we  are  present  in  court.  The  word  ‘  Silence !’  is  all-sufficient,  by 
by  whomsoever  uttered. — Ed.] 

14.  Indictment]  Lord  Campbell  (p.  73)  :  Though  the  indictment  is  not  alto¬ 
gether  according  to  English  legal  form,  and  might  be  held  insufficient  on  a  writ  of 
error,  we  lawyers  cannot  but  wonder  at  seeing  it  so  near  perfection  in  charging  the 
treason,  and  alleging  the  overt  act  committed  by  her  ‘  contrary  to  the  faith  and 
allegiance  of  a  true  subject.’ 

19.  pretence]  Johnson:  This  is,  in  this  place,  taken  for  a  scheme  laid,  a  design 
formed ;  to  ‘  pretend  ’  means  to  design  in  The  Two  Gent. — Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  ‘  Pretence  ’ 
is  quite  right  [see  Text.  Notes] ;  Shakespeare  found  the  word  in  Greene’s  novel : 
‘  their  pretence  being  partly  spyed,’  etc.  [See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia.] 

28.  Integritie]  Johnson  :  That  is,  my  virtue  being  accounted  wickedness ,  my 
assertion  of  it  will  pass  but  for  a  lie.  Falsehood  means  both  treachery  and  lie. 

30.  But  thus]  Deighton  :  But  as  I  have  to  speak,  this  is  what  I  say. 

31.  humane]  No  distinction  is  made  in  the  Folio,  between  human  and  humane , 
either  in  spelling  or  pronunciation.  The  accent  is  uniformly  on  the  first  syllable, 
except  in  line  178  of  this  scene.  See,  also,  V,  i,  51. 

31.  as  they  doe]  The  Cowdf.n-Clarkes  :  The  fervour,  faith,  courage,  yet  sim¬ 
plicity,  summed  in  these  three  monosyllables,  it  would  be  difficult  to  match. 


120 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iii,  sc.  ii. 


I  doubt  not  then, but  Innocence  lhall  make  32 

Falfe  Accufation  blufh,  and  Tyrannie 

Tremble  at  Patience.  You  (my  Lord,)  beft  know 

(Whom  leaft  will  feeme  to  doe  fo)  my  part  life  3  5 

Hath  beene  as  continent,  as  chafte ,  as  true, 

As  I  am  now  vnhappy  ;  which  is  more 
Then  Hiftorie  can  patterne,  though  deuis’d, 

And  play’d,  to  take  Spectators.  For  behold  me, 

A  Fellow  of  the  Royall  Bed,  which  owe  40 

A  Moitie  of  the  Throne  :  a  great  Kings  Daughter, 

The  Mother  to  a  hopefull  Prince,  here  ftanding 

To  prate  and  talke  for  Life,  and  Honor,  fore 

Who  pleafe  to  come,  and  heare.  For  Life,  I  prize  it 

As  I  weigh  Griefe  (which  I  would  fpare:)For  Honor,  45 

’Tis  a  deriuatiue  from  me  to  mine, 

33.  Accufation\  Accusations  Ff, 

Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

35-  Whom]  Who  Rowe  et  seq. 

40.  owe']  owes  Var.  ’85. 

35.  Whom]  For  many  other  examples  of  ‘  whom  ’  for  who,  see  Abbott,  §  274. 

37.  which]  Malone:  That  is,  which  unhappiness. 

40.  owe]  That  is,  own  ;  passim. 

44.  For  life,  etc.]  Johnson:  ‘Life’  is  to  me  now  only  ‘grief,’  and  as  such  only 
is  considered  by  me ;  I  would,  therefore,  willingly  dismiss  it.  To  ‘  spare  ’  anything  is 
to  let  it  go,  to  quit  the  possession  of. — Staunton:  It  is  surprising  this  passage  should 
have  passed  without  question,  for  ‘  grief’  must  surely  be  an  error.  Hermione  means 
that  life  to  her  is  of  as  little  estimation  as  the  most  trivial  thing  which  she  would  part 
with ;  and  she  expresses  the  same  sentiment  shortly  after,  in  similar  terms, — ‘  no  life, 
— I  prize  it  not  a  straw.'  Could  she  speak  of  ‘  grief’  as  a  trifle,  of  no  moment  or 
importance?  [As  an  answer  to  Staunton,  Dyce  quotes  Dr  Johnson’s  paraphrase. 
The  trace  of  sad  irony  in  Hermione’s  ‘  which  I  would  spare  ’  seems  to  have  escaped 
Staunton’s  notice. — Ed.] — Cambridge  Editors  :  Is  not  the  meaning  this,  that  Her¬ 
mione  now  holds  life  and  grief  to  be  inseparable  and  would  willingly  be  rid  of  both  ? 
Johnson’s  note  is  to  this  effect. 

45-  For  Honor]  That  is,  as  regards  honor;  as  in  Ham.  I,  v,  39: — ‘For  your 
desire  to  know  what  is  between  us,  O’ermaster  it,’  etc.  or  Lear,  II,  ii,  114: — ‘For 
you,  Edmund,  whose  virtue  .  .  .  commends  itself,  you  shall  be  ours,’  etc.  See  Ab¬ 
bott,  §  149. 

46.  me  to  mine]  Steevens  :  This  sentiment,  which  is  probably  borrowed  from 
Ecclesiasticus,  iii,  II,  cannot  be  too  often  impressed  on  the  female  mind: — ‘The 
glory  of  a  man  is  from  the  honour  of  his  father ;  and  a  mother  in  dishonour  is  a 
reproach  unto  her  children.’  [So  reads  the  text  of  the  Authorised  Version,  with  which 
in  all  likelihood  Shakespeare  was  not  familiar.  In  the  Bishops'  Bible,  of  1568,  which 
Shakespeare  knew,  and  knew  thoroughly,  this  verse  in  Ecclesiasticus  reads  quite  dif- 


43.  prate]  plead  Ktly  conj. 

fore]  'fore  Pope  et  seq. 

45.  Griefe]  speech  or  breath  Daniel. 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


1 2  I 


And  onely  that  I  ftand  for.  I  appeale 
To  your  owne  Confcience  (Sir)  before  Polixenes 
Came  to  your  Court,  how  I  was  in  your  grace, 

How  merited  to  be  fo  :  Since  he  came, 

With  what  encounter  fo  vncurrant,  I 
Haue  ftrayn’d  t’appeare  thus  ;  if  one  iot  beyond 

51.  vncurrant,  I]  uncurrent  I 'Row.  thus?  Han.  Cap.  Ktly.  I  have. ..thus  ? 

51,  52.  /  haue. ..thus;']  have  I...  Var.  ’73,  ’78,  ’85. 

ferently  from  that  which  Steevens  has  chosen  as  a  text  for  the  edification  of  the 
‘female  mind;’  it  is  as  follows: — ‘For  the  worshyp  of  a  mans  father,  is  his  owne 
worshyp:  and  the  reproche  of  the  mother,  is  the  dishonestie  of  the  sonne,’  where 
‘  the  reproche  of  the  mother  ’  means  the  reproach  cast  on  her  by  her  son’s  dishonesty, 
— a  sentiment  which  cannot  be  too  often  impressed  on  the  male  mind. — Ed.] 

47-  I  appeale]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

51,  52.  With  what  .  .  .  appeare  thus]  Johnson:  These  lines  I  do  not  under¬ 
stand  ;  with  the  licence  of  all  editors,  what  I  cannot  understand  I  suppose  unintel¬ 
ligible,  and  therefore  propose  that  they  may  be  altered  thus  :  ‘  With  what  encounter 
so  uncurrent  have  I  Been  stain'd  to  appear  thus  ?’  At  least,  I  think  it  might  be  read  : 
*  With  what  encounter  so  uncurrent  have  I  Strain’d  to  appear  thus  ?’  [Hanmer’s 
text;  except  that  ‘have  ’  closes  the  line.] — Capell  (p.  170)  :  The  place’s  wording  is 
cloudy,  and  not  to  be  commended ;  ‘  encounter  ’  must  relate  to  Polixenes,  to  her  en¬ 
counter  with  him,  and  the  light  the  editor  sees  it  in  is  as  follows :  Since  he  came,  in 
what  blameable  manner  have  I  met  his  friendship,  eagerly  met  it  (for  that  is  convey’d 
in  ‘  strain’d  ’),  that  I  should  appear  thus,  or  where  I  do  ?  the  fault  lies  in  a  discordant 
and  ill-chosen  metaphor,  fetch’d  from  racing. — Steevens  :  ‘  Uncurrent  encounter  ’ 
may  be  a  metaphor  taken  from  tilting,  in  which  the  shock  of  meeting  adversaries 
was  so  called.  The  sense  would  then  be :  ‘In  what  base  reciprocation  of  love  have 
I  caught  this  strain  ?’  Mrs  Ford  talks  of  some  ‘  strain  ’  in  her  character  [ Mer.  Wives, 
Hj  b  9J]>  and  in  Beau.  &  Fl.’s  Custom  of  the  Country  the  same  expression  occurs: 

‘  or  strain  your  loves  With  any  base  or  hir’d  persuasions.’ — [I,  i.  For  neither  of  these 
quotations  did  Steevens  give  the  reference  to  Act  and  Scene.  Neither  of  them  is 
sufficiently  parallel  to  the  present  passage.  In  Mer.  Wives  ‘  strain,’  a  noun,  refers 
to  natural  tendency ;  and  in  the  Custom  of  the  Country  it  means  constrain.] — M. 
Mason  :  Johnson  would  not  have  proposed  his  alteration  had  he  considered,  with 
attention,  the  construction  of  the  passage,  which  runs  thus :  ‘  I  appeal  to  your  own 
conscience,  with  what  encounter,’  etc.,  that  is,  ‘  I  appeal  to  your  own  conscience  to 
declare  with  what  encounter  I  have,’  etc.  The  following  words,  ‘  if  one  jot  beyond 
the  bound  of  honour,’  would  induce  me  to  think  that  we  ought  to  read  strayed  instead 
of  ‘  strayn’d,’  but  the  present  reading  is  sense. — Malone  :  ‘  I  have  strain’d  ’  may 
perhaps  mean :  ‘  I  have  swerved  or  deflected  from  the  strict  line  of  duty.’ — Col 
LIER  in  his  First  Edition  gives  a  paraphrase  by  Mr  Amyot :  ‘  I  appeal  to  your  con¬ 
science  how  it  has  happened  that  I  have  had  to  struggle  against  so  untoward  a  cur¬ 
rent,  as  to  appear  thus  before  you  in  the  character  of  a  criminal ;’  and  in  his  Second 
and  Third  Editions  adopts  the  reading  of  his  MS  Corrector :  stray'd;  wherein  the 
Corrector  agrees  with  M.  Mason. — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  ‘  Encounter  ’  was  of  old 
used  in  the  sense  of  intercourse,  of  whatever  nature ;  ‘  uncurrent  ’  may  be  taken  in 


47 

50 

52 


122 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 

53 


The  bound  of  Honor,  or  in  a£f,  or  will 
That  way  enclining,  hardned  be  the  hearts 
Of  all  that  heare  me,  and  my  neer’ft  of  Kin  5  5 

Cry  fie  vpon  my  Graue. 

Leo.  I  ne’re  heard  yet, 

That  any  of  thefe  bolder  Vices  wanted 
Leffe  Impudence  to  gaine-fay  what  they  did, 

Then  to  performe  it  firft.  60 

Her.  That’s  true  enough, 

Though  ’tis  a  faying  (Sir)  not  due  to  me. 

Leo.  You  will  not  owne  it. 

Her.  More  then  Miftreffe  of, 

Which  comes  to  me  in  name  of  Fault,  I  muft  not  65 

At  all  acknowledge.  For  Polixenes 
(With  whom  I  am  accus’d)  I  doe  confeffe 
I  lou’d  him,  as  in  Honor  he  requir’d  : 

With  fuch  a  kind  of  Loue,  as  might  become 
A  Lady  like  me  ;  with  a  Loue,  euen  fuch,  70 


53.  bound ]  bounds  Rowe-)-,  Var. ’73. 

54.  enclining\  inclining  Theob. 

58.  thefe]  thofe  F^,  Rowe-f  ,  Var.  ’73. 
wanted]  vented  Bailey  (ii,  369). 

59.  Impudence]  impudence  F  . 

60.  64.  Then]  Than  F^. 

61.  That’s]  That  is  F^. 


64.  Miftreffe  of]  mistress  of;  Rowe. 
mistress  of  Pope.  I’m  mistress  of,  Han. 
Ktly.  my  distress  Daniel,  Sprenger. 
misreport  or  misprision  or  my  stress  of 
fortune  or,  line  omitted,  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

65.  Which]  What  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Var.  ’73. 


the  sense  of  unallowable  ;  and  *  strain’d  ’  plainly  means  to  go  astray,  to  swerve  from 
the  right  path.  .  .  .  Still  it  is  possible  that  the  passage  is  corrupted ;  in  which  case  the 
misprint  is  probably  in  the  word  *  uncurrent.’  [In  his  Second  Edition  White  pro¬ 
nounces  the  passage  ‘very  involved,  elliptical,  obscure,  and  perhaps  corrupt.’] _ Hal- 

liwell  :  In  other  words,  I  appeal  to  you  to  tell  me,  since  Polixenes  came  to  your 
Court,  with  what  conversation  or  marks  of  affection  beyond  those  currently  allowed 
by  society  have  I  passed  bounds,  to  justify  my  appearance  in  this  manner  as  a  crim¬ 
inal. — Staunton  :  That  is,  By  what  unwarrantable  familiarity  have  I  lapsed,  that  I 
should  be  made  to  stand  as  a  public  criminal  thus  ?  [Possibly,  the  first  clause,  ‘  With 
what  encounter  so  uncurrent,  I  have  strain’d  to  appear  thus,’  is  unfinished.— Ed.] 

58,  59.  wanted  Lesse  Impudence]  See  Note,  I,  ii,  304.  Also  see  Dorastus 
and  Fawma. — Johnson  :  It  is  apparent  that  according  to  the  proper,  at  least  accord- 
ing  to  the  present,  use  of  words,  ‘  less  ’  should  be  more,  or  ‘  wanted  ’  should  be  had. 
But  Shakespeare  is  very  uncertain  in  his  use  of  negatives.  It  may  be  necessary  once 
to  observe,  that  in  our  language,  two  negatives  did  not  originally  affirm,  but  strengthen 
the  negation.  This  mode  of  speech  was  in  time  changed,  but,  as  the  change  was 
made  in  opposition  to  long  custom,  it  proceeded  gradually,  and  uniformity  was  not 
obtained  but  through  an  intermediate  confusion. 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


123 


So,  and  no  other,  as  your  felfe  commanded  :  71 

Which,  not  to  haue  done,  I  thinke  had  been  in  me 
Both  Difobedience,and  Ingratitude 
To  you,  and  toward  your  Friend,  whole  Loue  had  fpoke, 

Euen  fince  it  could  fpeake,from  an  Infant,  freely,  75 

That  it  was  yours.  Now  for  Confpiracie, 

I  know  not  how  it  taftes,  though  it  be  dilh’d 
For  me  to  try  how  :  All  I  know  of  it, 

Is,  that  Camillo  was  an  honeft  man  ; 

And  why  he  left  your  Court,  the  Gods  themfelues  80 

(Wotting  no  more  then  I)  are  ignorant. 

Leo.  You  knew  of  his  departure,  as  you  know 
What  you  haue  vnderta’ne  to  doe  in’s  abfence. 

Her.  Sir, 

You  fpeake  a  Language  that  I  vnderftand  not :  85 

My  Life  ftands  in  the  leuell  of  your  Dreames, 

Which  He  lay  downe. 

Leo.  Your  Actions  are  my  Dreames. 

You  had  a  Baftard  by  Polixenes , 

And  I  but  dream’d  it  :  As  you  were  pall  all  fhame,  90 


73.  Ingratitude ]  in  gratitude  F4. 

74.  toward  ]  towards  F3F4,  Rowe-t- , 
Var.  Rann. 

Friend ]  friends  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

75.  Euen]  Ever  Ed.  conj. 

82-84.  You  knew. ..Sir]  As  two  lines, 


ending  what. ..Sir,  reading  You've  in 
line  83,  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

83.  in's]  in  his  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Mai. 
Steer.  Var.  Knt,  Ktly. 

84,  85.  One  line,  Cap. 

90.  were]  are  Han. 


76-78.  Conspiracie,  .  .  .  how:]  Deighton:  That  is,  I  am  an  utter  stranger  to 
its  taste,  and  should  be  so  even  if  it  were  served  up  for  me  to  try. 

79.  was]  Both  sense  and  rhythm  require  an  emphasis  on  this  word. — Ed. 

86.  leuell]  See  II,  iii,  8. — Johnson  :  This  means,  by  a  metaphor  from  archery  to 
be  within  the  reach. — Staunton  :  To  be  in  the  level  is  to  be  within  the  range  or 
compass  : — ‘  and  therefore  when  under  his  covert  or  pertision  he  is  gotten  within  his 
levell  and  hath  the  Winde  fit  and  certaine,  then  he  shall  make  choice  of  his  marke,' 
etc. — Markham’s  Hunger’s  Prevention ,  1621,  p.  45.  The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  A 
beautifully  poetical  way  of  saying  that  her  life  lies  at  the  mercy  of  his  false  fancies. — 
Deighton  :  Not  exactly  within  the  reach,  as  Johnson  says,  but  in  a  direct  line  with, 
and  so  in  danger  of  being  hit. — Rolfe  :  My  life  is  at  the  mercy  of  your  suspicions, 
which  are  like  ‘  the  baseless  fabric  ’  of  a  dream.  [Whencesoever  the  metaphor,  I 
think  that  ‘in’  is  here  equivalent  simply  to  on.  ‘You  speak,’  says  Hermione,  ‘  a 
language  I  understand  not;  my  life, — the  actions  you  impute  to  me, — and  your 
dreams  are  on  a  level.’  That  this  is  the  meaning  is  confirmed,  I  think,  by  the 
intense  scorn  with  which  Leontes  repeats  almost  her  very  words:  ‘  Your  actions  are 
my  dreams  !  I  dream' d  you  had  a  bastard  !’ — Ed.] 


124 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


(Thofe  of  your  Fa£t  are  fo)  fo  paft  all  truth;  91 

Which  to  deny,  concernes  more  then  auailes :  for  as 
Thy  Brat  hath  been  caft  out,  like  to  it  felfe, 

No  Father  owning  it(which  is  indeed 

More  criminall  in  thee,  then  it)  fo  thou  95 

Shalt  feele  our  Iuftice ;  in  whofe  eafieft  paffage, 

Looke  for  no  leffe  then  death. 

Her.  Sir,  fpare  your  Threats  : 

The  Bugge  which  you  would  fright  me  with,  I  feeke:  99 


91.  are  fo)  fo)  are)  so  you’re  Han. 

92.  Which ]  Om,  Cap. 

Which. ..auailes)  One  line,  Han. 
for  as ]  Separate  line,  Steev.  Var. 


’°3>  >l3t  Knt,  Dyce  ii,  iii.  Commencing 
line  93,  Abbott,  §  499. 

93.  Bral  hath  been ]  brat's  Han. 

99.  me ]  we  Cap.  (corrected  in  Er¬ 
rata). 


91.  Fa<5t]  Johnson  :  I  do  not  remember  that  ‘  fact  ’  is  used  anywhere  absolutely 
for  guilt,  which  must  be  its  sense  in  this  place.  Perhaps  we  should  read  pack.  Pack 
is  a  low  coarse  word  well  suited  to  the  rest  of  this  royal  invective. — Farmer  :  I 
should  guess  sect  to  be  the  right  word.  [So  also  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  101.)] — 
Steevens  :  It  may,  however,  mean, — ‘  those  who  have  done  as  you  do.’ — Malone  : 
That  ‘  fact  ’  is  the  true  reading  is  proved  decisively  from  the  words  of  the  novel : — ‘  to 
deny  such  a  monstrous  crime,  and  to  be  impudent  in  forswearing  the  fact ,  since  she 
had  passed  all  shame]  etc.  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. — STAUNTON  :  That  is,  those 
of  your  crime.  Thus  in  Per.  IV,  iii :  ‘  Becoming  well  thy  fact.’ — R.  G.  White 
(ed.  i)  :  That  is,  those  who  do  what  you  have  done, — the  radical  sense  of  the  word. 
— Lettsom  (Footnote  to  Walker,  Crit.  iii,  101):  ‘Fact’  has  been  defended  on  the 
ground  that  in  a  passage,  which  no  doubt,  Shakespeare  imitates  here,  we  find  the 
word  deny,  the  phrase  *  passed  all  shame,’  and,  in  particular,  the  expression  ‘  for¬ 
swearing  the  fact’ ;  in  other  words,  that,  because  Greene  used  fact  in  one  combina¬ 
tion,  Shakespeare  used  it  in  another. 

92.  concernes]  Halliwell  :  In  other  words,  the  denial  is  your  business,  but  it 
avails  thee  nothing ;  or,  perhaps,  troubles  you  without  availing  with  us. 

93.  like  to  it  selfe]  That  is,  as  a  brat  should  be  cast  out.  Hudson  says  he  could 
make  nothing  of  the  phrase,  and,  therefore,  adopted  Keightley’s  suggestion  left, 
which,  the  latter  remarked,  made  ‘  better  sense  ’  than  ‘  like.’ — Ed. 

98-121.  Sir,  spare  your  Threats  :  etc.]  Hudson  (p.  23)  :  Hermione’s  last  speech 
at  the  trial  is,  I  am  apt  to  think,  the  solidest  piece  of  eloquence  in  the  language.  It 
is  like  a  piece  of  the  finest  statuary  marble,  chiselled  into  perfect  form;  so  compact 
of  grain  that  you  cannot  crush  it  into  smaller  space ;  while  its  effect  is  as  wholesome 
and  bracing  as  the  atmosphere  of  an  iced  mountain  when  tempered  by  the  Summer 
sun. . . .  Noble  simplicity  of  the  olden  time,  when  the  best  and  purest  of  women,  with 
the  bravest  men  in  presence,  thought  no  shame  to  hear  themselves  speaking  such 
plain  honest  words  as  these  ! 

99.  Bugge]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.)  :  Middle  English  bugge,  possibly  from  Welsh 
bwg  ( =  bug)  ‘  a  ghost,’  quoted  in  Lhwyd’s  Archceologia  Brit.  (1707),  214,  from  the 
MS  Welsh  Vocabulary  of  Henry  Salesbury  (born  1561).  Owen  Pugh  has  bug, 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


125 


To  me  can  Life  be  no  commoditie ;  IOO 

The  crowne  and  comfort  of  my  Life(your  Fauor) 

I  doe  giue  loft,  for  I  doe  feele  it  gone, 

But  know  not  how  it  went.  My  fecond  Ioy, 

And  firft  Fruits  of  my  body,  from  his  prefence 

I  am  bar’d,  like  one  infedtious.  My  third  comfort  105 

(Star’d  moft  vnluckily)  is  from  my  breaft 

(The  innocent  milke  in  it  moft  innocent  mouth  ) 

Hal’d  out  to  murther.  My  felfe  on  euery  Poft 

Proclaym’d  a  Strumpet :  With  immodeft  hatred 

The  Child-bed  priuiledge  deny’d,  which  longs  no 

To  Women  of  all  fafhion.  Laftly,  hurried 


104.  And]  The  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Var.  ’73. 

105.  Iam ]  I'm  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 
bar’d,  like\  barr'd  [with  a  sti¬ 
fled  sob  in  her  voice]  like  Lady  Mar¬ 
tin. 

107.  in  it]  Ff,  Wh.  Sta.  Ktly,  Cam. 


Rife,  Dtn.  in  it’s  Cap.  in  its  Rowe 
et  cet. 

108.  murther ]  F2,  Cap.  Knt,  Wh.  i. 
murder  F3F4  et  cet. 

109.  Strumpet  .-...hatred]  strumpet... 
hatred ;  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Rann. 

110.  longs ]  ’longs  F$F4. 


‘  hobgoblin,  scarecrow  ’ ;  but  the  word  is  apparently  now  known  chiefly  in  its  deriv¬ 
atives.  When  bug  became  current  as  the  name  of  an  insect,  this  sense  fell  into 
disuse,  and  now  survives  only  in  the  compound  Bugbear. 

107.  in  it]  See  II,  iii,  214. — Dyce  ( Pref.  to  Second  Ed.  p.  xv)  excuses  his  sub¬ 
stitution  in  the  present  passage  of  its  for  ‘  it,’  ‘  because,’  he  says,  ‘  unless  I  were  indif¬ 
ferent  about  persevering  consistency,  I  could  not  retain  “  it,”  and  yet  in  another 
passage,  I,  ii,  183,  184,  print,  with  the  Folio,  “  it’s.”  ’  To  make  an  honest  pentameter 
of  this  line  Abbott,  §  468,  ‘  almost  ignores  ’  the  o  in  both  ‘  innocents.’ 

108.  Post]  That  there  were  posts  to  which  play-bills  were  affixed,  we  know  from 
allusions  in  old  plays ;  but  whether  or  not  they  were  exclusively  reserved  for  play-bills, 
I  do  not  know.  In  the  Induction  to  A  Warning  for  Fair  Women,  1599,  we  find: 
‘’Tis  you  have  kept  the  theatres  so  long,  Painted  in  play-bills  upon  every  post.’ — 
Collier’s  Eng.  Dram.  Poetry,  iii,  188.  Furthermore,  ‘at  the  doors  of  sheriffs  were 
usually  set  up  ornamented  posts,  on  which  royal  and  civic  proclamations  were  fixed.’ 
— Dyce,  Gloss,  s.  v.  Sheriff.  It  is  probable  that  Hermione  refers  to  these  ‘  posts  ’  to 
which  were  affixed  the  royal  official  summons  for  a  session,’  commanded  by  Leontes 
(II,  iii,  242) ;  or  she  may  refer  to  the  Proclamation,  wherein  she  was  denounced  in 
most  opprobrious  terms;  this  Proclamation  was  ‘blazed  through  the  country;’  see 
Dorastus  and  Fawnia. — Ed. 

HO.  longs]  See  Abbott,  §  460,  for  many  examples  where  prefixes  are  dropped. 

ill.  of  all  fashion]  In  a  Supplement  to  vol.  ii  of  Walker’s  Crit.,  extracts  are 
given  from  ‘  Ancient  Words,  Forms  of  Words,’  etc.  These  extracts  are  disconnected 
jottings,  which  doubtless  would  have  been  modified  had  Walker  lived  to  supervise 
them;  as  we  now  have  them  they  are  valuable  hints.  No.  22  (p.  348),  is  as  follows: 

. — ‘  People,  etc.,  of  fashion,  for  people  of  rank.  Winter’s  Tale  [the  present  phrase 
here  quoted]  So,  people  of  rank,  quality,  condition,  for  people  of  the  highest  rank, 


126 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Here,  to  this  place,  i’th’  open  ayre,  before  112 

I  haue  got  (Length  of  limit.  Now(my  Liege) 

Tell  me  what  bleffings  I  haue  here  aliue, 

That  I  fhould  feare  to  die  ?  Therefore  proceed  :  1 15 

But  yet  heare  this  :  miftake  me  not  :  no  Life, 


1 1 2.  Here ,  A?]  Here  to  Pope  et  seq. 

1 13.  limit ]  limbs  F3F4,  Rowe,  limbs. 
And  Pope,  Han. 

1 14.  what]  watY . 

1 16.  no  Life,]  no  !  life,  Han.  Var.  ’78, 


’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  no 
life —  Theob.  Warb.  Johns,  no  life  ; 
Cap.  Var.  ’73.  No:  life.  Coll,  my  life, 
Wh.  i,  Huds.  for  life,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly 
conj.,  Rife. 


etc.’  From  which  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  Walker  interpreted  this  line  in  a  way 
which  differs  from  that  in  which,  I  am  quite  sure,  it  is  generally  understood.  It  is 
generally  supposed  to  mean :  ‘  women  of  all  degrees,  high  and  low,  alike,’  but 
Walker  takes  it  as:  ‘all  women  of  the  highest  rank.’ — Ed. 

III.  Lastly]  Bucknill  (p.  130):  Hastily  is  a  reading  which  I  venture  to  sug¬ 
gest  in  place  of  ‘  Lastly,’  which  breaks  the  construction  and  sense  of  the  passage,  it 
being  evident  that  the  denial  of  child-bed  privilege  is  one  and  the  same  offence 
against  decency  and  humanity,  as  the  poor  woman’s  exposure  in  open  court  while 
still  suffering  from  parturient  debility. 

II3-  limit]  Theobald:  That  is,  strength  enough  for  coming  abroad,  going 
never  so  little  a  way,  so  in  Cymb.  Ill,  iii,  35  ‘  A  prison,  for  a  debtor  that  not 

dares  To  stride  a  limit.’— Heath  (p.  212):  That  is,  before  I  have  recovered  that 
degree  of  strength,  which  women  in  my  circumstances  usually  acquire  by  a  longer 
confinement  to  their  chamber.— Johnson  :  I  know  not  well  how  ‘  strength  of  limit  ’ 
can  mean  strength  to  pass  the  limits  of  the  child-bed  chamber  j.  which  yet  it  must 
mean  in  this  place,  unless  we  read  in  a  more  easy  phrase,  ‘  strength  of  limb.  And 
now,’  etc. — Halliwell:  That  is,  before  even  I  have  regained  a  limited  degree  of 
strength.  ‘  Strength  of  limit  ’  is  limited  strength.  So  in  Mer.  of  Yen.  <  your  mind 
of  love  ’  is  your  loving  mind.— R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  Before  I  have  regained  strength 
by  limit,  restraint,  confinement,  after  child-birth.  [In  the  Var.  1785,  Steevens  asserted 
that  ‘  limit  was  anciently  used  for  limbs, ,  on  the  strength  of  the  following  passage  in 
Titana  [sic]  and  Theseus,  a  black  letter  history  of  which  he  had  no  copy  of  an 
earlier  date  than  1636:— ‘very  strange  that  nature  should  endow  so  fair  a  face  with 
so  hard  a  heart,  such  comely  limits  with  such  perverse  conditions.’  This  note  he  did 
not  repeat  in  his  subsequent  editions,  possibly  because  of  the  absurdity  of  interpreting 
the  ‘  face  ’  as  a  limb.  Nor  would  it  have  been  repeated  here,  had  it  not  misled  Nares 
(Glossary).  If  it  could  be  proved  that  ‘  limit  ’  had  a  special  meaning,  corresponding 
to  what  is  now  called,  with  a  special  meaning,  confinement,  the  interpretations  refer¬ 
ring  to  child-birth  would  be  unquestionable,  but,  without  this  proof,  I  think  Halli- 
well’s  paraphrase  the  best. — Ed. 

116.  no  Life,]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  Such  an  exclamation  [as  No!  life,  see 
Text.  Notes]  is  not  in  place ;  and  it  seems  plain  that  ‘  no  ’  is  a  misprint  for  my,  and 
that  ‘  my  life  ’  is  antithetical  to  ‘  mine  honour.’  See  Hermione’s  previous  speech 'in  this 
Scene,  line  44.— Dyce  merely  repeats  the  same  reference  to  line  44.— Rolfe  :  The 
Folio  ‘no  life,’  might  pass  with  Hanmer’s  pointing.  It  seems  more  probable,  how¬ 
ever,  that  ‘no’  is  a  misprint.— Deighton  :  A  note  of  admiration  seems  necessary 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


127 


(I  prize  it  not  a  ftraw)  but  for  mine  Honor,  1 17 

Which  I  would  free:  if  I  fhall  be  condemn’d 
Vpon  furmizes  (all  proofes  deeping  elfe, 

But  what  your  Iealoufies  awake)  I  tell  you  120 

’Tis  Rigor,  and  not  Law.  Your  Honors  all, 

I  doe  referre  me  to  the  Oracle  : 

Apollo  be  my  Iudge. 

Lord.  This  your  requeft 

Is  altogether  iuft  :  therefore  bring  forth  1 25 

(And  in  Apollo’s  Name)  his  Oracle. 

Her.  The  Emperor  of  Ruffia  was  my  Father. 

Oh  that  he  were  aliue,  and  here  beholding 
His  Daughters  Tryall  :  that  he  did  but  fee 

The  datneffe  of  my  miferie  ;  yet  with  eyes  1 30 

Of  Pitty,  not  Reuenge. 

Officer. You  here  fhal  fweare  vpon  this  Sword  of  Iuftice,  1 32 


123.  Scene  iii.  Enter  Dion  and  Cleo- 
mines  Pope  +  . 

124.  Lord.]  1.  L.  Cap. 

requeJT\  requeft.  Enter  Dion 
and  Cleomines.  Ff. 

126.  Apollo’s]  Apoll’s  F2. 


126.  [Exeunt  certain  officers.  Cap. 

131.  [Re-enter  Officers,  with  Cleom- 
enes  and  Dion,  bringing  in  the  Oracle. 
Cap. 

132.  this  Sword ]  the  Sword  Ff, 
Rowed-,  Var.  ’73,  Rann. 


after  ‘  no,’  unless  for  be  the  right  reading,  as  Dyce  and  others  edit.  [I  cannot  but 
believe  that  this  phrase  has  been  misunderstood.  With  line  115,  Hermione  ends  her 
defence,  by  commanding  the  trial  to  proceed.  Then  the  thought  of  a  sullied  name 
flashes  upon  her,  and  that  she  has  not  with  sufficient  emphasis  contended  for  the 
preservation  of  her  honour ;  she  hastily  resumes,  but  fearing  lest  the  king  should  mis¬ 
interpret,  and  suppose  that  it  is  to  plead  for  life,  and  not  for  what  was,  for  her  boy’s 
sake,  infinitely  dearer  to  her,  she  exclaims :  ‘  Mistake  me  not !  No  life  !  Give  me 
not  that!  I  prize  it  not  a  straw!’  It  is  really  the  climax  of  the  speech.  Self-com¬ 
miseration  has  vanished,  and  she  speaks  for  her  honour  with  the  last  fire  of  her  ex¬ 
hausted  strength.  The  lines  from  ‘  mistake  me  not  ’  to  ‘  I  would  free,’  inclusive,  are 
parenthetical.  *  ’Tis  rigor  and  not  law  !’  the  last  words  she  ever  addresses  through¬ 
out  the  play  to  her  husband,  are  full  of  the  sternness  of  Fate,  and  mean,  of  course, 
that  her  honour  will  remain  unblemished. — -Ed.] 

121.  Law]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

130.  flatness]  Johnson:  That  is,  how  low,  how  flat  I  am  laid  by  my  calamity. 
[Schmidt’s  definition  is  better :  completeness .] — Lady  Martin  :  Then  thinking  with 
what  direful  vengeance  he  would  have  smitten  her  accuser,  she  adds  with  her  accus¬ 
tomed  merciful  tenderness  :  ‘  Yet  with  eyes  Of  pity,  not  revenge  !’ 

132.  sweare]  Lord  Campbell  (p.  73) :  It  is  remarkable  that  Cleomenes  and 
Dion  .  .  .  are  sworn  to  the  genuineness  of  the  document  they  produce  almost  in  the 
very  words  now  used  by  the  Lord  Chancellor  when  an  officer  presents  at  the  bar  of 
the  House  of  Lords  the  copy  of  a  record  of  a  Court  of  Justice. 


128 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


That  you  ( Cleomines  and  Dion )  haue 

Been  both  at  Delphos,and  from  thence  haue  brought 

This  feal’d-vp  Oracle,  by  the  Hand  deliuer’d 

Of  great  Apollo's  Prieft  ;  and  that  fince  then, 

You  haue  not  dar’d  to  breake  the  holy  Seale, 

Nor  read  the  Secrets  in’t. 

Cleo  Dio.  All  this  we  fweare. 

Leo.  Breake  vp  the  Seales,  and  read. 

Officer.  Hermione  is  chajl ,  Polixenes  blameleffe ,  Camillo 
a  true  Subiecl ,  Leontes  a  iealous  Tyrant ,  his  innocent  Babe 
truly  begotten ,  and  the  Ki?ig /hall  line  without  an  Heire,  if  that 
which  is  lojl ,  be  not  found. 

Lords.  Now  bleffed  be  the  great  Apollo. 

Her.  Prayfed. 

Leo.  Haft  thou  read  truth  ? 


133 

135 


140 


145 

147 


141.  Officer.]  Off.  [reads]  Cap.  147.  truth']  the  truth  F3F4,  Rowe, 

chaff]  caff  F2.  Pope,  Han.  true  Jervis  (p.  13). 

138,  etc.  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

143.  King  shall  liue]  Collier:  The  edition  of  ‘Pandosto’  of  1588  reads  ‘his 
babe  an  innocent ;  the  King  shall  die  without  an  heire,’  etc.  The  editions  subsequent 
to  that  of  1588,  read  ‘  his  babe  innocent,’  and  ‘the  King  shall  live  without  an  heire,’ 
etc.  Therefore  Shakespeare  employed  one  of  the  later  impressions;  probably  that 
of  1609,  the  year  before  we  suppose  him  to  have  commenced  this.  play.  [Collier  in 
his  Shakespeare’s  Library  (i,  21)  professes  to  follow  the  ed.  of  1588,  yet  he  prints 
‘  his  babe  innocent,  and  the  King  shall  live  without  an  heire,’  etc.  W.  C.  Hazlitt  in 
his  Reprint  of  Collier  professes  also  to  follow  the  ed.  of  1588;  he  gives  us  ‘  his  Babe 
an  innocent,  and  the  King  shall  live  without  an  heire,’  etc.  Grosart’s  Reprint 
follows  Hazlitt. — Ed,] 

144-  found]  Coleridge  (p.  252) :  Although,  on  the  whole,  this  play  is  exquisitely 
respondent  to  its  title,  and,  even  in  the  fault  I  am  about  to  mention,  still  a  winter’s 
tale ;  yet  it  seems  a  mere  indolence  of  the  great  bard  not  to  have  provided  in  the 
oracular  response  some  ground  for  Hermione’s  seeming  death  and  fifteen  years’  vol¬ 
untary  concealment.  This  might  have  been  easily  effected  by  some  obscure  sentence 
of  the  Oracle,  as  for  example : — ‘  Nor  shall  he  ever  recover  an  heir,  if  he  have  a  wife 
before  that  recovery.’  [It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  Coleridge,  perhaps  the  very  finest 
of  Shakespearian  critics,  could  have  written  this  note.  With  such  a  clause  as  he  sug¬ 
gests,  Paulina’s  occupation  would  thereafter  have  been  gone.  It  is  her  part  to  hold 
Leontes  from  marrying  again  by  keeping  constantly  vivid  before  him  the  perfections 
of  his  lost  Hermione.  But,  above  all,  by  such  a  clause,  the  meaning  and  effect  of  the 
play  would  have  been  distorted.  It  was  not  ‘  mere  indolence  ’  but  knowledge  of 
human  nature  which  kept  Shakespeare  from  inserting  it.  Had  Leontes  been  restrained 
from  marriage  by  the  words  of  an  Oracle  and  not  by  heart-broken  contrition  and 
devotion  to  Hermione’s  memory,  he  would  never  have  won  from  us  that  pity  which 
goes  far  to  help  us  to  forgive  him. — Ed.] 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 

Offic.  I(my  Lord)euen  fo  as  it  is  here  fet  downe. 

Leo.  There  is  no  truth  at  all  i’th’Oracle: 

The  Seffions  fhall  proceed:  this  is  meere  falfehood. 

Ser.  My  Lord  the  King  :  the  King  ? 

Leo.  What  is  the  bufineffe  ? 

Ser.  O  Sir,  I  fhall  be  hated  to  report  it. 

The  Prince  your  Sonne,  with  meere  conceit,  and  feare 
Of  the  Queenes  fpeed,  is  gone.  1 55 

Leo.  How  ?  gone  ? 

Ser.  Is  dead.  157 


129 

148 

150 


148.  Dividing  line  at  fo  Cap. 
it  w]  Om.  Han. 

150.  Seffions']  Session  Theob. +  ,  Var. 
Rann,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

1 5 1.  King?]  King —  Theob. +  . 

King!  Han.  Cap. 


151.  [Enter  a  Servant.  Rowe.  Enter 
a  Gentleman,  hastily.  Cap. 

156.  How?  gone?]  How ,  gone? 
Rowe.  How  gone  ?  Pope.  How  !  gone  ? 
Cap. 


154.  meere  conceit]  ‘Mere’  here,  and  in  line  150,  is  pure,  in  its  Latin  sense. 
‘The  noun  “conceit,”’  says  Craik  ( Jul.  Cces.  I,  iii,  162),  ‘which  survives  with  a 
limited  meaning  (the  conception  of  a  man  by  himself,  which  is  so  apt  to  be  one  of 
over-estimation),  is  frequent  in  Shakespeare  with  the  sense,  nearly,  of  what  we  now 
call  conception,  in  general.’  See  Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  i,  102  of  this  ed.,  where  this  note 
of  Craik  is  quoted  in  full. — Ed. 

155.  speed]  Johnson  :  Of  the  event  of  the  queen’s  trial;  so  we  still  say,  he  sped 
well  or  ill. 

157.  Is  dead]  Swinburne  (p.  222)  :  To  the  very  end  I  must  confess  that  I 
have  in  me  so  much  of  the  spirit  of  Rachel  weeping  in  Ramah,  as  will  not  be  com¬ 
forted  because  Mamillius  is  not.  It  is  well  for  those  whose  hearts  are  light  enough, 
to  take  perfect  comfort  even  in  the  substitution  of  his  sister  Perdita  for  the  boy  who 
died  of  ‘  thoughts  high  for  one  so  tender.’  Even  the  beautiful  suggestion  that  Shake¬ 
speare  as  he  wrote  had  in  mind  his  own  dead  little  son  still  fresh  and  living  at  his 
heart  can  hardly  add  more  than  a  touch  of  additional  tenderness  to  our  perfect  and 
piteous  delight  in  him.  And  even  in  her  daughter’s  embrace  it  seems  hard  if  his 
mother  should  have  utterly  forgotten  the  little  voice  that  had  only  time  to  tell  her  just 
eight  words  of  that  ghost  story  which  neither  she  nor  we  were  ever  to  hear  ended. 
Any  one  but  Shakespeare  would  have  sought  to  make  pathetic  profit  out  of  the  child 
by  the  easy  means  of  showing  him  if  but  once  again  as  changed  and  stricken  to  the 
death  for  want  of  his  mother  and  fear  for  her  and  hunger  and  thirst  at  his  little  high 
heart  for  the  sight  and  touch  of  her ;  Shakespeare  only  could  find  a  better  way,  a 
nobler  and  a  deeper  chord  to  strike,  by  giving  us  our  last  glimpse  of  him  as  he 
laughed  and  chattered  with  her  ‘  past  enduring,’  to  the  shameful  neglect  of  those 
ladies  in  the  natural  blueness  of  whose  eyebrows  as  well  as  their  noses  he  so  stoutly 
declined  to  believe.  And  at  the  very  end  (as  aforesaid)  it  may  be  that  we  remember 
him  all  the  better  because  the  father  whose  jealousy  killed  him  and  the  mother  for 
love  of  whom  he  died  would  seem  to  have  forgotten  the  little  brave  sweet  spirit  with 
all  its  truth  of  love  and  tender  sense  of  shame  as  perfectly  and  unpardonably  as 


9 


130 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Leo.  Apollo's  angry, and  the  Heauens  themfelues  158 

Doe  ft-iike  at  my  Iniuftice.  How  now  there  ? 

Paul. This  newes  is  mortall  to  the  Queene:Look  downe  160 
And  fee  what  Death  is  doing. 

Leo.  Take  her  hence  : 

Her  heart  is  but  o’re-charg’d  :  fhe  will  recouer. 

I  haue  too  much  beleeu’d  mine  owne  fufpition  : 

’Befeech  you  tenderly  apply  to  her  165 

Some  remedies  for  life.  Apollo  pardon 
My  great  prophaneneffe  ’gainft  thine  Oracle . 

He  reconcile  me  to  Polixenes , 

New  woe  my  Queene,  recall  the  good  Camillo 

(  Whom  I  proclaime  a  man  of  Truth,  of  Mercy:  )  170 

For  being  tranfported  by  my  Iealoufies 

To  bloody  thoughts,  and  to  reuenge,  I  chofe 

Camillo  for  the  minifter,  to  poyfon 

My  friend  Polixenes  :  which  had  been  done , 

But  that  the  good  mind  of  Camillo  tardied  175 

My  fwift  command  :  though  I  with  Death,  and  with 
Reward,  did  threaten  and  encourage  him, 

Not  doing  it,  and  being  done  :  he(moft  humane,  178 


159.  jlAke)  Fr. 

How  now  there  ?]  How  now , 
there  ?  Theob.  How  now  ?  there  !  Johns. 
[Her.  faints.  Rowe. 

163.  [Exeunt  Paulina  and  Ladies, 
with  Hermione.  Rowe. 

164.  Scene  iv.  Pope-f. 


167.  prophaneneffe}  F  . 

169.  New  woe]  New  wooe  FaF3.  New 
woo  F  .  New-woo  Cap.  Mai. 

1 70.  Mercy .')]  mercy.)  Rowe  ii. 
mercy.  Han. 

178.  humane ]  human  F4,  Rowe. 


Shakespeare  himself  at  the  close  of  King  Lear  would  seem  to  have  forgotten  one 
who  never  had  forgotten  Cordelia. 

Lady  Martin:  Upon  this,  a  cry  echoes  through  the  hall  like  a  death-knell;  the 
cry  of  a  soul  from  which  all  happiness,  all  hope,  are  gone ;  the  cry  of  a  broken  heart, 
which  shakes  every  other  in  the  assembled  crowd ;  a  cry  that  will  ring  in  the  ears  of 
Leontes  ever  after,  and  that  even  now  chases  from  his  brain  every  mad  delusion. 
Upon  the  instant  his  senses  return  to  him,  and  all  his  monstrous  distrust  and  cruelty 
and  their  consequences  are  seen  by  him  in  their  true  light.  .  .  .  Fly  to  her  side,  he 
dare  not, — he,  unworthy  to  touch  her  whom  he  had  so  foully  slandered.  .  .  .  Then 
follows  a  burst  of  contrition,  in  which  those  better  qualities  are  seen,  which  had  won 
and  kept  for  him  until  now  the  love  of  his  pure,  high-hearted  queen.  They  come 
back  as  suddenly  as  they  had  left  him. 

176-178.  though  I  .  .  .  being  done]  An  example  of  what  Corson  has  called 
•  respective  construction.’  Thus :  though  I  with  death  did  threaten  him  not  doing 


ACT  III,  SC.  li.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


131 

And  fill’d  with  Honor)  to  my  Kingly  Gueft 

Vnclafp’d  my  pradlife,  quit  his  fortunes  here  180 

(Which  you  knew  great)  and  to  the  hazard 

181.  great]  to  be  great  Anon.  ap.  Cam.  ’03,  ’13,  Dyce  ii,  iii.  hazard  boldly 

hazard  ]  certain  hazard  Ff,  Ktly.  hazarding  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

Rowe+,  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Steev.  Var. 


it,  and  with  reward  did  encourage  him,  it  being  done.  The  curious  reader  will  find 
an  extraordinary  example  of  this  ‘  respective  construction  ’  by  Joshua  Sylvester  in 
his  translation  of  Du  Bartas,  p.  408,  ed.  1632,  where  seven  epigrams  from  the  Latin 
of  ‘  Mr  Henry  Smith,’  on  a  King,  a  Lawyer,  a  Physician,  a  Divine,  a  Judge,  a  Hus¬ 
bandman,  and  a  Captaine,  are  summed  up  in  two  lines,  the  first  line  consisting  of 
verbs,  each  verb  governed  by  its  respective  subject  in  the  epigram,  and  the  second 
line  consisting  of  the  objects  of  the  respective  verbs : — ‘  So  rule,  plead,  practice, 
preach,  doom,  delve,  direct,  |  Climes,  causes,  cures,  Christ,  crimes,  turves,  troops 
select.’  There  is  also  a  notable  example  in  Sidney’s  Arcadia:  ‘  Vertue,  beautie, 
and  speach,  did  strike,  wound,  charme,’  etc. — p.  368,  ed.  1598. — Ed. 

178.  being  done]  That  is,  ‘it  being  done.’  For  other  examples  of  participles 
without  a  noun,  see  Abbott,  §  378. 

178.  humane]  See  line  31,  above.  This  is  apparently  an  exception  to  the  rule 
that  Shakespeare  uniformly  accents  this  word  on  the  first  syllable.  Schmidt,  in  the 
First  Ed.  of  his  Lex.,  asserts  that  the  present  instance  is  not  an  exception,  but  his 
scansion  of  the  line  to  prove  it,  is  so  printed  as  to  be  almost  unintelligible.  In  his 
Second  Ed.,  grown  more  cautious,  he  says  that  the  line  ‘  may  possibly  be  scanned 
thus:  “Not  d<5  |  ing  ft  |  and  bding  ( monosyll .)  |  done;  hfi  |  most  hfimane but  the 
much  more  natural  scansion  would  be :  “  Not  doing  (monosyll.)  |  it  find  |  being 
(monosyll.)  ddne;  |  he  mdst  |  humane,”  ’  which  virtually  retracts  the  assertion  of  the 
First  Ed.  In  these  abhorrent  contractions  of  doing  and  being,  he  has,  to  be  sure,  the 
countenance  of  Walker  (Vers.  p.  1 19).  But,  in  comparison  with  these  irredeemably 
harsh  unmusical  lines,  a  line  of  twelve  syllables  is  far  preferable :  ‘  Not  do  |  ing  it  | 
and  bS  |  ing  done ;  |  he  most  |  humkne.’  See  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  76  of  this  ed. — Ed. 

180.  practise]  Treachery,  strategem. 

180.  quit]  For  other  examples  of  ‘quit’  for  quitted,  see  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  324). 

181.  hazard]  Malone:  In  this  line  some  word  of  two  syllables  has  been  inad¬ 
vertently  omitted.  I  believe  the  omitted  word  was  either  doubtful  or  fearful.  The 
editor  of  F2  endeavoured  to  cure  the  defect  by  reading,  ‘  certain  hazard  ’ ;  the  most 
improper  word  that  could  have  been  chosen. — Steevens  :  I  am  of  a  contrary  opin¬ 
ion,  and  therefore  retain  the  emendation  of  F2.  ‘  Certain  hazard  ’  is  quite  in  our 
author’s  manner.  So  in  Com.  of  Err.  II,  ii,  187  : — ‘  Until  I  know  this  sure  uncer¬ 
tainty.' — Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Certain  is  needed  as  far  as  metre  is  concerned,  and  as  it 
is  not  erased  in  the  MS  we  may  be  pretty  sure  that  it  was  formerly  recited  on  the 
stage,  and  ought  to  be  included  in  our  text. — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  Certain  supplies 
the  deficiency  in  metre  by  a  contrast  so  much  in  Shakespeare’s  manner,  that  were  it 
not  plain  that  be  often  purposely  left  lines  incomplete,  the  correction  might  be  safely 
received  into  the  text.-— Walker  (Crit.  iii,  102) :  ‘  Certain  hazard  is  unquestionably 
right. — Lettsom  (footnote  to  Walker) :  As  Malone  has  asserted  that  certain  is  ‘  the 
most  improper  word  that  could  have  been  chosen,’  I  may  be  allowed  to  quote  a  few 


132 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 

Of  all  Incertainties,  himfelfe  commended,  182 

No  richer  then  his  Honor  :  How  he  glitters 
Through  my  Ruft?  and  how  his  Pietie 

Do’s  my  deeds  make  the  blacker  ?  185 

Paul.  Woe  the  while: 

O  cut  my  Lace,leaft  my  heart( cracking  it) 

Breake  too.  188 


182.  Incertainties']  uncertainties  F 'F 4, 
Rowe. 

184.  Through  my  Ruft]  Through 
my  dark  Ruft  Ff,  Rowe-f,  Cap.  Var. 


Rann.  Thorough  my  rust  Mai.  et  seq. 

186.  Scene  v.  Pope  +  . 

[Enter  Paulina.  Rowe. 

187.  leaJT\  left  F3F<. 


passages: — Sidney,  Arcadia,  B.  i,  p.  13, 1.  44, — ‘to  know  the  certainty  of  things  to 
come,  wherein  there  is  nothing  so  certain  as  our  continual  uncertainty.’  [Shake¬ 
speare’s]  Lucrece,  St.  clxxxviii, — ‘  Her  certain  sorrow  writ  uncertainly.’  Daniel, 
Panegyrick  to  the  King,  St.  48 : — ‘  In  periods  of  uncertain  certainty.’  [Beau.  &  FI.] 
Honest  Man's  Fortune,  II,  ii : — ‘  — that  portion  I  have,  I  would  not  hazard  upon  an 
unknown  course,  for  I  see  the  most  certainest  is  incertainty.’  Heywood’s  Love's 
Miseries,  V,  i : — ‘  Her  husband  Cupid  gave  her  certain  rules  For  her  uncertain  jour¬ 
ney.’  [There  need  be  no  objection  to  the  adoption  of  ‘  certain  hazard,’  if  any  addi¬ 
tion  be  needed  for  rhythm’s  sake  in  a  line  where  there  is  a  necessary  pause,  as  there 
is  here  after  the  parenthesis.  We  should  remember  that  rhythm  is  a  servant,  not  a 
master. — Ed. 

183.  Honor:]  According  to  this  punctuation,  which  is,  I  think,  right,  the  mean¬ 
ing  is  that  Camillo  resigned  his  great  fortune  here,  and  with  no  riches  but  his  honor, 
committed  himself  to  uncertainties.  But  Staunton  says  that  this  punctuation 
‘  miserably  enfeebles  ’  the  passage.  He,  therefore,  puts  a  full  stop  after  ‘  com¬ 
mended,’  and  only  a  comma  after  ‘  honor  ;’  whereby  the  meaning  is  :  ‘  How  he,  rich 
only  in  honor,  glisters  through  my  rust.’  I  fail  to  see  here  any  added  force  which 
can  compensate  for  loss  of  the  contrast  between  great  wealth  with  dishonor  exchanged 
for  poverty  with  honor. — Ed. 

184.  my  Rust]  The  reading  of  Fa,  ‘my  dark  rust,’  has  not  received  that  notice 
from  the  modern  editors  which  I  think  it  deserves. — Ed. 

185.  blacker]  Johnson  :  This  vehement  retractation  of  Leontes,  accompanied 
with  the  confession  of  more  crimes  than  he  was  suspected  of,  is  agreeable  to  our 
daily  experience  of  the  vicissitudes  of  violent  tempers,  and  the  eruptions  of  minds 
oppressed  with  guilt. 

187,  188.  O  cut  my  Lace  .  .  .  too]  It  is  heartily  to  be  wished  that  we  could 
impute  this  entreaty  to  Greene’s  Novel.  And  yet  it  may  be  that  Shakespeare  wished 
us  to  perceive  by  this  chilling  dash  of  rant  that  Paulina  lacked  the  earnestness  which 
should  be  hers  if  she  were  really  convinced  that  the  queen  was  truly  dead.  And 
yet  we  must  not  here  doubt  her  sincerity,  which  Lady  Martin  vindicates ;  nor  must 
we  examine  even  the  rest  of  Paulina’s  speech  too  curiously.  She  was  not  present 
when  Leontes  made  his  confession,  and  yet  she  knows  every  detail  of  it.  It  is 
enough  that  such  trifles  are  never  noticed  in  the  performance, — Segnius  irritant 
anirnos,  etc. — See  note  on  203. — Ed. 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


133 


Lord.  What  fit  is  thisf  good  Ladyf 

Paul.  What  ftudied  torments(  Tyrant  )haft  for  me  ?  190 

What  Wheeles?Racks?  Fires?  What  flaying?  boyling? 

In  Leads,  or  Oyles  ?  What  old,  or  newer  Torture 
Mutt  I  receiuePwhofe  euery  word  deferues 
To  tafte  of  thy  moft  worft.  Thy  Tyranny 

(Together  working  with  thy  Iealoufies,  195 

Fancies  too  weake  for  Boyes,  too  greene  and  idle 
For  Girles  of  Nine)  O  thinke  what  they  haue  done, 

And  then  run  mad  indeed  :  ftarke-mad  :  for  all 

Thy  by-gone  fooleries  were  but  fpices  of  it.  199 


1S9.  What]  Alas!  what  Han. 

190.  hafl]  hast  thou  Ktly. 

1 91.  Racks?  Fires?]  what  racks? 
what  fires  ?  Ktly. 

flaying  ?  boyling  /]  flaying  ? 
boyling?  Burning,  Ff,  Rowe+,  Var. 
’73.  flaying  ?  or  what  boiling  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Huds.  flaying,  burning,  boiling 
Coll.  (MS). 


192.  Leads,  or  Oyles?]  lead  or  oil? 
Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

newer]  new  Ff,  Rowe. 

193.  euery]  very  Ff,  Rowe. 

199.  but]  Om.  Theob.  i. 

of  it]  for  it  Ff,  Rowe,  to  Coll. 
MS,  ap.  Cam. 


191.  flaying  ?  boyling  ?]  To  the  addition,  burning  of  F2,  Capell  (p.  171)  objects 
on  the  score  that  ‘deaths  by  burning  are  imply’d’  in  ‘fires  and  ‘boiling’  is  the 
proper  word  for  ‘  leads  or  oils  ’  which  immediately  succeed.  He,  therefore,  reads  : 
‘  What  flaying,  rather  ?  boiling;’  very  unhappily,  as  Dyce  truly  says. — Walker  ( Crit . 
ii,  13),  not  knowing  of  the  reading  of  F2,  said  ‘  it  is  evident  that  a  word  had  dropped 
out,’  and  suggested  ‘flaying,  tearing,  boiling.’ — Abbott  (§  484)  scans  the  last  three 
feet :  ‘  What  fldy  |  ing  b<5  |  iling,’  which  is  repellant,  to  say  the  least,  in  aline  composed 
almost  of  a  succession  of  shrieks,  where  there  should  be,  as  there  is,  the  merest  sug¬ 
gestion  of  rhythm,  and  where  the  addition  of  two  syllables  is  as  harmless  as  it  is 
superfluous. — Halliwell  quotes  from  Grey  that  death  by  boiling  was  adjudged  for 
the  crime  of  poisoning  in  the  reign  of  Hen.  VIII.,  and  that  two  persons  suffered  it. 
He  also  gives,  as  an  illustration  of  the  text,  a  wood-cut  of  the  punishment,  copied 
from  a  MS  of  the  fifteenth  century,  where  the  artist,  evidently  on  the  principle  of 
Dr  Primrose’s  injunction  to  the  painter  to  put  in  as  many  sheep  as  he  could  for  the 
money,  has  represented  eight  persons  cosily  seated  in  what  appears  to  be  a  small 
egg-boiler,  with  flames  beneath  it. — Ed. 

192.  Leads,  or  Oyles]  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  243),  in  his  Article  on  the  ‘  final  s  fre¬ 
quently  interpolated  and  frequently  omitted  in  the  First  Folio,’  suggests  that  we 
should  here  read  ‘  In  lead,  or  oil? 

194.  most  worst]  For  examples  of  double  superlatives,  see  Abbott,  §  ii. 

194.  Thy  Tyranny]  Lady  Martin  (p.  366) :  Into  Paulina’s  lips  Shakespeare 
seems  as  if  he  wished  to  put,  as  the  Greek  tragedians  put  into  those  of  the  Chorus,  the 
concentrated  judgement  of  every  man  and  woman  in  his  kingdom. 

199.  spices]  Schmidt  (Lex.)  :  Served  only  to  season  it,  to  give  it  a  zest.  [An 
eminently  inappropriate  definition.  ‘  Spices  ’  may  be  here  equivalent  to  its  doublet, 


134 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


That  thou  betrayed’ft  Polixcncs, ’ t was  nothing,  200 

(That  did  but  fhew  thee,  of  a  Foole,inconftant, 

And  damnable  ingratefull : )  Nor  was’t  much,  202 

200.  betrayed  Jt]  betray' dst  Rowe  et  202.  ingratefull]  ungrateful  Var.  ’73, 

seq.  ’78,  ’85,  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  ’21,  Ktly. 

201.  thee,  of  a  Toole,]  thee  of  a  soul  much,]  much  F  .  much.  F  F  . 

Theob.  Han.  Wh.  ii. 

species;  cf.  Elyot’s  Governour,  Bk.  II,  where  the  heading  of  Chap,  xxi  is: — Of 
Moderation  the  spice  of  Temperance  ;’  if  so,  a  paraphrase  of  the  passage  may  be  : — 
‘all  thy  by-gone  fooleries  were  but  the  same  in  kind  with  thy  tyranny.’  Or  it  may 
mean  (and  this  seems  to  be  the  more  probable),  a  small  quantity ;  cf.  Hen.  VIII : 
II,  iii,  26 : — ‘  and  so  w'ould  you  For  all  this  spice  of  your  hypocrisy,’  or  Cor.  IV,  vii, 
46  : — ‘  He  hath  spices  of  them  all,  not  all.’  With  this  meaning  of  ‘  spice  ’  the  pres¬ 
ent  passage  might  be  paraphrased :  ‘  all  thy  by-gone  fooleries  wrere  but  a  modicum 
of  thy  tyranny,’  or  ‘  in  comparison  with  it.’  Herein  the  phrase  finds  a  correspond¬ 
ence  with  line  204:  ‘poor  trespasses  More  monstrous  standing  by.’ — Ed.] 

201.  of  a  Foole]  Theobald:  I  have  ventured  at  a  slight  alteration  here,  and  for 
‘  fool  ’  read  soul.  It  is  certainly  too  gross  and  blunt  in  Paulina,  though  she  might 
impeach  the  king  of  fooleries  in  some  of  his  past  actions  and  conduct,  to  call  him 
downright  a  Fool.  And  it  is  much  more  pardonable  in  her  to  arraign  his  morals, 
and  the  qualities  of  his  mind,  than  rudely  to  call  him  idiot  to  his  face. — War  burton  : 
We  should  read,  ‘  shew  thee  off,  a  fool,’  i.  e.  represent  thee  in  thy  true  colours ;  a  fool, 
an  inconstant,  etc— Johnson  :  Poor  Mr  Theobald’s  courtly  remark  cannot  be  thought 
to  deserve  much  notice.  [R.  G.  White,  in  his  ed.  ii,  thought  differently.]  Dr  War- 
burton,  too,  might  have  spared  his  sagacity  if  he  had  remembered  that  the  present 
reading,  by  a  mode  of  speech  anciently  much  used,  means  only,  ‘  Itshow’d  thee  first 
a  fool,  then  inconstant  and  ungrateful !’ — Steevens  :  The  same  construction  occurs 
in  Phaer’s  Second  Booke  of  JEneidos  ;  ‘  When  this  the  yong  men  heard  me  speake, 
of  wild  they  waxed  wood.’[ — Sig.  C4  ad  fin.] — Staunton  :  Any  change  would  be 
to  destroy  a  form  of  speech  characteristic  of  the  author’s  time ;  ‘  of  a  fool  ’  is  the 
same  as  ‘  for  a  fool.’— Halliwell  :  The  genitive  case  of  a  noun  was  sometimes 
used  instead  of  the  adjective,  so  that  ‘  of  a  fool  ’  means  simply  foolish.  A  similar 
construction  supplied  the  place  of  the  adverb  by  the  genitive  preposition  before  the 

adjective.  Thus  ‘  of  wild  ’  in  the  line  from  Phaer’s  Virgil  means  wildly. _ R.  G. 

White  (ed.  i) :  I  have  hardly  a  doubt  that  Theobald’s  emendation  is  correct;  not, 
however,  for  his  reason,  that  it  would  be  too  blunt  in  Paulina  to  call  the  king  a  fool ; 
but  because  she  does  not  call  him  so  with  sufficient  directness,  and  because  there  is 
greater  fitness  in  the  expression  as  amended.  But  as  the  original  text  may  be 
accepted  as  an  instance  of  a  French  construction  used  by  Shakespeare,  and  as  mean¬ 
ing,  ‘  That  did  but  show  thee  a  fool,’  etc.  it  must  stand.  In  his  second  ed.  White 
adopted  Theobald’s  emendation  without  comment.] — Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Altered  by 
Theobald,  wrongly,  I  believe.— Abbott  (§  173)  :  That  is,  as  regards  a  fool,’  ‘in  the 
matter  of  folly.’— Coleridge  (p.  255):  I  think  ‘fool’  is  Shakespeare’s  word.  1. 

My  ear  feels  it  to  be  Shakespearian ;  2.  The  involved  grammar  is  Shakespearian  ; _ 

‘show  thee,  being  a  fool  naturally,  to  have  improved  thy  folly  by  inconstancy;’  3. 

The  alteration  is  most  flat,  and  un-Shakespearian.  As  to  the  grossness  of  the  abuse _ 

she  calls  him  ‘  gross  and  foolish  ’  a  few  lines  below. 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


135 

Thou  would’ft  haue  poyfon’d  good  Camilla's  Honor,  203 

To  haue  him  kill  a  King  :  poore  Trefpaffes, 

More  monftrous  (landing  by  :  whereof  I  reckon  205 

The  calling  forth  to  Crowes,  thy  Baby-daughter, 

To  be  or  none,  or  little  ;  though  a  Deuill 
Would  haue  fhed  water  out  of  fire,  ere  don’t : 

Nor  is’t  dire£lly  layd  to  thee,  the  death 

Of  the  young  Prince,  whofe  honorable  thoughts  210 

(Thoughts  high  for  one  fo  tender) cleft  the  heart 
That  could  conceiue  a  groffe  and  foolifh  Sire 
Blemifh’d  his  gracious  Dam  :  this  is  not,  tio , 

Layd  to  thy  anfwere:  but  the  laft:  O  Lords, 

When  I  haue  faid,  cry  woe:  the  Queene,  the  Queene,  215 

The  fweet’fh  deer’ft  creature’s  dead:&  vengeance  for’t 
Not  drop’d  downe  yet. 

Lord.  The  higher  powres  forbid. 

Pau.  I  fay  (he’s  dead  :  lie  fwear’t.  If  word,  nor  oath 
Preuaile  not,  go  and  fee  :  if  you  can  bring  220 

Tin6lure,  or  luflre  in  her  lip,  her  eye 


205.  whereof  ]  wherefore  Ff,  Rowe. 

206.  to  Crowes\  of  Crows  F4. 
thy]  the  Ff. 

216.  fweet'Jl.  deer' Jf\  fweef Jl ,  deeer' ft 
F2.  fweet'fl,  dear' ft  F3,  Cap.  Coll.  Dyce, 
Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  Huds.  Rife.  fweet'Jl 


dear' ft  F4-  sweetest  dearest  Rowe,  Pope. 
sweetest  Flan,  sweetest,  dearest  Theob. 
et  cet. 

217.  drop'd~\  dropt  Rowe  ii.  drop 
Johns.  Var.  ’78. 


202.  damnable]  Malone:  Here  used  adverbially.  [See  IV,  iv,  570,  where 
Staunton  holds  that  ‘  irremovable  ’  is,  in  the  same  way,  used  adverbially.] 

203.  Honor]  Malone:  How  should  Paulina  have  known  this?  No  one  had 
charged  the  king  with  this  crime  except  himself,  while  Paulina  was  absent. — 
Halliwell  :  It  must  be  presumed  that  she  derived  her  knowledge  of  it  from 
Camillo  before  he  left  the  Court  with  Polixenes.  The  acquaintance  between  Camillo 
and  Paulina  is  alluded  to  in  the  last  Act. 

207.  Deuill]  Steevens:  That  is,  a  devil  would  have  shed  tears  of  pity  o’er  the 
damned,  ere  he  would  have  committed  such  an  action.  The  Cowden-Clarkes  : 
Dropped  tears  from  burning  eyes.  [The  better  interpretation.] 

209.  Nor  is’t]  Deighton:  Here  ‘it’  is  redundant;  or  rather,  perhaps,  there  is  a 
confusion  of  constructions  between  ‘  Nor  is  it  laid  to  thee  that  thou  didst  kill,’  etc. 
and  ‘Nor  is  the  death  of  the  prince  laid  to  you.’ 

216.  sweet’st.  deer’st]  Both  Walker  (Vers.  168)  and  Abbott  (§  473)>  using 
some  modern  text,  emend  these  words  to  the  present  abbreviations.  See  I,  ii,  109. 

221.  Tindlure]  Bucknill  (p.  131) :  Paulina  gives  four  signs  of  death,  which,  if 
they  existed,  would  go  a  long  way  to  enforce  her  opinion,  although  it  is  confessedly 
a  difficult  medical  problem  to  fix  upon  certain  signs  of  the  recent  cessation  of  life. 


136 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Heate  outwardly,  or  breath  within,  lie  ferue  you 
As  I  would  do  the  Gods.  But,  O  thou  Tyrant, 

Do  not  repent  thefe  things,  for  they  are  heauier 
Then  all  thy  woes  can  dirre  :  therefore  betake  thee 
To  nothing  but  difpaire.  A  thoufand  knees, 

Ten  thoufand  yeares  together,  naked,  fading, 

Vpon  a  barren  Mountaine,  and  dill  Winter 
In  dorme  perpetuall,  could  not  moue  the  Gods 
To  looke  that  way  thou  wer’t. 

Leo.  Go  on,  go  on  : 

Thou  cand  not  fpeake  too  much,  I  haue  deferu’d 
All  tongues  to  talke  their  bittred. 

Lord .  Say  no  more  ; 

How  ere  the  bufineffe  goes,  you  haue  made  fault 
I’th  boldneffe  of  your  fpeech. 

Pau.  I  am  forry  for’t ; 

All  faults  I  make,  when  I  fhall  come  to  know  them, 

I  do  repent  :  Alas,  I  haue  fhew’d  too  much 

The  rafhneffe  of  a  woman  :  he  is  toucht 

To  th’Noble  heart.  What’s  gone,  and  what’s  pad  helpe 


222 


225 


230 


235 


240 


223-230.  Marked  as  mnemonic,  Pope, 
Warb. 

224.  Do]  Dot  F2.  Doji  F3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope. 

225.  woes]  vows  Han. 
flirre  .•]  stir  ?  Pope. 


233.  tongues]  tongues  Fs. 

bittrejl]  F2,  Cap.  Wh.  bitterejl 
F3F4,  Rowe,  et  cet. 

237.  I  am]  I'm  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

239.  I  haue]  I've  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii, 
iii. 


The  signs  she  gives  are  the  pallor,  the  lustreless  eye,  the  cessation  of  breath,  and  the 
loss  of  animal  heat. 

224,  225.  heauier  .  .  .  stirre]  That  is,  these  things  are  too  heavy  for  all  thy 
afflictions,  self-inflicted  by  way  of  penance,  to  remove ;  repentance  is  therefore  impos¬ 
sible,  there  can  be  nothing  for  thee  but  despair.  Paulina  then  specifies  some  of  these 
‘  woes  ’ : — ‘  a  thousand  knees,’  etc. 

229.  could  not]  Deighton  says  that  the  subject  of 1  could  ’  is  ‘  a  thousand  knees  ’ ; 
but  can  ‘  fasting  ’  be  predicated  of  <  knees  ’  ?  The  subject  must  be  all  this,  or  a  sim¬ 
ilar  phrase.  ‘  Knees  ’  are  merely  equivalent  to  prayers  ;  and  ‘  naked  ’  and  <  fasting  ’ 
refer  to  him  who  offers  the  prayers.  ‘  Still  winter  ’  is  ‘■for  ever  winter.’ — Ed. 

233.  All  tongues  to  talke]  See  Abbott  (§  354)  for  other  examples  of  a  noun  and 
an  infinitive  used  as  the  object  (as  here)  or  as  subject  (in  V,  i,  52). 

237.  sorry  for’t]  Johnson:  This  is  another  instance  of  the  sudden  changes 
incident  to  vehement  and  ungovernable  minds. 

241,  242.  What’s  .  .  .  greefe]  Steevens:  Compare  Rich.  II:  II,  iii,  171 : _ 

4  Things  past  redress  are  now  with  me  past  care.’  [Also  Love's  Lab.  Lost ,  V,  ii,  28: _ 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


137 


Should  be  part  greefe  :  Do  not  receiue  affli6lion  242 

At  my  petition  ;  I  befeech  you,  rather 

Let  me  be  punifh’d,  that  haue  minded  you 

Of  what  you  fhould  forget.  Now  (good  my  Liege)  245 

Sir,  Royall  Sir,  forgiue  a  foolifh  woman  : 


242.  receiue]  revive  Sta.  and  Lettsom 
conj.  Huds. 

243.  At  my  petition ]  At  my  relation 
Sing.  conj.  At  repetition  Coll,  ii,  iii 
(MS).  At  my  monition  Cartwright. 


243.  petition  ; ...you,]  Dyce,  Cam.Wh. 
ii,  Ktly.  petition,. ..you,  Ff,  Huds.  pe¬ 
tition,... yoti ;  Rowe  et  cet. 

245.  Jhould]  Jhoold  F2. 


‘past  cure  is  still  past  care;’  again,  Macb.  Ill,  ii,  II  :  ‘  Things  without  all  remedy 
Should  be  without  regard.’  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia,  just  before  The  Epitaph.] 

242,  243.  receiue  .  .  .  petition]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Paulina  sees  that  she  has 
gone  too  far,  and  has  moved  the  grieved  king  too  much.  She  repents,  therefore,  the 
recapitulation  she  has  made,  in  her  speech  beginning  ‘  What  studied  torments,’  etc. 
of  the  consequences  of  his  jealousy,  and  says,  as  the  text  stands  corrected  in  the  MS : 
— ‘  do  not  receive  affliction  At  repetition  viz.  at  the  repetition  of  the  misfortunes 
Leontes  has  brought  upon  himself.  .  .  .  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  ‘  at  repetition  ’ 
is  the  true  language  of  the  poet. — Staunton  :  We  might  perhaps  read :  ‘  do  not 
revive  affliction,’  etc.,  but  certainly  not  ‘At  repetition,'  as  suggested  by  Collier’s  MS 
annotator. — R.  G.  White:  ‘At  my  petition’  is  at  my  seeking.  Collier’s  repetition 
indicates  a  mind  of  blunt  perceptions. — Halliwell  :  That  is,  ‘  at  my  entreaty,  I 
beseech  you  not  to  give  way  to  affliction,’  the  word  ‘  petition,’  which  has  been  objected 
to,  making  perfect  sense.  [This  paraphrase  is  a  little  ambiguous.  Does  it  mean  : 
‘  I  beseech  you,  at  my  entreaty,  not  to  give  way  to  affliction,’  or  ‘  because  I  have 
entreated  you  to  be  afflicted,  do  not  give  way  to  it  ’  ?  If  Halliwell  intends  the  latter, 
which  I  am  afraid  he  does  not,  then  he  takes  me  wholly  with  him ;  this  is  the  mean¬ 
ing,  which,  I  think  all  the  early  editors  saw  in  the  passage,  until  the  unhappy  hour 
when  Collier’s  MS  annotator  started  a  difficulty.  Paulina  had  told  the  King  to  think 
on  what  his  tyranny  and  jealousies  had  done,  and  then  run  mad — stark  mad ;  and 
had  bade  him  not  repent,  but  betake  him  to  nothing  but  despair, — she  now  withdraws 
her  words,  and  begs  him  not  to  be  afflicted  by  them. — Ed.] — Lettsom  (. Preface  to 
Walker,  p.  xlii)  :  According  to  Collier,  ‘  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  at  repetition  is  the 
true  language  of  the  poet.’  If,  however,  we  compare  AIF s  Well,  V,  iii: — ‘We’re 
reconcil’d,  and  the  first  view  shall  kill  All  repetition  ’  (where  Johnson  justly  inter¬ 
prets  ‘  repetition  ’  by  recollection  of  the  past) ;  Massinger,  Guardian,  V,  i,  7  : — 
‘  — revive  not  a  sorrow  long  dead ;’  and  Witch  of  Edmonton,  V,  ii,  Gifford’s  Ford, 
vol.  ii,  p.  552  : — ‘  You  will  revive  affliction  almost  kill'd  With  my  continual  sorrow  ;’ 
we  may  be  led  to  suspect  that  ‘  the  true  language  of  the  poet  ’  was  : — * — do  not  revive 
affliction  By  repetition,  I  beseech  you,’  and  that  Massinger  and  the  authors  of  The 
Witch  of  Edmonton  imitated  this  passage  as  well  as  that  in  Alls  Well. — Hudson: 
It  seems  to  me  that  the  simplest  way  out  of  the  difficulty  is  by  slightly  changing  the 
punctuation  [and  by  adopting  Staunton’s  revive.  Accordingly,  Hudson’s  text  reads  : 
‘  Do  not  revive  affliction,’  etc.  Staunton  and  Lettsom  published  their  conjecture  in 
the  same  year. — Ed.] 

245,  246.  my  Liege)  Sir,  Royall  Sir]  The  repetition  betokens,  I  think ,  here,  as 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iii,  sc.  ii. 

247 


138 


The  loue  I  bore  your  Queene  (Lo,  foole  againe) 
lie  fpeake  of  her  no  more,  nor  of  your  Children  : 
lie  not  remember  you  of  my  owne  Lord, 

(Who  is  loft  too:)  take  your  patience  to  you,  250 

And  lie  fay  nothing. 

Leo.  Thou  didft  fpeake  but  well, 

When  moil:  the  truth  :  which  I  receyue  much  better, 

Then  to  be  pittied  of  thee.  Prethee  bring  me 

To  the  dead  bodies  of  my  Queene,  and  Sonne,  255 

One  graue  fhall  be  for  both  :  Vpon  them  fhall 

The  caufes  of  their  death  appeare  (vnto 

Our  fhame  perpetuall)  once  a  day,  lie  vifit 

The  Chappell  where  they  lye,  and  teares  fhed  there 

Shall  be  my  recreation.  So  long  as  Nature  260 

Will  beare  vp  with  this  exercife,  fo  long 

I  dayly  vow  to  vfe  it.  Come,  and  leade  me 

To  thefe  forrowes.  Exeunt  2 63 


250.  take  your]  take  you  your  Rowe 
ii  +  ,  Cap.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

to  you ]  to  you,  Sir,  Ktly. 

260.  Xo]  Om.  Han. 

260-262.  Lines  end  Nature. ..exercife 
...Come,  Johns.  Var.  ’73.  Nature. ..long 


...Come  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Rann.  as. ..exer¬ 
cise,. ..Come,  Steev.  Var.  long. ..exercise 
...Come  Ktly. 

263.  To]  Unto  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Wh.  ii,  Huds.  Rife. 

forrowes]  my  sorrows  Han.  Cap. 


elsewhere,  deep  emotion,  and  entreaty.  Paulina  imagines  that  the  King  does  not 

listen  to  her,  so  deeply  bowed  is  his  head  and  closely  veiled  are  his  eyes. — Ed. 

250,251.  Who  .  .  .  nothing]  Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  102):  Write  and  arrange, 
Who  s  lost  too :  Take  your  patience  to  you,  and  |  I  will  say  nothing.’  [It  is  dif¬ 
ficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  discern  the  advantage  of  this  modification  of  these  lines, 
dislocating  as  it  does  the  emphasis  in  both,  which  should  fall  in  the  first  on  ‘  too  ’  and 
in  the  second  on  ‘  I’ll.’  If,  in  the  last  resort,  rhythm  is  to  be  marked  by  ‘  sawing  the 

air  with  your  hand,’  then  ‘  your  ’  can  be  pronounced  as  a  disyllable. _ Ed.] 

258.  once  a  day]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

260.  recreation]  This  is  used  here  in  its  Latin  meaning  of  restoration  to  health, 
re-creation. — Ed. 


260-263.  After  quoting  these  lines  according  to  the  metrical  arrangement  adopted 
by  Steevens  (see  Text.  Notes),  Knight  goes  on  to  say:  We  claim  no  merit  for  first 
pointing  out  these  abominable  corruptions  of  the  text ;  but  we  do  most  earnestly  ex¬ 
hort  those  who  reprint  Shakspere— and  the  very  act  of  reprinting  is  in  some  sort  a 
tribute  to  him— not  to  continue  to  present  him  in  this  mangled  shape.  If  the  free¬ 
dom  and  variety  of  his  versification  were  offensive  to  those  who  had  been  trained  in 
the  school  of  Pope,  let  it  be  remembered  that  we  have  now  come  back  to  the  proper 
estimate  of  a  nobler  rhythm;  and  that  Shakspere,  of  all  the  great  dramatists,  appears 
to  have  held  the  true  mean,  between  a  syllabic  monotony  on  the  one  hand,  and  a 
licence  running  into  prose  on  the  other. 


act  hi,  sc.  iii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 


139 


Sccena  Tertia. 


Enter  Antigonus,  a  Marriner ,  Babe ,  Sheepe- 
heard ,  and  Clowne. 


Ant. Thou  art  perfe<5t  then,  our  fhip  hath  toucht  vpon 
The  Defarts  of  Bohemia. 


5 


I.  Scene  vi.  Pope  +  . 

A  desart  Country  :  the  Sea  at  a  lit¬ 
tle  distance.  Rowe.  Changes  to  Bohe¬ 
mia.  Pope. 


2.  Enter. ..Babe,  Sheepeheard,]  Enter 
...Babe  and  Shepherd  F  .  Enter  Antig- 
onus  with  a  child,  and  a  Mariner.  Rowe. 
5.  Bohemia.]  Bohemia  ?  Pope. 


1.  Scaena  Tertia]  Hudson  (p.  14)  :  It  is  to  be  noted  that  while  the  play  divides 
itself  into  two  parts,  these  are  skillfully  woven  together  by  a  happy  stroke  of  art. 
The  last  scene  of  the  Third  Act  not  only  finishes  the  action  of  the  first  three,  but  by 
an  apt  and  unforced  transition  begins  that  of  the  other  two ;  the  two  parts  of  the 
drama  being  smoothly  drawn  into  the  unity  of  a  continuous  whole  by  the  introduction 
of  the  old  Shepherd  and  his  son  at  the  close  of  the  one  and  the  opening  of  the  other. 
This  natural  arrangement  saves  the  imagination  from  being  disturbed  by  any  yawning 
or  obtrusive  gap  of  time,  notwithstanding  the  lapse  of  so  many  years  in  the  interval. 

2.  Halliwell  :  This  stage-directiou  is  merely  a  note  for  the  actors  as  to  what 
players  were  to  be  in  readiness,  not  a  direction  for  them  all  to  appear  upon  the  stage 
at  the  commencement  of  the  scene.  There  were  probably  more  than  one  mariner 
entering  with  Antigonus,  at  least  if  we  may  be  guided  by  the  note  in  Drummond’s 
account  of  his  Conversations  with  Ben  Jonson,  [where  the  latter  speaks  of  ‘  a  number 
of  men  ’  who  had  suffered  ‘  ship- wrack.’  See  note,  below.] 

2.  Babe]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  We  can  see  no  ground  for  changing,  with  modern 
editors,  ‘  babe  ’  to  child,  and  every  reason  for  preserving  the  word  which,  we  may 
reasonably  presume,  Shakespeare  wrote. 

4.  perfetft]  Johnson  :  ‘  Perfect  ’  is  often  used  by  Shakespeare  for  certain,  well 
assured,  or  well  informed. — Steevens  :  It  is  so  used  by  almost  all  our  ancient  writers. 

5.  Desarts  of  Bohemia]  Hanmer  refused  to  accept  ‘Bohemia’  at  all.  He 
pronounced  it  a  ‘blunder  and  an  absurdity  of  which  Shakespear  in  justice  ought  not 
to  be  thought  capable,’  and  that  as  Shakespeare  had  changed  throughout  the  names 
of  the  characters  in  Greene’s  Novel,  it  is  probable  that  he  had  changed  ‘  Bohemia  ’ 
into  Bithynia,  which  the  printers  had  ‘  corrupted  and  brought  back  again  to  Bohemia  by 
a  less  variation  in  the  letters  than  they  have  been  guilty  of  in  numberless  other  places 
of  this  Work.’  Accordingly,  in  Hanmer’s  text,  Bithynia  takes  throughout  the  place 
of  ‘  Bohemia.’  The  blame  cannot,  however,  be  thrown  on  the  printers.  Ben  Jonson 
at  one  time  visited  Scotland,  and  while  there  spent  three  weeks  with  William  Drum¬ 
mond  of  Hawthornden,  who  has  left  a  record  of  his  guest’s  conversation.  This 
record  was  reprinted  by  The  Shakespeare  Society,  and,  on  p.  16,  we  find  the  follow¬ 
ing  remark  by  Ben  Jonson  : — ‘  Shakspear,  in  a  play,  brought  in  a  number  of  men 
saying  they  had  suffered  ship-wrack  in  Bohemia,  wher  ther  is  no  sea  neer  by  some 
100  miles.’  This  conversation  took  place  in  1619,  and  as  far  as  we  know  The 


140 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  iii. 


[5.  Desarts  of  Bohemia] 

Winter’s  Tale  was  not  printed  before  1623.  It  was  not,  therefore,  from  a  printed 
page  that  Jonson  spoke ;  he  must  have  heard  the  ‘  sea-coast  of  Bohemia  ’  mentioned 
on  the  stage,  or,  what  is  possible  but  not  probable,  read  it  in  MS.  But  Hanmer  knew 
nothing  of  the  conversation  with  Drummond,  although  it  had  been  printed  in  1 7 1 1 ,  thirty 
years  before  Hanmer’s  edition  of  Shakespeare  appeared.  The  editors  who  have  dis¬ 
cussed  the  ‘  sea-coast  of  Bohemia  ’  have  been  chiefly  concerned  with  shielding  Shake¬ 
speare’s  reputation  by  offering  reasons  why  he  should  have  followed  Greene.  Capell 
(p.  169)  supposed  that  Shakespeare  retained  the  name  Bohemia  because  while  it  ‘had 
harmony  and  was  pleasing,  it  stood  connected  so  with  Sicilia  in  the  minds  of  his 
whole  audience,  that  removing  it  had  been  removing  foundations ;  the  fault  had  been 
over-look  d  in  the  story-book,  which  was  popular  and  then  a  great  favourite,  and  he 
was  in  no  fear  but  it  would  be  so  in  the  play;  his  changing  all  the  other  names  gen¬ 
erally  throughout  the  fable,  arose  partly  from  judgement  and  partly  from  his  ear’s 
goodness  which  could  not  put  up  with  Garinter,  Franion,  and  Pandosto,  and  such 
like,  which  have  neither  music  in  themselves  nor  relation  to  the  places  the  scene  is 
lay  d  in.  Farmer  says  that  ‘  Cervantes  ridicules  these  geographical  mistakes,  when 
he  makes  the  princess  Micomicona  land  at  Ossuna.’  But  is  this  correctly  expressed  ? 
Cervantes  intentionally  makes  us  laugh  openly  as  much  as  the  princess  laughed  se¬ 
cretly,  over  her  slip  in  making  Ossuna  a  sea-port  town.  Is  this  ridiculing  the  mistake  ? 

‘  Corporal  Trim’s  King  of  Bohemia,’  Farmer  continues,  ‘  “  delighted  in  navigation, 
and  had  never  a  sea-port  in  his  dominions;”  and  my  lord  Herbert  tells  us  that  De 
Luines,  the  prime  minister  of  France,  when  he  was  embassador  there,  demanded, 
whether  Bohemia  was  an  inland  country,  or  lay  “  upon  the  sea  ”  ?— There  is  a  similar 
mistake  in  The  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  relative  to  that  city  and  Milan.’  An 
entertaining  collection  of  instances  of  ignorance  of  Geography  is  given  in  an  Essay 
by  F.  Jacox  in  Bentley's  Miscellany,  February,  1867. — Tieck  (ix,  355)  remarks  that 
inasmuch  as  Germany  was  far  less  known  in  Elizabethan  times  than  Italy,  Illyria,  or 
Spain,  Bohemia  was  purposely  selected  by  Greene,  and  adopted  by  Shakespeare,  as 
a  country  seldom  mentioned  and  but  little  known,  and  with  which  there  was  but 
slight  intercourse  either  in  the  world  of  poetry  or  of  commerce,  and  that  to  the  in¬ 
different  novel-readers  and  theatre-goers  of  that  day,  this  mutilation  of  their  map  was 
a  matter  of  as  little  importance  as  to  the  newspaper  readers  of  modern  times.— 
Collier  (New  Particulars,  p.  21)  is  inclined  to  think  that  we  are  apt  to  impute  to 
Shakespeare’s  audience  a  geographical  knowledge  wider  than  it  was  in  reality.  Dr 
Simon  Forman,  for  instance,  in  his  notes  on  the  play  (see  Appendix,  Date  of  Compo¬ 
sition)  lays  the  scene  in  Sicilia  and  Bohemia  and  makes  no  allusion  to  any  geograph¬ 
ical  blunder.  Collier  quotes  from  ‘  a  popular  author  of  the  time,  who  ridicules  a 
vulgar  error  of  the  kind,’— Taylor,  the  Water-poet,  ‘  who,’  Collier  goes  on  to  say, 

‘  made  a  journey  to  Prague  in  1620,  nine  years  after  The  Winter’s  Tale  was  acted,’ 
and  on  his  return  published  an  account  of  his  expedition ;  the  address  to  the  reader] 
contains  the  following  paragraph,  laughing  at  the  ignorance  of  the  Aldermen  of 
London  on  matters  of  geography  — “  I  am  no  sooner  eased  of  him,  but  Gregory 
Gandergoose,  an  Alderman  of  Gotham,  catches  me  by  the  goll,  demanding  if 
Bohemia  be  a  great  town,  whether  there  be  any  meat  in  it,  and  whether  the  last  fleet 
of  ships  be  arrived  there  ?”  ...  Sir  Gregory  Gandergoose  had  derived  his  knowledge 
from  such  sources  as  Greene’s  Dorastus  ana  Fawnia  and  The  Winter’s  Tale.' 

Thus  far  we  have  listened  to  those  only,  who  have  acknowledged  that  a  sea-coast 


act  iii,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


141 


[5.  Desarts  of  Bohemia] 

of  Bohemia  is  a  blunder,  and  have  attempted  to  frame  excuses  or  palliations  for  it. 
But  in  a  little  obscure  corner  of  The  Monthly  Magazine ,  for  the  first  of  January, 
1811,  there  is  a  short  note,  by  whom  I  do  not  know,  which  says  that  there  is  here 
‘  no  breach  of  geography.’  The  note  is  as  follows  : — ‘  In  the  year  1270  the  provinces 
of  Stiria  and  Carniola  were  dependent  on  the  crown  of  Bohemia.  Rudolf,  who 
became  King  of  the  Romans  in  1 273,  took  these  provinces  from  Ottocar,  the  King 
of  Bohemia,  and  attached  them  to  the  possessions  of  the  house  of  Austria.  The 
dependencies  of  a  large  empire  are  often  denominated  from  the  seat  of  government; 
so  that  a  vessel  sailing  to  Aquileia  or  Trieste,  might,  in  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth 
century,  be  correctly  described  as  bound  for  Bohemia.  The  shipwreck,  in  The 
Winter’s  Tale,  is  no  breach  of  geography.’ — In  later  times  George  Sand  ( Jean 
Zyska ,  p.  13)  ‘exculpates  Shakespeare’s  memory  from  a  gross  geographical  blunder.’ 
But  it  is  to  be  feared  that  her  knowledge  of  the  blunder  was  obtained  from  hearsay ; 
she  says  in  a  footnote  that  it  is  well  known  that  in  one  of  his  dramas  Shakespeare 
represents  ‘  one  of  his  characters  as  embarking  on  a  ship  in  Bohemia.  This  might 
have  been  the  harbour  of  Naon  which  King  Ottocar  purchased,  and  which  placed  a 
splendid  limit  to  his  empire  on  the  coast  of  the  Adriatic.’ — Dr  von  Lippmann  (Sh. 
Jahrbuch ,  xxvii,  1 15)  records  another  allusion  to  a  ‘sea-coast  of  Bohemia’  which  is 
to  be  found  in  Tschamser’s  Annals  of  the  Barefooted  Friars  of  Thann  (i,  654) 
where  it  is  stated  that  ‘in  1481  fourteen  pilgrims  returned  home  from  their  pilgrimage 
to  the  Holy  Land,  after  having  been  attacked  on  the  way  by  Corsairs,  but  finally 
luckily  escaped;  they  had  landed  “at  Bohemia  .  .  .”  and  brought  to  St.  Theobald’s 
Church  in  Thann  fifty  pounds  of  wax  in  fulfillment  of  a  vow.’  ‘  Here  again,’  says 
Lippmann,  ‘  we  meet  with  a  sea-coast  of  Bohemia,  but  with  it  comes  an  explanation 
also,  for  following  the  word  “  Bohemia”  there  is,  in  parenthesis:  “whereby  Apulia 
is  meant.”  Whence  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  there  was  a  time,  and  not  far  removed, 
either,  from  the  days  of  Greene  and  Shakespeare,  when  the  south-eastern  coast  of 
Italy  was  called  Bohemia.'  How  it  acquired  this  name  is  a  matter  of  conjecture. 
In  default  of  a  better  solution  Lippmann  surmises  that  it  may  have  been  gradually 
evolved  from  Bohemund  I.  of  Tarentum,  who  was  famous  in  the  First  Crusade  as  one 
of  the  greatest  of  soldiers.  Hence  it  is  not  unlikely  that  in  popular  speech  Apulia 
came  to  be  known  as  ‘  the  Land  of  Bohemund,’  possibly  written,  Terra  Bohemundi ; 
from  which,  or  from  its  abbreviation,  Terra  Bohem.,  arose  the  erroneous  Terra 
Bohemica  and  Bohemia.  Lippmann  finds  in  Humboldt’s  Critical  Investigation  of 
the  Historical  Developement  of  our  Geographical  Knowledge  of  the  New  World,  a 
parallel  evolution,  which  he  thinks  corroborates  his  conjecture,  in  the  case  of  Martin 
Behaim,  born  in  1436,  and  the  maker  of  the  celebrated  Globe ;  his  name  appears  as 
Martinus  Bohaimus  or  Bohemus,  and  in  Pigafetta,  De  Barros,  and  Herrera  as  ‘  Martin 
de  Bohemia  ’ ;  and  when  at  a  later  date  a  number  of  learned  men  were  anxious  to 
ascribe  to  Behaim  the  discovery  of  America,  or  at  least  to  bring  it  into  close  connec¬ 
tion  with  his  voyages,  we  find  his  name  in  this  disguised  form  plays  a  prominent  part ; 
the  Straits  of  Magellan  are  called  Fretum  Bohemicum.  ‘  Here  we  have,’  concludes 
Lippmann,  ‘  a  misunderstanding  quite  analogous  to  that  which  may  have  given  rise  to 
the  change  of  name  from  Apulia  to  Bohemia.’  The  substance  of  this  article  Lipp¬ 
mann  contributed  to  The  New  Review,  March,  1891.  Indeed  it  is  not  easy  to  decide,  in 
reviewing  the  whole  question,  which  to  admire  the  more,  the  ingenuity  which  supplies 
excuses  where  none  is  really  needed,  or  the  diffusion  of  geographical  knowledge. — Ed. 


142 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  III,  sc.  iii. 


Mar.  I  ( my  Lord )  and  feare  6 

We  haue  Landed  in  ill  time  :  the  skies  looke  grimly, 

And  threaten  prefent  blufters.  In  my  confcience 
The  heauens  with  that  we  haue  in  hand,  are  angry, 

And  frowne  vpon’s.  IO 

Ant.  Their  facred  wil’s  be  done  :  go  get  a-boord, 

Looke  to  thy  barke,  lie  not  be  long  before 
I  call  vpon  thee. 

Mar.  Make  your  bed;  hade,  and  go  not 
Too-farre  i’th  Land  :  ’tis  like  to  be  lowd  weather.  15 

Befides  this  place  is  famous  for  the  Creatures 
Of  prey,  that  keepe  vpon’t. 

Antig.  Go  thou  away, 
lie  follow  indantly. 

Mar.  I  am  glad  at  heart  20 

To  be  fo  ridde  o’th  bufmeffe.  Exit 

Ant.  Come,  poore  babe ; 

I  haue  heard  (but  not  beleeu’d)  the  Spirits  o’th’  dead 

May  walke  againe  :  if  fuch  thing  be,  thy  Mother  24 


6.  {my  Lord)']  Om.  Han. 

7.  IVe  haue]  We've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii, 
iii. 

10.  vpon’s]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Sing.  Dyce, 
Wh.  Cam.  Huds.  Rife,  upon  us  Cap. 
et  cet. 


II-  go  get]  get  Ff.  get  thee  Rowe  +  . 
Go,  get  Cap.  et  seq. 

13.  vpon]  on  Han. 

20.  I  am]  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 
23.  I  haue]  I've  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

o' eh]  of  the  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns. 
Var.  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Sing. 


24.  thy  Mother]  Macdonald  (p.  156):  Convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  vision, 
Antigonus  obeys;  and  the  whole  marvellous  result  depends  on  this  obedience.' 
Therefore  the  vision  must  be  intended  for  a  genuine  one.  But  how  could  it  be  such 
if  Hermione  was  not  dead,  as,  from  her  appearance  to  him,  Antigonus  firmly  believed 
she  was  ?  I  should  feel  this  to  be  an  objection  to  the  art  of  the  play,  but  for  the  fol¬ 
lowing  answer :  At  the  time  she  appeared  to  him  she  was  still  lying  in  that  death-like 
swoon,  into  which  she  fell  when  the  news  of  the  loss  of  her  son  reached  her  as  she 
stood  before  the  judgement-seat  of  her  husband,  at  a  time  when  she  ought  not  to 
have  been  out  of  her  chamber.— E.  H.  Ranney  (Re/igio- Philosophical  Joum.,  Chi¬ 
cago,  30  Dec.  1893) :  It  is  a  probable  fact  doubted  only  by  the  uninformed  that  in 
times  of  great  personal  distress,  sorrow,  impending  calamity,  and  death,  there  is  a 
something  that  may  leave  the  body,  having  sufficient  resemblance  to  the  living  form 
as  to  be  recognised  by  others  at  a  distance  who  naturally  are  in  close  sympathy.  We 
call  it  a  1  phantasm  of  the  living.’  Sometimes  this  entity,  or  astral  body,  if  we  prefer 
so  to  call  it,  may  be  projected  at  will.  In  either  event  there  are  about  the  coiporeal 
ody,  at  this  time,  the  usual  indications  of  death.  Practically  it  may  be  called  death 
since  the  life-giving  force  is  somewhere  else.  But  it  may  return  to  its  abode  and  once’ 


act  hi,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


143 


Appear’d  to  me  laft  night  :  for  ne’re  was  dreame  25 

So  like  a  waking.  To  me  comes  a  creature, 

Sometimes  her  head  on  one  fide,  fome  another, 

I  neuer  faw  a  veffell  of  like  forrow 

So  fill’d,  and  fo  becomming  :  in  pure  white  Robes  29 


26.  a  waking]  awaking  Anon.  ap. 
Cam. 

27.  on  one]  is  on  one  Ff. 
fome]  some'  Cap. 

another]  on  other  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 


28.  forrow]  sorrow.  Cap.  et  seq. 

29.  fill'd]  still  Cartwright. 
becomming]  o' er-running  Coll,  ii, 

iii  (MS),  Huds.  o' er -brimming  Daniel. 
become  it  Kinnear. 


more  set  in  motion  the  machinery  necessary  to  create  the  visual  impression  of  life.  .  .  . 
[This  vision  of  Antigonus]  is  a  ‘  phantasm  of  the  living,’  and  is  what  The  Society  for 
Psychical  Research  would  call  a  good  ‘  case.’  Doubtless  it  would  require  additional 
proof,  but  as  a  bare  statement  it  would  be  hard  to  improve  upon.  ...  It  adds  value  to 
note  that  Antigonus  is  positive  that  he  was  awake  when  the  vision  appeared.  ...  In 
the  play  this  scene  is  made  to  follow  the  Trial  Scene.  .  .  .  We  can  believe  that  the 
poet  intended  to  have  the  two  incidents  of  Hermione’s  apparent  death  and  the  vision 
of  her  astral  form  seen  by  Antigonus,  bear  a  close  relationship  in  point  of  time.  It 
certainly  strengthens  our  ‘  case  ’  to  have  it  so.  Then  there  would  be  that  coincidence 
of  time  which  is  always  necessary.  There  is  reason  in  Hermione’s  case  for  this  sud¬ 
den  separation  of  spirit  and  body :  it  is  the  mother’s  overwhelming  love  for  her  baby 
child;  her  great  anxiety  for  its  welfare  ;  her  fear  of  impending  death  in  a  desert  land. 
Her  spirit  liberated  would  fly  to  that  most  dear  to  her.  .  .  .  Shall  we  be  bold  and  say 
that  we  have  found  another  proof  of  Shakespeare’s  universality  ?  That  whatever 
direction  new  thought  may  take,  we  find  that  he  has  been  there  before  us. 

29.  so  becomming]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  ‘So  o' er-running'  from  the  MS  appears 
to  us  incontrovertible.  A  vessel  of  sorrow  not  only  ‘  fill’d  ’  but  o'  er-running  from 
abundant  tears.  That  ‘  becomming  ’  is  a  blunder  for  o'  er-running  cannot,  we  think, 
be  disputed ;  and  we  receive  the  change  as  a  welcome  restoration  of  the  poet’s  orig¬ 
inal  word  in  a  situation  where  it  was  much  needed. — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  That  is, 
so  decent.  The  expression,  considered  with  the  context,  is  a  singular  one,  it  must  be 
admitted.  Collier’s  MS  most  ridiculously  reads: — ‘so  o' er  flowing,'  [sic], — Singer: 
Antigonus  describes  an  expression  which  only  the  greatest  masters  have  realised  in 
art:  grief  the  most  poignant  rather  enhancing  the  beauty  of  a  countenance  than 
deforming  it. — Staunton  :  Collier’s  MS  alteration  at  once  destroys  the  meaning  of 
the  poet,  and  converts  a  beauteous  image  into  one  pre-eminently  ludicrous !  ‘  So 

becoming’  here  means  self-restrained ;  not  as  it  is  usually  explained  so  decent  ox  so 
dignified.  Compare  Rom.  &>  Jul.  IV,  ii, — ‘  I  gave  him  what  becomed  love  I  might, 
Not  stepping  o’er  the  bounds  of  modesty.’ — Lettsom  (ap.  Dyce,  iii) :  According  to 
Singer  \_Sh.  Vindicated,  p.  75]  ‘becoming’  here  means  decent  and  dignified ;  accord¬ 
ing  to  Staunton,  self-restrained.  The  latter  quotes,  in  support  of  his  opinion,  a  sus¬ 
picious  passage  from  Rom.  dr5  Jul.,  which,  even  if  correct,  is  nothing  to  the  purpose. 
I  do  not  understand  why  he  calls  the  old  Corrector’s  o'  er-running  ‘  pre-eminently 
ludicrous ;’  or  how  Grant  White  makes  it  out  to  be  ‘  ridiculous.’  According  to  John¬ 
son,  to  over-run  is  to  be  more  than  full.  Surely  ‘  a  vessel  filled  and  over-running  ’  is 
a  rather  better  expression  than  ‘  a  vessel  filled  and  dignified,’  or  ‘  a  vessel  filled  and 


144 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iii,  sc.  iii. 


Like  very  fantflity  fhe  did  approach 
My  Cabine  where  I  lay  :  thrice  bow’d  before  me, 
And  (gafping  to  begin  fome  fpeech)  her  eyes 
Became  two  fpouts  ;  the  furie  fpent,  anon 
Did  this  breake  from  her.  Good  Antigonus , 

Since  Fate  (againft  thy  better  difpofition) 

Hath  made  thy  perfon  for  the  Thower-out 
Of  my  poore  babe,  according  to  thine  oath, 

Places  remote  enough  are  in  Bohemia, 

There  weepe,  and  leaue  it  crying  :  and  for  the  babe 
Is  counted  loft  for  euer,  Perdita 
I  prethee  call’t  :  For  this  vngentle  bufineffe 
Put  on  thee,  by  my  Lord,  thou  ne’re  fhalt  fee 
Thy  Wife  Paulina  more  :  and  fo,  with  fhriekes 


30 


35 


40 


43 


36.  Thower-out]  Ff. 

39.  weepe]  wend  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS), 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  land  Cartwright. 
bear't  Gould. 

40.  euer]  ever  ever  Rowe  i.  ever 


and  ever  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns. 

42.  thee]  theee  F2. 

43.  more  .■]  more  ?  F  . 

Jhriekes]  Jkrickes  F#.  Jhrikes  F  . 


self-restrained.’  Or,  if  we  suppose  that  here,  as  elsewhere,  Shakespeare  has  inter¬ 
mingled  the  comparison  and  the  thing  compared,  and  that  <  filled  ’  relates  to  <  vessel  ’ 
and  ‘  becoming  ’  to  Hermione,  how  can  this  adjective  be  applied  to  a  person  ?  A 
becoming  bonnet,  colour,  or  attitude,  I  can  understand ;  but  what  can  be  said  to  a 
becoming  young  lady,  or  a  becoming  queen  ?  I  will  not  assert  that  Shakespeare 
wrote  ‘  So  fill’d,  e'en  so  o’er-running ;’  but  I  am  quite  sure  that,  if  Fx  had  given  us 
this  reading,  and  the  old  Corrector  had  altered  it  to  ‘ — and  so  becoming,’  he  would 
have  had  the  whole  vocabulary  of  vituperation  hurled  at  his  head,  and  nobody  would 
have  so  much  as  dreamed  that  o' er-running  was  ludicrous  or  ridiculous. — Deighton  • 
But  it  seems  allowable  to  suppose  that  it  was  the  sorrow  that  was  so  ‘  becoming  ’  to  her. 
[If  any  meaning  is  to  be  detected  in  ‘becoming,’  I  think  Singer  has  found  it,  but  at 
such  a  minute  to  allude  at  all  to  personal  beauty  strikes  a  false  note,  so  it  seems  to 
me.  I  prefer  Collier’s  change;  Antigonus  goes  on  to  refer  to  the  vision’s  unrestrained 
weeping,  and  says  her  eyes  became  two  spouts. — Ed.] 

29.  pure  white  Robes]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  102]  :  Compare  Milton,  Sonnet  xxiii, 
on  his  deceased  wife,—1  Came  vested  all  in  white,  pure  as  her  mind.’ 

39.  weepe]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Here  again  we  are  greatly  indebted  to  the  MS 
[which  changes  ‘  weepe  ’]  to  wend,  1.  e.  go.  The  word  ‘  crying  ’  probably  misled  the 
compositor,  and  he  fancied  that  wend  was  ‘  weep,’  and  so  printed.— R.  G.  White 
(ed.  i) :  Wend  is  a  very  plausible  emendation,  and  one  which  should  perhaps  be 
received  into  the  text.  But  the  subsequent  passage,  in  which  Antigonus’  oath  is 
alluded  to,—'  Weep  I  cannot,’  etc.  by  its  implication  of  the  duty  of  shedding  tears, 
supports  the  original  reading.  [It  is  these  very  words :  ‘  Weep  I  cannot  ’  which  con¬ 
vinced  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  that  the  ‘  weepe  ’  of  Fx  could  not  be  defended  by  appealing  to 
them.] 


act  hi,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


145 


She  melted  into  Ayre.  Affrighted  much, 

I  did  in  time  collect  my  felfe,  and  thought  45 

This  was  fo,  and  no  Humber  :  Dreames,  are  toyes, 

Yet  for  this  once,  yea  fuperftitioufly, 

I  will  be  fquar’d  by  this.  I  do  beleeue 
Hermione  hath  fuffer’d  death,  and  that 

Apollo  would  (this  being  indeede  the  iffue  50 

Of  King  Polixenes )  it  fhould  heere  be  laide 
(Either  for  life,  or  death)  vpon  the  earth 
Of  it’s  right  Father.  Bloffome,  fpeed  thee  well, 

There  lye,  and  there  thy  charradter  :  there  thefe, 

Which  may  if  Fortune  pleafe,  both  breed  thee  (pretty)  55 

And  ftill  reft  thine.  The  ftorme  beginnes,  poore  wretch, 

That  for  thy  mothers  fault,  art  thus  expos’d 

To  Ioffe,  and  what  may  follow.  Weepe  I  cannot,  58 


46.  fo\  footh  Warb.  conj. 

51.  Polixenes]  Polixenus  F2. 

53.  it's]  Ff,  Cap.  its  Rowe. 

[Laying  down  the  Child.  Rowe 

et  seq. 

54.  [Laying  down  a  bundle.  Johns. 

55.  breed  thee  ( pretty)~\  breed  thee , 


pretty  one,  Rowe+,  Var.  ’73,  Ktly. 
breed  thee  pretty.  Harness,  Knt,  Wh.  i. 
breed  thee  ( pretty  /)  Sta.  breed  thee  pity 
Gould. 

56.  beginnes,~\  begins ;  Rowe. 

[Thunder.  Dyce. 

57-  arf\  are  Knt. 


46.  toyes]  ‘  Babioles.  Trifles,  niphles,  trinkets,  toyes.’ — Cotgrave. 

47.  superstitiously]  ‘  Superstitieusement.  Superstitiously,  ouerscrupulously,  cere¬ 
moniously,  curiously.’ — Cotgrave. 

48.  squar’d]  Schmidt  :  Regulate,  shape.  See  V,  i,  63. 

53.  thee]  For  other  examples  of  ‘  thee  ’  used  for  thou,  see,  if  necessary,  Abbott( 
§  212.  Also  ‘  looke  thee  here,’  lines  117,  120,  121  below. 

54.  charratfter]  Steevens  :  That  is,  thy  description,  the  writing  afterwards  dis¬ 
covered  with  Perdita. — Staunton  :  Some  ciphers  and  the  name  ‘  Perdita  ’  by  which 
the  child  hereafter  might  be  recognised. 

56.  still  rest  thine]  Staunton  :  The  meaning  is  manifestly, — ‘  Poor  Blossom,  good 
speed  to  thee  !  which  may  happen,  despite  thy  present  desolate  condition,  if  Fortune 
please  to  adopt  thee  (thou  pretty  one !),  and  remain  thy  constant  friend;’  the  interme¬ 
diate  line, — ‘  There  lie,’  etc.,  being,  of  course,  parenthetical.  From  the  punctuation 
hitherto  adopted  :  ‘  Which  may,  if  Fortune  please,  both  breed  thee  pretty,  And  still  rest 
thine,’  the  editors,  one  and  all,  must  have  supposed  Antigonus  to  anticipate  that  the 
rich  clothes,  etc.  which  he  leaves  with  the  child,  might  breed  it  beautiful  and  prove  of 
permanent  utility  to  it  in  its  after  course  of  life.  [Staunton,  unwittingly  of  course,  ex¬ 
aggerates  the  number  of  editors  who  have,  ‘  one  and  all,’  hitherto  adopted  the  read¬ 
ing  he  quotes.  Harness,  Knight,  and  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  are  the  only  editors 
who  have  the  reading  he  criticises;  the  Cam.  Ed.  ascribes  it  to  ‘  Reed  (1813),’  but  this 
is  not  the  reading  in  my  copy  of  that  edition,  which  here  follows  the  Folio. — Ed.] 

58.  To  losse]  See  II,  iii,  228. 

10 


146 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iii,  SC.  iii. 


But  my  heart  bleedes  :  and  moft  accurft  am  I 

To  be  by  oath  enioyn’d  to  this.  Farewell,  60 

The  day  frownes  more  and  more  :  thou’rt  like  to  haue 

A  lullabie  too  rough  :  I  neuer  faw 

The  heauens  fo  dim,  by  day.  A  fauage  clamor  ? 

Well  may  I  get  a-boord  :  This  is  the  Chace, 

I  am  gone  for  euer.  Exit  purfued  by  a  Beare.  65 

Shep.  I  would  there  were  no  age  betweene  ten  and 
three  and  twenty,  or  that  youth  would  deep  out  the  rest  : 
for  there  is  nothing  (in  the  betweene)  but  getting  wen¬ 
ches  with  childe,  wronging  the  Auncientry,  ftealing, 
fighting,  hearke  you  now  :  would  any  but  thefe  boylde-  70 
braines  of  nineteene,  and  two  and  twenty  hunt  this  wea- 


61.  thou'rt]  F2F3,  Cap.  Dyce,  Wh. 
Sta.  Cam.  thou  art  F4,  Rowe  et  cet. 

63.  day.']  day.  [Bear  roars]  Coll.  i. 
day. — [Noise  without  of  Hunters  and 
Dogs]  Sta.,  Dyce  adds  *  Bears.’ 

clamor  /]  clamour  !  F^F^. 

64.  a-boord :]  aboard ! — [sees  a  Bear.] 
Sta. 

65.  Beare.]  Beare.  Enter  a  Shep- 
heard.  Ff  (an  old  Shepherd.  Rowe). 

Scene  vii.  Pope-K 


66-80.  As  mnemonic  lines,  Warb. 

66.  ten ]  thirteen  Han.  Cap.  sixteen 
Glo.  Cam.  Wh.  ii,  Huds.  Rife. 

69.  Auncientry ]  ancientry  Rowe. 

70.  fighting , ...  now  .-]  fighting —  ... 
now —  Rowe. 

fighting ,]  fighting —  [Homs.] 

Wh.  ii. 

70,  71.  boylde-braines ]  Fa.  boyld- 
- brains  F3.  boyld  brains  F  .  boiled- 
-brains  Coll. 


62.  lullabie]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

63.  clamor?]  Johnson  :  This  clamor  was  the  cry  of  the  dogs  and  hunters;  then 
seeing  the  bear,  he  cries,  ‘  This  is  the  chace,’  or,  the  animal  pursued. 

66.  Shep.]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  It  is  worth  noting  that  ‘  Crooke  ’  is  written  in  the 
margin  of  the  corrected  Fa,  to  indicate  that  the  Shepherd  was  to  be  furnished  with 
that  appropriate  property. 

66.  ten]  Capell  followed  the  change,  silently  made  by  Hanmer,  of  ‘  ten  ’  to 
thirteen,  1  because,’  as  he  says,  ‘  ten  is  rather  too  early  for  some  of  the  pranks  com¬ 
plain’d  of.’ — Cambridge  Editors  [see  Text.  Notes]  :  If  written  in  Arabic  numerals 
16  would  be  more  likely  to  be  mistaken  for  10  than  13,  which  Capell  suggested. 
Besides,  sixteen  seems  to  suit  the  context  better  than  thirteen.  Another  mistake  of 
one  number  for  another  occurs  IV,  ii,  6,  but  this  may  have  been  an  error  on  the 
author’s  part. — Gildemeister  ( Anmerkungen ,  p.  1 15):  The  connection  clearly 
demands  an  age  older  than  ‘  ten  ’ ;  but  if  a  change  must  be  made,  nineteen  is  to  be 
preferred,  which  the  old  Shepherd  himself  mentions  a  few  lines  further  on.  A  com¬ 
positor  would  be  as  likely  to  convert  19  into  10,  as  he  would  16.— Deighton  :  The 
alteration  of  the  Cambridge  Editors  is  by  no  means  an  improvement ;  ‘  ten  ’  marks 
extreme  boyishness,  sixteen  does  not. 

69.  Auncientry]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.) :  Ancients,  elder  people,  elders. 

70,  71.  boylde-braines]  When  Prospero  has  woven  his  spells  about  his  enemies, 
he  commands  solemn  music  to  sound,  with  the  words : — ‘  A  solemn  air,  and  the  best 


act  iii,  sc.  iii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  147 

ther  ?  They  haue  fcarr’d  away  two  of  my  beft  Sheepe,  72 
which  I  feare  the  Wolfe  will  fooner  finde  then  the  Mai- 
fter  ;  if  any  where  I  haue  them,  his  by  the  fea-fide,  brou- 
zing  of  Iuy.  Good-lucke  (and’t  be  thy  will)  what  haue  75 
we  heere  ?  Mercy  on’s,  a  Barne  ?  A  very  pretty  barne  ;  A 
boy,  or  a  Childe  I  wonder  ?  ( A  pretty  one,  a  verie  prettie  77 


72.  fcarr’d ]  Ff,  Sing.  Ktly.  scar'd 
Rowe  et  cet. 

73,  74.  Maifler]  Ff,  Sing. 

75.  of  Iuy\  on  ivy  Steev.  Var.  ’03,’  13. 
and’t']  an't  Pope  ii,  et  seq. 


75.  thy ]  the  Ff,  Rowe  i. 

76.  Barne]  bearne  Theob.  bairn 
Dyce. 

77-  boy ]  god  Wh.  i,  Huds.  boy-  Ktly. 
Childe]  maid-child  Ktly. 


comforter  To  an  unsettled  fancy,  cure  thy  braines,  Now  useless,  boiled  within  thy 
skull,’  V,  i,  70.  With  this  clew,  and  with  Theseus’s  assertion  that  ‘  Lovers  and  mad¬ 
men  have  such  seething  brains,’  we  may  understand  the  old  Shepherd’s  phrase. 
Without  this  hint,  the  temptation  would  be  strong  to  mistrust  the  word  ‘  boylde.’ 
There  are  several  words  for  which  it  might  be  plausibly  exchanged ;  these  may  be 
safely  left  to  be  suggested  by  those  to  whom  the  emendation  of  Shakespeare  is  a  light 
and  airy  pastime. — Ed. 

75-  of  Iuy]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia.  For  other  examples  of  of  after  verbal 
nouns,  see  Abbott,  §  178.  ‘  Iuie  is  called  Edera,  and  hath  that  name,  for  it  cleaueth 
to  trees,  as  Isi.  saith :  or  it  hath  the  name  of  Edus,  a  Kid,  for  it  multiplieth  milke  in 
Goates,  that  eate  thereof,  &  with  that  milke  Kids  be  fed  and  nourished.’ — Batman 
vppon  Bartholome,  p.  289  verso. — Ed. 

75.  76.  haue  we  heere  ?]  With  the  exception  of  Capell  and  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) 
every  editor,  from  Rowe  down  to  Dyce  (ed.  ii)  has,  after  these  words,  the  stage- 
direction,  substantially :  *  Taking  up  the  child,’  overlooking  the  fact  that  in  line  83 
the  shepherd  says  he’ll  wait  until  his  son  comes  before  taking  it  up ;  possibly,  the 
child  is  not  lifted  from  the  ground  until  line  121.  It  is  hardly  likely  that  the  old 
man,  while  listening  to  his  son’s  account  of  the  ship- wreck,  stands  holding  the  child 
in  his  arms. — Ed. 

76.  Barne  ?]  Murray  (A’!  E.  D .) :  The  obsolete  form  of  Bairn ,  a  child;  it  still 
survives  in  northern  English;  bairn  is  the  Scotch  form,  occasionally  used  in  literary 
English  since  1700. 

77.  Childe]  Steevens  :  I  am  told  that  in  some  of  our  inland  counties,  a  female 
infant ,  in  contradistinction  to  a  male  one,  is  still  termed,  among  the  peasantry, — a 
child. — Nares  :  This  may  perhaps  be  referred  to  the  simplicity  of  the  shepherd, 
reversing  the  common  practice,  than  taken  as  an  authority  for  it. — R.  G.  White: 
The  true  reading  [which  White  adopts],  I  have  not  a  doubt  is  ‘A  god  or  a  child’ — 
meaning  ‘  a  babe  of  immortal  or  mortal  origin.’  The  typographical  mistake  involved 
might  easily  have  been  made;  and  the  correspondent  passage,  hitherto  unnoticed, 
of  the  old  tale  (the  language  of  which  was  deeply  impressed  upon  Shakespeare’s 
mind)  seems  quite  decisive  on  the  point : — ‘  The  sheepeheard  .  .  .  thought  assuredly 
that  it  was  some  little  god.  .  .  .  The  babe  began  to  cry  a  freshe,  whereby  the  poore 
man  knew  it  was  a  childe.'  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  time  is  that  of  Apollo’s 
Oracle,  when  demigods  were  begotten  upon  the  Earth,  and  the  children  of  Jupiter, 
Mars,  and  Apollo  were  exposed  and  found  by  shepherds.  [In  his  Second  Ed.  White 


1 48 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iii,  sc;  iii. 


one)  fure  fome  Scape  ;  Though  I  am  not  bookifh,  yet  I  78 
can  reade  Waiting-Gentlewoman  in  the  fcape  :  this  has 
beene  fome  ftaire-worke,  fome  Trunke-worke,  fome  be-  80 
hinde-doore  worke  :  they  were  warmer  that  got  this, 
then  the  poore  Thing  is  heere.  lie  take  it  vp  for  pity,  yet 
lie  tarry  till  my  fonne  come  :  he  hallow’d  but  euen  now. 
Whoa-ho-hoa. 


Enter  Clowne. 

Clo.  Hilloa,  loa. 

Shep.  What  ?  art  fo  neere  ?  If  thou’lt  fee  a  thing  to 
talke  on,  when  thou  art  dead  and  rotten  .  come  hither  : 
what  ayl’ft  thou,  man  ? 


85 


89 


78.  Scape\  'scape  Rowe. 

80,  81.  behinde-doore  work~\  behind- 
-door-work  Rowe. 

83.  hallow'd ]  F2F3.  hollow'd  F^, 

Rowe  +  ,  Var.  ’73.  halloo'd  Cap.  hol- 
loo'd  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Rann.  holla'd  Mai. 
Steev.  hollaed  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Knt.  hol- 


lad  Var.  ’21.  hallood  Coll,  hallooed 
Dyce,  Cam. 

85.  Enter...]  After  hither ,  line  88, 
Dyce,  Sta. 

86.  Clo.]  Clo.  [within]  Dyce.  Clo. 
[without]  Sta. 


returns  to  ‘  child,’ but  remarks:  ‘we  should  probably  read  “  a  god  ax  a  child," 
this  is  the  more  probable,  because  in  this  very  play,  I,  i,  a  boy  (the  prince)  is  em¬ 
phatically  called  a  child.’] — Halliwell  :  ‘  A  child,  a  female  infant,’ — Hole’s  MS 
Glossary  of  Devonshire  Words,  collected  about  1780.  This  is  clearly  the  meaning 
of  the  term,  unless  it  is  supposed  that  the  shepherd  blunders  in  his  simplicity,  or  in 
the  excess  of  his  astonishment  at  the  discovery  of  the  infant.  [This  definition  from 
Hole’s  Gloss,  is  cited  by  Dyce  and  Staunton  with  approval.] — Murray  (Ar.  E.  D.) 
gives  as  one  of  the  definitions  of  ‘  child,’  ‘  a  female  infant,  a  girl-baby,’  and  after 
giving  the  present  passage  quotes  Ash’s  Dictionary,  1775  ‘  Child,  an  infant— a  son 

or  daughter  ...  a  female  infant,’  which  is  earlier  in  date  than  Hole’s  Glossary. 
There  are  several  good  notes  in  Series  V,  vol.  v,  of  Notes  H  Queries ;  on  p.  371 
C.  Thiriold  gives  a  passage  from  Beau.  &  Fl.’s  Philaster,  II,  iv : — ‘  if  he  have  any 
child,  It  shall  be  crossly  matched;  the  gods  themselves  Shall  sow  wild  strife  be¬ 
twixt  her  lord  and  her.'  [There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  a  ‘  child,’  especially  in 
contradistinction  to  a  ‘  boy,’  means  a  girl.  But  I  much  doubt  that  it  was  intended 
to  bear  that  meaning  here.  It  is  very  certain  that  it  does  not  always  bear  it,  and  in 
the  mouth  of  one  who  tells  the  Clown  that  here  are  sights  for  him  to  talk  on  when 
he  is  dead  and  rotten,  we  may  believe  that  any  absurdity  is  intentionally  placed. 
— Ed.] 

83.  lie  tarry]  This  may  mean,  of  course,  ‘  I’ll  take  up  the  babe  and  then  tarry 
till  my  son  come  ’  but  it  may,  also,  mean  ‘  I’ll  take  it  up,— yet,  no,— I’ll  wait  till  my 
son  come.’  See  note  on  stage-direction,  line  76. — Ed. 

84.  Whoa-ho-hoa]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  The  final  a  in  the  call  and  reply  here, 
seems  to  have  been  intended  to  be  pronounced. 


act  hi,  sc.  iii.J 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


149 


Clo.  I  haue  feene  two  fuch  fights,  by  Sea  &  by  Land:  90 

but  I  am  not  to  fay  it  is  a  Sea,  for  it  is  now  the  skie,  be¬ 
twixt  the  Firmament  and  it,  you  cannot  thruft  a  bodkins 
point. 

Shep.  Why  boy,  how  is  it  ? 

Clo.  I  would  you  did  but  fee  how  it  chafes,  how  it  ra-  95 
ges,  how  it  takes  vp  the  fhore,  but  that’s  not  to  the  point: 

Oh,  the  moft  pitteous  cry  of  the  poore  foules,  fometimes 
to  fee  ’em,  and  not  to  fee  ’em  :  Now  the  Shippe  boaring 
the  Moone  with  her  maine  Maft  ,  and  anon  fwallowed 
with  yeft  and  froth,  as  you’ld  thrufi.  a  Corke  into  a  hogf-  100 
head.  And  then  for  the  Land-feruice  ,  to  fee  how  the 
Beare  tore  out  his  fhoulder-bone,  how  he  cride  to  mee 
for  helpe,  and  faid  his  name  was  Antigotius,  a  Nobleman: 

But  to  make  an  end  of  the  Ship,  to  fee  how  the  Sea  flap- 
dragon’d  it  :  but  firft,  how  the  poore  foules  roared,  and  105 
the  fea  mock’d  thermand  how  the  poore  Gentleman  roa- 


95-108.  As  mnemonic  lines,  Warb. 
96.  takes']  rakes  Han.  tears  Cart¬ 
wright. 

98.  and  not ]  and  then  not  Cap. 

99.  /wallowed  ]  swallow' d  Rowe  -+■  . 


101.  for  the  Land-feruice ]  the  land- 
service  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  the  land-sight 
Han. 

105.  roared ]  roar'd  F  . 


101.  Land-seruice]  Warburton  :  Everyone  sees  the  humour  of  this  military 
expression  ‘  land-service  ’ ;  and  how  well  it  is  adapted  to  the  character.  [‘  Land- 
service  ’  is  undoubtedly  used  in  a  military  sense  when  dealing  with  military  matters. 
But  ‘  service  ’  among  its  many  meanings  signified  a  course  of  dishes  at  table  ;  thus 
Hamlet  uses  it  when  he  says  ‘Your  fat  king  and  your  lean  beggar  is  but  variable 
service,  two  dishes,  but  to  one  table.’  Again,  in  Stans  Puer  in  Mensam  : — ‘  And  til 
thow  se  afore  the  thy  service.  Be  nat  to  hasty  on  brede  for  to  byte.’ — E.  E.  Text.  Soc. 
p.  28.  It  is,  therefore,  possible  that  the  clown  says,  in  effect : — ‘  And  then  to  see 
what  was  dished  up  on  land.’ — Ed.] 

104,  105.  flap-dragon’d]  Steevens:  That  is,  swallowed  it,  as  our  ancient  topers 
swallowed  flap-dragons. — Johnson  (Note  on  2  Hen.  IV:  II,  iv,  267) :  A  flap-dragon 
is  a  small  combustible  body,  fired  at  one  end,  and  put  afloat  in  a  glass  of  liquor.  It 
is  an  act  of  a  toper’s  dexterity  to  toss  off  the  glass  in  such  a  manner  as  to  prevent  the 
flap-dragon  from  doing  mischief. — Dyce  (Gloss.):  In  former  days  gallants  used  to 
vie  with  each  other  in  drinking  off  flap-dragons  to  the  health  of  their  mistresses, — 
which  flap-dragons  were  generally  raisins,  and  sometimes  even  candles’  ends,  swim¬ 
ming  in  brandy  or  other  strong  spirits,  whence,  on  fire,  they  were  snatched  by  the 
mouth  and  swallowed. — Bradley  (N.  E.  D.) :  The  original  sense  may  have  been 
identical  with  a  dialectal  sense  of  snapdragon,  viz.  a  figure  of  a  dragon’s  head  with 
snapping  jaws,  carried  about  by  the  mummers  at  Christmas ;  but  of  this  there  is  no 
trace  in  our  quotations. 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iii,  sc.  iii. 


150 


red,  and  the  Beare  mock’d  him,  both  roaring  lowder  107 
then  the  fea,  or  weather. 

Shep.  Name  of  mercy,  when  was  this  boy  ? 

Clo.  Now,  now  :  I  haue  not  wink’d  fince  I  faw  thefe  no 
fights  :  the  men  are  not  yet  cold  vnder  water,  nor  the 
Beare  halfe  din’d  on  the  Gentleman  :  he’s  at  it  now. 

Shep.  Would  I  had  bin  by,  to  haue  help’d  the  olde 
man. 

Clo.  I  would  you  had  beene  by  the  fhip  fide,  to  haue  1 15 


107.  mock'd]  mocked  Y . 

109.  Name\  ’ Name  Theob.  ii  +  ,  Cap. 
Var.  Steev. 

ill.  not  yet  cold  ]  not  cold  Rowe  i. 
113.  Would]  ’  Would  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns.  Cap. 


1 13.  bln]  beene  Ff. 

1 13,  1 14.  olde  man ]  nobleman  Theob. 
Han. 

1 15 .  piip  fide]  piip-fide  FjF^.  ship's 
side  Coll. 


I09.  Name]  Theobald  carefully  placed  before  this  word  an  apostrophe  which  is 
not  in  the  Folio,  and  before  ‘  Marry  ’  in  line  159  did  not  place  an  apostrophe  which 
is  in  the  Folio.  Of  course  the  same  statement  reversed  may  be  made  of  Isaac 
Jaggar(l  and  Ed.  Blount,  who  by  a  lucky  fate  have  escaped  all  the  blame  for  typo¬ 
graphical  errors  which  is  usually  heaped  on  Heminge  and  Condv.ll.  Theobald  might 
urge  that  there  is  an  omission  of  ‘  I’th’  ’ ;  and  Jaggard  and  Blount  that  there  is  an 
omission  of  ‘  Ay.’ — Ed. 

1 13>  1 *4*  olde  man]  Theobald  :  I  am  persuaded  we  ought  to  restore  Nobleman. 
The  Shepherd  knew  nothing  of  Antigonus’s  age ;  besides,  the  Clown  had  just  told 
his  father,  that  he  said  his  name  was  Antigonus,  a  Nobleman,  and  no  less  than  three 

times  in  this  short  scene,  the  Clown,  speaking  of  him,  calls  him  the  ‘  Gentleman.’ _ 

Capell  ( p .  172)  •'  The  character  [of  the  old  Shepherd]  has  not  been  weigh’d  by 
them  [Theobald  and  Hanmer]  duly ;  the  ignorance  of  the  speaker  appears  in  his 
calling  the  mantie  ‘  — a  bearing-cloth  for  a  squire’s  child,’  and  he  knew  as  little  what 
a  nobleman  was  as  what  a  mantle ;  the  son,  though  told  he  was  a  «  nobleman,’  call* 
him  ‘  gentleman,’  and  the  father  presumes  he  was  old  because  he  himself  was.— 
Steevens  :  I  suppose  the  Shepherd  infers  the  age  of  Antigonus  from  his  inability  to 
defend  himself;  or  perhaps  Shakespeare,  who  was  conscious  that  he  himself  designed 
Antigonus  for  an  old  man,  has  inadvertently  given  this  knowledge  to  the  Shepherd 
who  had  never  seen  him.  Malone  :  Perhaps  the  word  old  was  inadvertently  omitted 
before  ‘Gentleman’  in  line  1 12. — R.  G.  White:  Shakespeare  knew  that  Antigonus 
was  old,  but  the  Shepherd  did  not.  This  is  a  specimen  of  the  only  kind  of  self¬ 
obtrusion  found  in  Shakespeare’s  dramas.— Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  This  is  an  oversight  on 
our  author’s  part. 

1 15.  I  would]  Theobald  (Nichols,  Illust.  ii,  362) :  Does  this  ungracious  Clown 
wish  his  father  to  have  been  by  the  ship-side  to  have  been  drowned  ?  I  suspect  here 
we  should  read  :  ‘  I  would  not,’  etc.  [Theobald  did  not  repeat  this  conjecture  in  his 
edition,  but  instead  thereof,  he  converted  the  whole  speech  into  an  Aside,  wherein  he 
has  been  followed  by  many  an  editor  who  has  failed  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  speech 
is  that  of  a  Clown,  who  afterwards  thought  it  would  be  ‘  hard  luck  not  to  live  to  shed 


act  hi,  sc.  iii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  15 1 

help’d  herjthere  your  charity  would  haue  lack’d  footing.  116 

Shep.  Heauy  matters,  heauy  matters  :  but  looke  thee 
heere  boy.  Now  bleffe  thy  felfe:  thou  met’ft  with  things 
dying,  I  with  things  new  borne.  Here’s  a  fight  for  thee: 

Looke  thee,  a  bearing-cloath  for  a  Squires  childe:  looke  120 
thee  heere,  take  vp,  take  vp  (Boy: )  open’t :  fo,  let’s  fee,  it 
was  told  me  I  fhould  be  rich  by  the  Fairies.  This  is  fome 
Changeling  :  open’t  :  what’s  within,  boy  ? 

Clo.  You’re  a  mad  olde  man  :  If  the  finnes  of  your 
youth  are  forgiuen  you,  you’re  well  to  liue.  Golde,  all  125 
Gold. 

Shep.  This  is  Faiery  Gold  boy,  and  ’twill  proue  fo:  vp 
with’t,  keepe  it  clofe  :  home,  home,  the  next  way.  We 
are  luckie  (boy)  and  to  bee  fo  ftill  requires  nothing  but  129 


1 1 6.  there]  but  there  Han. 

[Aside.  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Var.  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 
lack' d  ]  lacked  F^. 

118.  met ’PI  meet'P  Rowe  +  ,  Var. 
’73.  mettest  Dyce,  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 

1 1 9.  Here's]  Here  is  F  ,  Rowe  i. 

123.  what's]  what  is  F  ,  Rowe  i. 


124.  mad]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Warb. 
made  Theob.  et  cet. 

125.  you're]  you  are  F4,  Rowe  i. 

127.  Faiery]  Fairy  F  . 

'twill]  will  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Var.  ’73. 

128.  with't]  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Cap.  Dyce, 
Wh.  Cam.  with  it  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 

129.  pill]  still,  Theob.  et  seq. 


many  more  tears,  bring  in  so  preposterous  an  estate,’  and  from  whom  any  absurd 
sentiment  or  perverted  expression  is  to  be  expected. — Ed.] 

1 17.  looke  thee]  See  line  53,  above. 

120.  bearing-cloath]  Percy  :  This  is  the  fine  mantle  or  cloth  with  which  a  child 
is  usually  covered  when  it  is  carried  to  the  church  to  be  baptized. 

123.  Changeling]  Steevens:  That  is,  some  child  left  behind  by  the  fairies,  in 
the  room  of  one  which  they  had  stolen.  So  in  Mid.  N.  D.  [II,  i,  22  of  the  present 
edition.  ‘  Changeling’  here  does  not  mean  the  child  left  behind,  but  the  child  that 
has  been  stolen  away]. 

124.  mad]  Theobald:  I  have  ventured  to  correct  the  text, — ‘You’re  a  made  old 
man ;’  i.  e.  your  fortune’s  made  by  this  adventitious  treasure. — Farmer  :  This  emen¬ 
dation  is  certainly  right.  The  word  is  borrowed  from  the  Novel :  ‘  The  good  man 
desired  his  wife  to  be  quiet ;  if  she  would  hold  peace,  they  were  made  for  ever.’ 
[See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia.] 

125.  well  to  liue]  Abbott  (§  356) :  That  is,  you  are  well  off  as  regards  living  ; 
it  resembles  our  modem,  ‘  You  are  well  to  do.'  [See  II,  i,  122 ;  and  also  cf.  Mer.  of 
Ven.  II,  ii,  50  of  this  ed.] 

128.  keepe  it  close]  Staunton  :  To  divulge  the  possession  of  fairies’  gifts  was 
supposed  to  entail  misfortune.  Thus,  Ben  Jonson, — ‘  A  prince’s  secrets  are  like  fairy 
favours,  Wholesome  if  kept ;  but  poison  if  discover’d.’ 

128.  the  next  way]  Steevens:  That  is,  the  nearest  way. 


152 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  hi,  sc.  iii. 


fecrecie.  Let  my  fheepe  go  :  Come  (good  boy)the  next 
way  home. 

Clo.  Go  you  the  next  way  with  your  Findings,  lie  go 
fee  if  the  Beare  bee  gone  from  the  Gentleman,  and  how 
much  he  hath  eaten  :  they  are  neuer  curft  but  when  they 
are  hungry  :  if  there  be  any  of  him  left,  lie  bury  it. 

Shep.  That’s  a  good  deed  :  if  thou  mayeft  difcerne  by 
that  which  is  left  of  him,  what  he  is,  fetch  me  to  thTight 
of  him. 

Clozvne.  ’Marry  will  I :  and  you  fhall  helpe  to  put  him 
i’th’ground. 

Shep.  ’Tis  a  lucky  day,  boy,  and  wee’l  do  good  deeds 
on  Exeunt 

Ij6.  mayejl~\  Fs,  Dyce,  Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  maijl  F_F^.  may' st  Rowe  et  cet. 


130 


135 


I40 

I42 


134.  curst]  Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  Shrewish,  cross-grained,  ill-tempered,  fierce,  irascible, 
angry. 

137.  th  sight]  Cambridge  Editors:  Capell’s  copy  of  Fr  has  distinctly  ‘ fight.’ 
A  copy  in  the  possession  of  the  Rev.  N.  M.  Ferrers,  Master  of  Gonville  and  Caius 
College,  has  as  distinctly  ‘  sight.’  [It  is  ‘  sight  ’  in  the  copy  of  the  present  Ed.] 

I4* I-  good  deeds]  Walker  ( Proverbs  in  Shakespeare — Crit.  ii,  170)  :  2  Hen.  VI: 
IV,  iii,  near  the  end,  ‘  If  we  mean  to  thrive  and  do  good,  break  open  the  jails,  and 
let  out  the  prisoners.’  Thrive  and  do  good  was  probably  a  familiar  expression.  Com¬ 
pare  [the  present  passage]  in  Winter's  Tale. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


153 


A  tins  Quartus .  Scena  Prim  a. 


Enter  Time ,  the  Chorus. 

Time.  I  that  pleafe  feme,  try  all  :  both  ioy  and  terror 
Of  good,  and  bad  :  that  makes,  and  vnfolds  error,  4 


1.  A (ftus  Quartus]  Act  IV.  (at  the 
beginning  of  the  next  Scene)  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 

3,  4.  all :  ...  bad:]  all , ...  bad,  F4, 
Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Wh.  Cam.  Rife,  Dtn. 


4.  makes,  and  vnfolds ]  Ff,  Wh.  Cam. 
Rife,  mask  and  tinfold  Theob.  make 
and  unfold  Rowe  et  cet. 

4.  error,']  error.  Ff.  error ;  Rowe  +  . 


1.  A  (This  Quartus]  Hudson  (p.  28) :  During  the  first  three  Acts  the  interest  of 
the  play  is  mainly  tragic ;  the  scene  is  densely  crowded  with  incidents ;  the  action 
hurried,  abrupt,  almost  spasmodic ;  the  style  quick  and  sharp,  flashing  off  point  after 
point  in  brief,  sinewy  strokes;  and  all  is  rapidity  and  dispatch;  what  with  the  insane 
fury  of  the  King,  the  noble  agony  of  the  Queen,  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Court  in  her 
behalf,  and  the  King’s  violence  toward  both  them  and  her,  the  mind  is  kept  on  the 
jump;  all  which,  if  continued  to  the  end,  would  generate  rather  a  tumult  and  hubbub 
in  the  thoughts,  than  that  inward  music  which  the  title  of  the  play  promises ;  not  to 
say,  that  such  a  prolonged  hurry  of  movement  would  at  length  become  monotonous 
and  wearisome.  Far  otherwise  the  latter  half  of  the  play.  Here  the  anticipations 
proper  to  a  long,  leisurely  winter  evening  are  fully  met ;  the  general  effect  is  soothing 
and  composing ;  the  tones,  dipped  in  sweetness,  fall  gently  on  the  ear,  disposing  the 
mind  to  be  still  and  listen  and  contemplate ;  thus  making  the  play,  as  Coleridge 
describes  it,  ‘  exquisitely  respondent  to  the  title.’  It  would  seem,  indeed,  that  in  these 
scenes  the  Poet  had  specially  endeavoured  how  much  of  silent  effect  he  could  pro¬ 
duce,  without  diverging  from  the  dramatic  form.  To  this  end,  he  provides  resting- 
places  for  thought ;  suspending  or  retarding  the  action  by  musical  pauses  and  periods 
of  lyrical  movement,  and  breathing-in  the  mellowest  strains  of  poetical  harmony,  till 
the  eye  is  ‘  made  quiet  by  the  power  of  beauty,’  and  all  tumult  of  mind  is  hushed  by 
the  very  intensity  of  feeling. 

2.  Heath  (p.  213) :  I  am  persuaded,  from  the  insipid  flatness  of  the  expression, 
and  the  poverty  of  the  sentiment,  that  this  Chorus  is  an  interpolation  of  the  players, 
and  not  the  genuine  product  of  Shakespeare’s  pen. — Capell  (p.  172)  :  The  address 
is  of  the  utmost  use  here,  and  made  judiciously  in  the  person  of  ‘  Time  ’ ;  and,  if  for 
these  causes  only  must  have  been  Shakespeare’s;  contrary  to  an  opinion  [of  Heath], 
who  sets  it  lower  than  it  deserves.  In  truth  its  punctuation  has  been  such  in  all  parts 
of  it,  that  it  was  scarce  discoverable  what  it  is;  it  was  besides  blemish’d  with  some 
corruptions.  [Capell  begins  the  Fourth  Act  here,  but  does  not  mark  this  ‘  Chorus  ’  as 
a  Scene.  The  ‘  Scena  Secunda  ’  of  the  Folio  is  his  Scene  I.] — Cambridge  Editors  : 
Johnson  followed  Theobald  and  Warburton  in  printing  Time’s  speech  at  the  end 
of  the  Third  Act,  but  said  in  his  note  :  ‘  I  believe  this  speech  of  Time  rather  begins 
the  Fourth  Act  than  concludes  the  Third.’  He  had  not  referred,  apparently,  to  the 
Folios  or  to  Rowe  and  Pope.  Theobald  did  not  mean  to  include  the  speech  in  either 
Act,  but  drew  a  line  above  it  to  mark  that  it  was  an  Interlude  between  the  Third  and 


154 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  rv,  sc.  i. 


[2.  Enter  Time,  the  Chorus.] 

Fourth.  Warburton,  and  Johnson  after  him,  omitted  the  line.  [Warburton  and  John¬ 
son  omitted  the  line  because  they  printed  from  Theobald’s  Second  Edition,  where  this 
line  is  omitted. — Ed.] — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  There  could  hardly  be  greater  differ¬ 
ence  in  style  than  that  between  Time’s  speech  as  Chorus  and  the  rest  of  the  verse  of 
this  play.  The  former  is  direct,  simple,  composed  of  the  commonest  words  used  in 
their  commonest  signification,  but  bald  and  tame,  and  in  its  versification  very  con¬ 
strained  and  ungraceful ;  the  latter  is  involved,  parenthetical,  having  a  vocabulary  of 
its  own,  but  rich  in  beauties  of  thought  and  expression,  and  entirely  untrammelled  by 
the  form  in  which  it  is  written.  The  Chorus  I  believe  not  to  have  been  written  by 
Shakespeare.  It  bears  no  resemblance  to  his  work  at  any  period  of  his  life.  My  ear 
cannot  err,  I  think,  in  deciding  that  such  rhythm  as  this  is  not  Shakespeare's  [see 
lines  11-25].  A  comparison  of  this  Chorus  with  the  Epilogue  to  The  Tempest,  and 
the  Prologue  to  Henry  VIII.,  will,  I  think,  convince  any  one  with  an  ear  that  they 
are  from  the  same  pen,  and  that  not  Shakespeare’s.  He  probably  saw,  after  putting 
the  story  into  dramatic  form,  that  for  an  audience  an  explanation  was  needed  to  bridge 
over  the  space  between  the  two  Acts,  and  committed  the  ungrateful  task  to  willing 
hands.  It  has  been  supposed  by  previous  editors,  and  not  without  reason,  that  the 
Prologue  to  Henry  VIII  was  written  by  Ben  Jonson.  But  from  the  remarkable  use 
in  that  composition  of  the  uncouth  and  disjointed  rhythm  produced  by  the  continual 
enjambemenl  de  vers ,  which  is  noticeable  also  in  the  Epilogue  to  The  Tempest,  and  in 
a  still  greater  degree  in  this  Chorus,  I  more  than  suspect  that  they  were  all  written 
by  Chapman.  See  Chapman’s  poetical  address  To  the  Reader  which  precedes  his 
translation  of  Homer;  and  also  that  translation. — Lueders  {Sk.  Jahrbuch,  1870, 
vol.  v,  p.  282) :  The  idea  of  thus  introducing  Time  as  a  deus  ex  machina,  so  to 
speak, — albeit  such  personifications  were  not  in  those  days  uncommon, — Shakespeare 
presumably  derived  from  the  title  of  Greene’s  Novel,  wThich  is :  ‘  Pandosto,  or  the 
Triumph  of  Time  .  .  .  wherein  is  discovered  that,  although  by  means  of  sinister 
fortune.  Truth  may  be  concealed  yet  by  Time  in  spight  of  fortune  it  is  most  manifestly 
reuealed.’ — Stapfer  (p.  60)  :  It  would  be  impossible  to  speak  in  a  quieter  and 
prouder  tone  than  this,  and  nothing  is  more  striking  in  Time’s  speech  than  its  digni¬ 
fied  calmness  and  serenity.  To  some  critics  these  words  seem  to  wear  an  accent  of 
revolt  and  protestation,  but  what  a  pitiful  mistake  !  Shakespear  never  troubled  him¬ 
self  about  the  legislators  of  Parnassus,  or  even  did  them  the  honour  of  recognizing 
their  existence.  He  is  far  above  our  paltry  wrangling,  and  from  the  philosophical 
point  of  view  to  which  he  rises,  a  space  of  sixteen  years  is  of  no  longer  duration  than 
an  interval  of  twenty-four  hours,  both  alike  are  nothing  in  the  devouring  flight  of 
time.  [It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Stapfer  does  not  furnish  the  names  of  the  critics 
to  whom  he  alludes. — Ed.] — Hudson  :  Certainly,  if  Shakespeare  wrote  [this  Chorus], 
his  hand  must  have  lapsed  from,  or  forgot,  its  cunning  for  the  time.  The  texture 
and  movement  of  the  verse  are  very  different  from  what  a  ripe  Shakespearian  tastes 
in  the  rest  of  the  play.  As  compared  with  the  Choruses  in  Henry  V,  the  workman¬ 
ship  is  at  once  clumsy,  languid,  and  obscure.  Shakespeare  indeed  is  often  obscure  ; 
but  his  obscurity  almost  always  results  from  compression  of  thought,  not  from  clumsi¬ 
ness  of  tongue  or  brain. 

3,  4.  please  .  .  .  makes,]  For  other  examples  of  irregular  construction  with  the 
relative,  see  Abbott,  §  247. 

4.  makes,  and  vnfolds]  Theobald  :  This  does  not,  in  my  opinion,  take  in  the 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 


155 


Now  take  vpon  me  (in  the  name  of  Time) 

To  vfe  my  wings  :  Impute  it  not  a  crime 

To  me,  or  my  fwift  paffage,  that  I  Aide 

Ore  fixteene  yeeres,  and  leaue  the  growth  vntride 


8 


5 


poet’s  thought.  Time  does  not  make  mistakes,  and  discover  them  at  different  con¬ 
junctures;  but  the  poet  means,  that  Time  often  for  a  season  covers  errors;  which  he 
afterward  displays  and  brings  to  light.  I  choose  therefore  to  read :  ‘  that  mask  and 
unfold  error,’  etc. — M.  Mason  (p.  130) :  These  very  comments  on  Shakespeare  prove 
that  time  can  both  make  and  unfold  error. — Steevens  :  Theobald’s  emendation  is 
surely  unnecessary.  Departed  time  renders  many  facts  obscure,  and  in  that  sense  is 
the  cause  of  error.  Time  to  come  brings  discoveries  with  it.  [It  is  not  easy  to  under¬ 
stand  how  time  can  be  said  to  make  errors.  ‘  Time  shall  unfold  what  plighted  cun¬ 
ning  hides,’  is  said  in  Lear ,  but  how  time  can  create  the  difficulty  which  it  afterwards 
solves  is  by  no  means  clear.  Error  is  the  result  of  human  dealings  which  ‘  Time’s 
strong  hours  ’  may  reverse,  if  those  who  made  the  error  do  not  of  themselves  unfold 
it.  May  it  not  be,  then,  in  the  present  passage,  that  ‘  makes  ’  and  ‘  unfolds  ’  do  not 
refer  to  Time,  but  to  the  ‘  good  ’  and  the  *  bad  ’  ?  May  not  the  sentence  be  para¬ 
phrased  thus : — I,  who  please  some,  try  all,  and  am  both  the  joy  and  the  terror  of 
the  good  man,  as  well  as  the  bad  man  who  makes  and  unfolds  error  ’  ?  (In  ‘both 
joy,’  there  is,  I  think,  an  absorption  of  the  definite  article  in  ‘  both,’  that  is,  both  the.) 
This  interpretation  does  away  with  the  irregularity  of  construction  in  having  two 
verbs  in  the  3d  pers.,  ‘  makes  and  unfolds,’  placed  between  two  verbs  in  the  1st  pers. : 
‘  please  ’  and  *  take,’  and  all  four  with  the  same  nominative. — Ed.] 

5.  in  the  name]  Deighton:  That  is,  under  the  name;  not  in  behalf  of.  [With 
the  text  before  us,  we  know  who  the  speaker  is,  but,  for  the  sake  of  the  spectators,  it 
is  necessary  that  the  character  should  announce  himself  by  name. — Ed.] 

8.  sixteene  yeeres]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. — Steevens:  This  trespass,  in 
respect  of  dramatic  unity,  will  appear  venial  to  those  who  have  read  Lyly’s  Endymion. 
.  .  .  Two  Acts  of  his  piece  comprise  the  space  of  forty  years,  Endymion  lying  down 
to  sleep  at  the  end  of  the  Second,  and  waking  in  the  First  Scene  of  the  Fifth,  after 
a  nap  of  that  unconscionable  length.  Lyly  has  likewise  been  guilty  of  much  greater 
absurdities  than  ever  Shakespeare  committed;  for  he  supposes  that  Endymion’s  hair, 
features,  and  person,  were  changed  by  age  during  his  sleep,  while  all  the  other  per¬ 
sonages  of  the  drama  remained  without  alteration.  George  Whetstone,  in  the  Epistle 
Dedicatory  before  his  Promos  and  Cassandra ,  1579  (on  the  plan  of  which  Measure  for 
Measure  is  formed),  had  pointed  out  many  of  these  absurdities  and  offences  against  the 
laws  of  the  Drama.  It  must  be  owned  that  Shakespeare  has  not  fallen  into  them  through 
ignorance  of  what  they  were.  ‘  The  Englishman  in  this  qualitie  [he  is  speaking  of 
dramatic  action]  is  most  vaine,  indiscreete,  and  out  of  order.  He  first  grounds  his 
worke  on  impossibilities ;  then  in  three  houres  ronnes  he  throwe  the  worlde ;  marryes, 
gets  children,  makes  children  men,  men  to  conquer  kingdomes,  murder  monsters,  and 
bringeth  goddes  from  heauen,  and  fetcheth  deuils  from  hell,’  etc.  This  quotation  will 
serve  to  show  that  our  poet  might  have  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  literary  laws,  but,  like 
Achilles,  denied  that  laws  were  designed  to  operate  on  beings  confident  of  their  own 
powers,  and  secure  of  graces  beyond  the  reach  of  art.  [See  Malone’s  quotation  from 
Sir  Philip  Sidney  in  the  Appendix:  Unity  of  Action .] 

8.  growth]  Warburton  :  The  ‘  growth  ’  of  what  ?  The  reading  is  nonsense. 


156  THE  WINTERS  TALE  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 

Of  that  wide  gap,  fince  it  is  in  my  powre 
To  orethrow  Law,  and  in  one  felfe-borne  howre 
To  plant,  and  ore-whelme  Cuftome.  Let  me  paffe 
The  fame  I  am,  ere  ancient’ft  Order  was, 

Or  what  is  now  receiu’d.  I  witneffe  to 
The  times  that  brought  them  in,  fo  fhall  I  do 
To  th’frefheft  things  now  reigning,  and  make  ftale 
The  glittering  of  this  prefent,  as  my  Tale 
Now  feemes  to  it  :  your  patience  this  allowing, 

I  turne  my  glaffe,  and  giue  my  Scene  fuch  growing 
As  you  had  flept  betweene  :  Leontes  leauing 

13.  witnefft ?]  witness'd  Cap.  Sing.  19.  leauing ]  leaving, —  Sta.  Dyce  ii, 

Ktly.  iii.  Cam.  Wh.  ii.  Rife,  Huds.  Dtn. 

18.  Scene"]  Sccene  FaF3. 

Shakespeare  wrote  :  ‘  leave  the  gulf  untry’d,’  i.  e.  unwaded  through.  [Withdrawn, 
according  to  N  &  Qu.  VIII,  iii,  203.]— Johnson  :  Our  author  attends  more  to  his 
ideas  than  to  his  words,  ‘  The  growth  of  the  wide  gap’  is  somewhat  irregular;  but 
he  means  the  growth  or  progression  of  the  time  which  filled  up  the  gap  of  the  story 
between  Perdita’s  birth  and  her  sixteenth  year.  ‘  To  leave  this  growth  untried  ’  is 
‘to  leave  the  passages  of  the  intermediate  years  unnoted  and  unexamined.’  ‘Un¬ 
tried  ’  is  not,  perhaps,  the  word  he  would  have  chosen,  but  which  his  rhyme  required. 
— M.  Mason  (p.  130) :  Dr  Johnson’s  explanation  of ‘growth’  is  confirmed  by  [line  18]. 

9—12.  gap,  .  .  .  Custome.  .  .  .  am,J  Singer’s  text  here  places  a  period  after 
‘  gap,’  and  makes  one  sentence  of  the  rest,  ending  with  ‘  am,’  and  with  only  a  comma 
after  ‘custome.’  Again,  in  the  next  sentence,  there  is  a  comma  after  ‘  receiu’d.’ 
Much  of  this  punctuation  the  Cambridge  Editors  attribute  to  Lloyd.  It  may  well 
be  another’s,  and  not  Singer’s ;  the  latter  at  times  adopts  the  emendations  and  even 
the  words  of  the  notes  of  other  editors  without  giving  credit  to  their  authors ;  suum 
cuique  seemed  to  possess  for  him  no  meaning.  And  yet  no  attacks  on  Collier  for 
what  was  alleged  to  be  literary  dishonesty  were  more  virulent  than  Singer’s ;  in  read¬ 
ing  his  Shakespeare  Vindicated  one  is  reminded  of  what  Dr  Johnson  says  of  Heath 
and  the  latter’s  criticisms  of  Warburton :  he  ‘  bites  like  a  viper  and  would  be  glad 
to  leave  inflammations  and  gangrene  behind  him.’ — Ed. 

10,  11.  Law  .  .  .  Custome]  Capell’s  assertion  (p.  173)  that  these  refer  to  the 
laws  and  customs  of  the  drama  is  more  than  doubtful. — Johnson  :  The  reasoning 
of  Time  is  not  very  clear;  he  seems  to  mean  that  he  who  has  broke  so  many  laws 
may  now  break  another;  that  he  who  introduced  everything  may  introduce  Perdita 
in  her  sixteenth  year;  and  he  entreats  that  he  may  pass  as  of  old,  before  any  order 
or  succession  of  objects,  ancient  or  modern,  distinguish  his  periods. 

13.  witnesse  to]  Although  the  sense  demands  no  change,  yet  Capell’s  witness’d 
is  extremely  plausible;  the  d  was  present  to  the  ear  of  the  compositor  in  the  t  of 
‘  to.’ — Ed. 

17.  seemes  to  it]  That  is,  as  my  Tale  now  seems  stale  in  comparison  with  the 
glistering  at  hand. 

19-21.  Leontes  ...  me]  Staunton:  It  is  hardly  credible  that,  in  every  edition, 


IO 


15 


19 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


157 


Th*  effects  of  his  fond  iealoufies,  fo  greeuing  20 

That  he  fhuts  vp  himfelfe.  Imagine  me 
(Gentle  Spedtators)  that  I  now  may  be 
In  faire  Bohemia,  and  remember  well, 

I  mentioned  a  fonne  o’th’Kings,  which  Florizell 

I  now  name  to  you  :  and  with  fpeed  fo  pace  25 

To  fpeake  of  Perdita ,  now  growne  in  grace 

Equall  with  wond’ring.  What  of  her  infues 

I  lift  not  prophefie  :  but  let  Times  newes 

Be  knowne  when  ’tis  brought  forth .  A  fhepherds  daugh- 

And  what  to  her  adheres,  which  followes  after,  (ter  30 


20.  Th'  effedls]  To  th'  effects  Ktly. 
iealoufies,\  Ff,  Rowe+.  jeal¬ 
ousies  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Cam.  Wh.  ii, 
Rife,  Huds.  Dtn.  jealousies;  Cap.  et 
cet. 

21.  himfelfe .]  himfelf,  Ff,  Coll.  Wh. 


Ktly,  Cam.  Rife,  Huds.  Dtn.  himself ; 
Rowe  et  cet. 

24.  I  mentioned  a]  I  mention  here  a 
Ff,  Rowe+,  Var.  ’73.  There  is  a  Han. 
I  mention'd  a  Cap.  Rann,  Knt,  Coll. 
Dyce. 

which']  whom  Pope  +  . 


not  excepting  even  that  of  Mr  Dyce,  which  is  immeasurably  superior  to  most  others 
in  the  article  of  punctuation,  these  lines  should  stand  [as  they  are  in  the  Folio,  except 
in  having  a  semi-colon  after  ‘jealousies  ’  and  another,  instead  of  a  period,  after  ‘  him- 
selfe’].  If  the  absurdity  of  representing  Leontes  .as  ‘  leaving  ’  the  consequences  of 
his  foolish  jealousies,  and  at  the  same  time  as  so  ‘  grieving  ’  over  them  that  he  shuts 
himself  up,  were  not  enough  to  indicate  the  poet’s  meaning,  how  could  any  editor 
possibly  miss  it  who  had  bestowed  a  moment’s  reflection  on  the  parallel  passage  in  the 
original  story  :  <  The  epitaph  being  engraven,  Pandosto  would  once  a  day  repair  to 
the  tombe.  .  .  .  But  leaving  him  to  his  dolorous  passions ,  at  last  let  us  come  to  shewe 
the  tragicall  discourse  of  the  young  infant.'  [Staunton,  therefore,  punctuates : — 
‘  Leontes  leaving, — The  effects  of  his  fond  jealousies  so  grieving,  That  he  shuts  up 
himself; — imagine  me,’  etc.  Herein  he  has  been  followed,  I  believe,  by  every  sub¬ 
sequent  editor,  and  justly.] 

21.  me]  Johnson  :  Time  is  everywhere  alike.  I  know  not  whether  both  sense 
and  grammar  may  not  dictate  :  ‘  imagine  we.  Gentle  spectators,  that  you  now  may  be,’ 
etc.  Let  us  imagine,  that  you,  who  behold  these  scenes,  are  now  in  Bohemia. — M. 
Mason  (p.  131)  pointed  out  that  me  is  the  Ethical  dative. 

24.  I  mentioned]  Walker  [Crit.  iii,  103) :  Certainly  not  ‘  mention^*/.’  But  the 
metre  proves  that  the  word  is  corrupt ;  I  am  at  present  unable  to  correct  it. — Dyce 
(ed.  iii) :  Mr  Lettsom  proposes  to  omit  ‘  I.’  [A  proposition  which  is  almost  incredible. 
— Ed.] — Hudson  :  [In  line  24]  verse  and  statement  are  alike  at  fault ;  for  so  we 
have  Time,  honest  old  Chorus  as  he  is,  telling  a  wrong  story.  It  is  true,  mention  has 
been  made  of  a  son  of  Polixenes ;  but  the  Chorus  did  not  make  it,  nor  has  he,  till 
now,  said  a  word  to  us  on  any  subject.  Most  likely  /  got  repeated  by  mistake  from 
the  next  line,  and  then  a  was  interpolated,  in  order  to  make  apparent  sense. 
[Hudson’s  text  reads  :  ‘  remember  well  A  mention’d  son  o’  th’  King’s,’  etc.] 

29,  30.  daughter  .  .  .  after]  The  rhyme  here,  as  well  as  in  Tam.  of  the  Shr. 


158 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


Is  th’argument  of  Time  :  of  this  allow, 

If  euer  you  haue  fpent  time  worfe,  ere  now  : 

If  neuer,  yet  that  Time  himfelfe  doth  fay, 

He  withes  earneftly,  you  neuer  may.  Exit. 


Scena  Secunda. 


Enter  Polixenes ,  and  Camillo. 

Pol.  I  pray  thee  (good  Camillo')  be  no  more  importu¬ 
nate  :  Tis  a  fickneffe  denying  thee  any  thing  :  a  death  to 
grant  this. 

Cam.  It  is  fifteene  yeeres  fince  I  faw  my  Countrey  : 
though  I  haue  ( for  the  moft  part)  bin  ayred  abroad,  I  de- 


5 

7 


33-  Lf\  /  Var.  ’85  (misprint). 

neuer,  yet]  never  yet  F^.  never 
yet.  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var 
Knt,  Wh.  Ktly. 

1.  Act  IV.  Scene,  the  Court  of  Bo¬ 
hemia.  Theob.  Act  IV,  Scene  i.  The 


Court  of  Bohemia.  Warb.  Johns.  Scene 
i.  The  same.  A  Room  in  Polixenes’ 
Palace.  Cap. 

6.  fifteene]  sixteen  Han.  Cap.  Rann, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Dtn. 

7.  bin]  beene  F2F3_  being  F4,  Rowe. 


I,  1,  244,  245  ‘  So  could  I,  faith,  boy,  to  have  the  next  wish  after.  That  Lucentio 

indeed  had  Baptista’s  youngest  daughter’  affords  ground  for  the  belief  that  daughter 
was  sometimes  pronounced  like  laughter.  On  the  other  hand,  in  Lear,  I  iv  312  we 
find  daughter  rhyming  with  caught  her,  and  slaughter.  See  note  in  this  ed.  on’ the 
line  m  Lear ;  or  see  Ellis,  Early  Eng.  Pronunciation,  p.  963. 

31,  argument]  Johnson  :  ‘  Argument  ’  is  the  same  with  subject 

,  Jt  tlhat} ,KEIGHTLEY  P-  202)  :  This  is  evidently  one  of  the  cases  in  which 

that  has  taken  the  place  of  than ,  then. 

2.  Enter,  etc.]  Knight  (Tntrod.  p.  338) :  Shakespeare  has  exhibited  his  con¬ 
summate  art  m  opening  the  Fourth  Act  with  Polixenes  and  Camillo,  of  whom  we 
have  lost  sight  since  the  end  of  the  First.  Had  it  been  otherwise, -had  he  brought 
utolycus,  and  Flonzel,  and  Perdita,  at  once  upon  the  scene, -the  continuity  of  action 
would  have  been  destroyed ;  and  the  commencement  of  the  Fourth  Act  would  have 
appeared  as  the  commencement  of  a  new  play.  Shakespeare  made  the  difficulties  of 
is  plot  bend  to  his  art;  instead  of  wanting  art,  as  Ben  Jonson  says. 

.  6'^teene^  CAPELL  (P-  173)  ••  Strange,  that  only  the  fourth  modem  [i.  e.  Hanmerl 
should  have  made  this  correction  \i.  e.  sixteen],  when  the  elaps’d  years’  number  had 
een  settl  d  so  lately  as  but  in  the  page  before.— Steevens  :  See  V.  iii,  39  :  <  Which  lets 
go  by  some  sixteen  years ;’  and  lb.  line  61 :  ‘  Which  sixteen  Winters  cannot  blow  away.’ 

vea7rs  Mb  c  "T  ^  ^  t0  understand  b7  this>  coupled  with  the  « fifteen 

years,  that  Camillo  has  not  been  continuously  at  the  Court  of  Leontes,  during  the 
sixteen  years  which  are  just  past  ? _ Ed.  8 

7-  ayred]  Schmidt  :  To  lead  forth,  to  lead  about.  [It  is  not  easy  to  see  how  Dr 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  159 

fire  to  lay  my  bones  there.  Befides,  the  penitent  King  8 

(my  Matter)  hath  fent  for  me,  to  whofe  feeling  forrowes 
I  might  be  fome  allay,  or  I  oreweene  to  thinke  fo)which  10 
is  another  fpurre  to  my  departure. 

Pol.  As  thou  lou’ft  me  ( Camillo )  wipe  not  out  the  reft 
of  thy  feruices,  by  leauing  me  now  :  the  neede  I  haue  of 
thee,  thine  owne  goodneffe  hath  made  :  better  not  to 
haue  had  thee,  then  thus  to  want  thee,  thou  hauing  made  15 
me  Bufineffes,  (which  none  (  without  thee)  can  fuffici- 
ently  manage)  muft  either  ftay  to  execute  them  thy  felfe, 
or  take  away  with  thee  the  very  feruices  thou  haft  done : 
which  if  I  haue  not  enough  confidered  (  as  too  much  I 
cannot)  to  bee  more  thankefull  to  thee,  fhall  bee  my  ftu-  20 
die,  and  my  profite  therein,  the  heaping  friendfhippes. 

Of  that  fatall  Countrey  Sicillia,  prethee  fpeake  no  more, 
whofe  very  naming,  punnifhes  me  with  the  remembrance 
of  that  penitent  (as  thou  calft  him)  and  reconciled  King 
my  brother,  whofe  Ioffe  of  his  moft  precious  Queene  &  25 

Children,  are  euen  now  to  be  a-frefh  lamented.  Say  to 


10.  or]  (or  Ff.  16.  Bufineffes]  Bufnefs  F  ,  Rowe. 

15.  want  thee,]  want  thee,  or  want  21.  heaping  friendfhippes]  heaping 

thee  :  Rowe  et  seq.  friendship  Han. 

Schmidt  can  have  extracted  this  definition  from  the  simple  phrase  equivalent  to  living 
and  breathing  abroad. — Ed.] 

21.  heaping]  Warburton  :  This  is  nonsense.  We  should  read  ‘  reaping  friend¬ 
ships.’  The  king  had  said  his  study  should  be  to  reward  his  friend’s  deserts;  and 
then  concludes  that  his  profit  in  this  study  should  be  reaping  the  fruits  of  his  friend’s 
attachment  to  him ;  which  refers  to  what  he  had  before  said  of  the  necessity  of  Ca- 
millo’s  stay,  or  otherwise  he  could  not  reap  the  fruit  of  those  businesses  which  Camillo 
had  cut  out. — Heath  (p.  214) :  The  sense  is,  All  the  profit  I  propose  to  myself  in 
this  study  of  mine  to  be  more  friendly  to  thee  for  the  future  is,  the  heaping  still  more 
friendships  on  thee,  and  by  that  means  laying  still  stronger  obligations  on  thee  to 
continue  with  me. — Johnson  :  The  sense  of  heaping  friendships,  though  like  many 
other  of  our  author’s  unusual  [phrases],  at  least  unusual  to  modern  ears,  is  not  very 
obscure.  ‘  To  be  more  thankful  shall  be  my  study ;  and  my  profit  therein  the  heap¬ 
ing  friendships.’  That  is,  ‘  I  will  for  the  future  be  more  liberal  of  recompence,  from 
which  I  shall  receive  this  advantage,  that  as  I  heap  benefits,  I  shall  heap  friendships, 
as  I  confer  favours  on  thee  I  shall  increase  the  friendship  between  us. — Malone  : 
<  Friendships  ’  is,  I  believe,  here  used,  with  sufficient  licence,  merely  for  friendly 
offices. — Deighton  :  But  Polixenes  could  hardly  mean  that  the  heaping  of  friendly 
offices  on  Camillo  was  nis  profit. 

26,  32.  Children,  are  .  .  .  affayres  may  be,  are]  In  both  instances  ‘  are  ’  is  the 
well-known  plural  by  attraction.  See  line  58  of  the  next  scene:  ‘the  loathfomnefle 


i6o 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


me,  when  faw’ft  thou  the  Prince  Florizell  my  fon  ?  Kings 
are  no  leffe  vnhappy,  their  iffue,not  being  gracious,  then 
they  are  in  loofing  them,  when  they  haue  approued  their 
Vertues. 

Cam.  Sir,  it  is  three  dayes  fince  I  faw  the  Prince:what 
his  happier  affayres  may  be,  are  to  me  vnknowne  :  but  I 
haue  (  mifsingly  )  noted,  he  is  of  late  much  retyred  from 
Court,  and  is  leffe  frequent  to  his  Princely  exercifes  then 
formerly  he  hath  appeared. 

Pol.  I  haue  confidered  fo  much  ( Camillo )  and  with 
fome  care,  fo  farre,  that  I  haue  eyes  vnder  my  feruice, 
which  looke  vpon  his  remouedneffe  :  from  whom  I  haue 
this  Intelligence,  that  he  is  feldome  from  the  houfe  of  a 
moft  homely  fhepheard  :  a  man  (they  fay)  that  from  very 
nothing,  and  beyond  the  imagination  of  his  neighbors, 
is  growne  into  an  vnfpeakable  eftate. 

Cam.  I  haue  heard  (fir)  of  fuch  a  man  ,  who  hath  a 
daughter  of  moft  rare  note  :  the  report  of  her  is  extended 


27 


30 


35 


40 


44 


28.  iffue,']  ijfue  Ff.  25-  appeared ]  appear'd  Rowe  + . 

29.  loofing]  lofing  F4.  36.  confidered ]  consider'd  Rowe-K 

33.  mifsingly ]  musingly  Han.  Coll.  37.  carefo <farre,~\  care  so  far,  Rowe  + . 

ii,  iii  (MS),  Huds.  Care  ;  so  far  Cap.  et  seq. 


of  them  offend  me  more where  modem  editors,  except  Dyce  and  Staunton,  follow 
the  Folios  in  changing  ‘  offend  ’  to  offends.  Thus,  in  both  the  present  passages  Keight- 
LEY  changed  ‘  are  ’  to  is,  which  is  grammatical  but  needless. — Ed. 

33.  missingly]  Warburton  :  [I  read]  ‘but  I  have  ( missing  him )  noted,’  etc. 
Ihis  accounts  for  the  reason  of  his  taking  note,  because  he  often  missed  him,  that  is, 
wanted  his  agreeable  company.  For  a  compliment  is  intended ;  and  in  that  sense,  it 
is  to  be  understood. — Steevens  :  ‘  Missingly  noted  ’  means,  I  have  observed  him  at 
intervals,  not  constantly  or  regularly,  but  occasionally. — M.  Mason  (p.  132) :  I  have 
no  doubt  but  Hamper's  amendment  [see  Text.  Note]  is  right,  and  the  meaning  will 
then  be :  ‘  I  have  perceived  his  retirement,  and  have  reflected  on  it.’  There  is  no 
such  word  as  ‘missingly,’  and  were  we  to  coin  it,  it  could  not  possibly  convey  the 
sense  that  Steevens  attributes  to  it.  [Collier’s  MS  Corrector  makes  the  same  change 
that  Hanmer  makes,  which  Collier  (ed.  ii)  says  is  ‘  evidently  right  ’  and  that  ‘  miss¬ 
ingly’  is  ‘a  mere  error  of  the  press.’]— Knight :  Does  it  not  mean,  ‘ missing  him, 
I  have  noted,’  etc.  ?— Halliwell:  -‘Missingly’  appears  to  mean,  missing  him,  dis¬ 
covering  him  not  to  be  present,  or,  like  a  person  that  has  missed  him.— Dyce  (ed.  iii) : 
Richardson  {Diet.  sub.  <  Miss’)  has  ‘“Missingly  noted,”  i.e.  observing  him  to  be 
missing,  to  be  absent,  noted,  etc.’— Staunton  thinks  Hanmer’s  change  has  ‘some 
plausibility.’— Deighton  :  To  miss,  equivalent  ‘  to  feel  the  want  of,  to  regret  the 
absence  of,’  is  as  common  in  Shakespeare  as  in  modern  parlance. 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


l6l 

more,  then  can  be  thought  to  begin  from  fuch  a  cottage  45 

Pol.  That’s  likewife  part  of  my  Intelligence  :  but(I 
feare)  the  Angle  that  pluckes  our  fonne  thither.  Thou 
fhalt  accompany  vs  to  the  place,  where  we  will  (not  ap¬ 
pearing  what  we  are)haue  fome  queftion  with  the  fhep- 
heard  ;  from  whofe  fimplicity,  I  thinke  it  not  vneafie  to  50 
get  the  caufe  of  my  fonnes  refort  thether.  ’Prethe  be  my 
prefent  partner  in  this  bufines,  and  lay  afide  the  thoughts 
of  Sicillia. 

Cam.  I  willingly  obey  your  command. 

Pol.  My  belt  Camillo,  we  mu  ft  difguifc  our  felues.  Exit  55 


46.  part ]  a  part  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Var.  ’73. 

46,  47.  but  (/  fear )  the  Angle\  and , 
I  fear,  the  Engle  Theob.  and,  I  fear, 
the  angle  Han.  Cap.  Rann,  Ktly,  Huds. 
and,  I  fear,  the  angel  Garrick,  but,  I 


fear  the  angle  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Rann,  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  ’21. 

51.  thether\  Ft. 

’Pretke]  Prithee  Ff. 

55-  Camillo,]  Camillo !  Theob.  i. 
Exit]  Exeunt.  Rowe. 


46,47.  but  (I  fear)  the  Angle]  Theobald:  The  disjunctive,  ‘but,’  here,  I 
think,  makes  stark  nonsense  of  the  context.  As  in  the  Tam.  Shr.  [IV,  ii,  61], 
‘  Angel  ’  is  mistakenly  put  for  Engle,  so,  I  suspect,  <  Angle,’  by  the  same  easy  cor¬ 
ruption,  is  here.  .  .  .  ‘  Ay,’  replies  the  king,  ‘  that’s  a  part  of  my  intelligence  too ;  and, 
I  fear,  [that  daughter  is]  the  Siren,  the  Decoy,  the  Itivitation,  that  plucks  our  son 
thither.’  [No  editor  accepted  Theobald’s  engle,  a  word  which  Shakespeare,  ‘to  his 
credit,’  says  Nares,  never  used.]— Heath  agrees  with  Theobald  in  preferring  and  to 
‘but;’  with  the  rest  of  Theobald’s  note  he  disagrees. — Staunton:  ‘But,’  in  this 
place,  is  the  Saxon  Botan  =  to  boot,  and  the  king’s  meaning,  ‘  The  attractions  of  that 
girl  form  part  of  my  intelligence,  and  they  are,  I  apprehend,  the  angle  which  draws 
the  prince  there.’ — Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Perhaps  and  with  Theobald. — Steevens  :  *  Angle,’ 
in  this  place,  means  a  fishing  rod,  which  he  represents  as  drawing  his  son,  like  a  fish, 
away.  [The  reading  of  Garrick’s  Version  (see  Appendix)  is  angel ;  it  is  included 
in  the  Text.  Notes,  but  it  is  possibly  a  mere  printer’s  error,  whereof  that  Version  has 
many.  See  IV,  iv,  147.] 

49.  question]  That  is,  conversation,  talk,  as  in  Shakespeare,  passim. 


11 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  xv,  sc.  iii. 


162 


Scena  Tertia. 


Enter  Autolicus  finging . 


When  Daffadils  begin  to  peere , 
With  heigh  the  Doxy  ouer  the  dale , 


4 


I.  Scene  ii.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap. 


2.  Enter  Autolicus...]  Enter  Autoly- 


The  Country.  Rowe.  Fields  [A 
Road.  Coll.]  near  the  Shepherds.  Cap. 


cus,  very  ragged...  Sing. 

3.  Daffadils]  Daffodils  Johns,  et  seq. 


Coll. 


2.  singing]  Fynes  Moryson  ( Itinerary ,  Part  III,  Bk  i,  Chap.  3,  p.  48)  gives  the 
following,  as  a  ‘  Prouerbe  ’  which  he  had  heard  in  his  travels  :  ‘  For  singing  Art, 
[they  say  that]  The  Spaniards  weep,  the  Italians  sigh,  the  English  bleate  like  Goats, 
the  Germans  bellow,  the  French  sing.’  Evidently  a  proverb  of  French  origin. — Ed. 
See  Appendix,  Autolycus,  for  Roffe’s  conclusion  that  ‘  Autolycus,  with  his  evident 
abilities,  his  enjoyment  in  the  Daffodils,  the  songs  of  the  birds  (not  forgetting  the 
tirra-lirra  of  the  lark),  his  real  love  for,  and  talents  in  Music,  all  weighed  together, 
will  ultimately  turn  over  a  new  leaf.’ 

3.  When,  etc.]  Steevens  :  ‘  When  daffodils  begin  to  peer  ’  and  ‘  Jog-on,  jog-on, 

the  foot-path  way’ — ‘Two  nonsensical  songs  by  the  rogue  Autolycus,’  says  Dr 
Burney.  But  could  not  the  many  compliments  paid  by  Shakespeare  to  musical 
science  intercede  for  a  better  epithet  than  nonsensical?  The  Dr  subsequently 
observes,  that  ‘  This  Autolycus  is  the  true  ancient  Minstrel,  as  described  in  the  old 
Fabliaux.’  I  believe  that  many  of  our  readers  will  push  the  comparison  a  little  fur¬ 
ther,  and  concur  with  me  in  thinking  that  our  modern  minstrels  of  the  opera,  like 
their  predecessor  Autolycus,  are  pickpockets  as  well  as  singers  of  nonsensical  ballads. 
[This  was  written  in  1793  !] — Douce  (i,  351) :  [Dr.  Burney’s]  observation  is  inaccu¬ 
rate.  Autolycus  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  character  of  a  minstrel  but  the 
singing  of  a  song  or  two.  He  is  a  mere  rogue,  assuming  various  shapes,  and  is 
specifically  called  so  in  the  dramatis  persona.  .  .  It  is  true  that  Autolycus  declares 

he  had  been  an  ‘  ape-bearer  ’ ;  but  this  was  no  part  of  the  minstrel’s  profession  in 
Shakespeare’s  time,  though  it  had  been  so  formerly. 

3.  Daffadils]  Murray  (W.  E.  D.)  :  A  variant  of  Affodel.  The  initial  o' has  not 
been  satisfactorily  accounted  for.  It  has  been  variously  suggested  as  due  to  childish 
or  playful  distortion,  as  in  Ted  for  Edward,  tante  for  aunt ;  to  union  of  the  article 
th,'  (cf.  Cotgrave,  Affrodille,  Th'  Affodill,  and  northern  English  f  affadil)-,  to  final 
d  °f  and\ n  (e.  g.)  ‘  fennell  an -d  affodil' ;  to  union  of  the  Dutch  or  Flemish  article, 
as  de  affodil =  the  affodil;  and  to  the  French  preposition  d' ,  as  in  fieur  d’  aphrodille. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  as  in  English  the  word  has  gained  a  letter,  in  16th  cent.  French  it 
sometimes  lost  one  :  Littre  (s.  v.  Asphodhle)  quotes  from  De  Serres  (16th  cent.),  ‘  Des 
racines  d’  affrodille,'  and  also  ‘Decoction  de  lapace,  de  frodilles.'  A  third  form 
dafrodille  is  quite  conceivable.  .  .  . 

Affodill,  and  its  popular  variants,  daffodil,  daffodilly ,  were  originally  and  properly 
the  Asphodel ;  then  by  popular  misconception,  due  apparently  to  the  application  to 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


163 

5 


Why  then  comes  in  the  fweet  o’ the  ye  ere , 

For  the  red  blood  raigns  in  y  winters  pale . 

6.  raigns]  reigns  Rowe  et  seq.  6.  winters  pale]  winter  pale  Var.  ’73. 

in]  o'er  Han. 

both  plants,  at  their  first  introduction  to  England,  of  the  fanciful  name  Laus  tibi  (see 
Turner,  Libelius  B  3  b),  it  was  applied,  especially  in  the  popular  variations,  to  species 
of  Narcissus,  etc.  Botanists,  after  resisting  this  misapplication,  compromised  the 
matter  by  retaining  affodil  for  the  Asphodel,  and  accepting  the  more  popular  daffodil 
for  Narcissus.  Finally  affodil  was  *  rectified  ’  to  asfodyl  and  asphodel,  and  daffodil 
restricted  in  popular  use  to  the  Yellow  Narcissus  or  Yellow  Daffodil  of  English  fields 
and  gardens.  .  .  .  Now  restricted  to  Narcissus  pseudo-Narcissus  (also  called  Lent 
Lily),  found  wild  in  various  parts  of  England  and  cultivated  as  an  early  spring 
flower.— Ellacombe  (p.  56)  :  The  daffodil  was  the  favourite  of  all  English  poets 
from  the  time  of  Shakespeare  to  our  own  time.  ...  A  small  volume  might  be  filled 
with  the  many  poetical  descriptions  of  the  ‘  delectable  and  sweet-smelling  flower,’  but 
there  are  two  which  are  almost  classical  and  which  can  never  be  omitted.  These  are 
Herrick’s  well-known  lines,  ‘  Fair  daffodils,  we  weep  to  see,’  etc.  [i,  167,  Singer’s  ed.] 
And  Keats’s  well-known  and  beautiful  lines,  which  bring  the  praises  of  the  Daffodil 
down  to  our  day.  [See  the  first  sixteen  or  eighteen  lines  of  Endymion.  Schmidt’s 
note  is  given  in  the  Preface,  supra 

3.  peere]  This  is  not  the  same  verb  as  that  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  i,  23 :  ‘  Peering  in 
maps  for  ports,’  etc.,  but,  as  Skeat  (s.  v.)  says,  ‘  merely  short  for  appear.  Middle 
English  peren,  short  for  aperen.  ...  As  aperen  was  frequently  spelt  with  one  p,  the 
prefix  a-  easily  dropped  off,  as  in  the  case  of  peal  for  appeal.  In  French  the  simple 
verb  paroir  (Lat.  parere)  was  used  in  a  similar  way.  “Paroir,  to  appear,  to  peep 
out,  as  the  day  in  a  morning,  or  the  sun  over  a  mountain.” — Cotgrave.’ 

4.  Doxy]  Cotgrave:  ‘Gneuse:  f.  A  woman  begger,  a  she  rogue,  a  great,  lazie, 
and  louzie  queane ;  a  Doxie,  or  Mort.’  [For  the  derivation,  see  note  on  ‘  Ducke,’ 
IV,  iv,  346.] 

6.  For  the  red  blood,  etc.]  Warburton  :  I  think  this  nonsense  should  be  read 
thus:  ‘Why,  then  come  in  the  sweet  o’  th’  year;  'Fore  the  red  blood  reins-in  the 
winter  pale,’  i.  e.  Why  then  come  in,  or  let  us  enjoy,  pleasure,  while  the  season  serves, 
before  pale  winter  reins-in  the  red  or  youthful  blood ;  as  much  as  to  say,  let  us  enjoy 
life  in  youth,  before  old  age  comes  and  freezes  up  the  blood. — Capell  (p.  173): 
That  is,  for  the  red  blood  exercises  dominion,  begins  to  exert  itself  in  a  season  which 
is  within  the  pale  or  province  of  winter,  when  ‘  blood  is  nipt.’ — Farmer  :  The  mean¬ 
ing  of  ‘  the  winter’s  pale  ’  is,  ‘  the  red,  the  spring  blood  now  reigns  o' er  the  parts  lately 
under  the  dominion  of  winter.'  The  English  pale,  the  Irish  pale,  were  frequent 
expressions  in  Shakespeare’s  time;  and  the  words  ‘red’  and  ‘pale’  were  chosen  for 
the  sake  of  the  antithesis. — M.  Mason  (p.  152) :  Dr  Thirlby  proposes  to  read  runs 
instead  of  ‘  reigns,’  which  seems  to  me  to  be  right ;  but  I  should  continue  to  read 
‘  winter’s  ’  in  the  plural  number,  and  then  the  line  would  stand  : — ‘  For  the  red  blood 
runs  in  the  winters  pale,’  that  is,  ‘  the  blood  runs  pale  in  the  winters.’ — Croft  (p.  11)  : 
‘  Pale  ’  may  mean  paleness,  that  the  red  blood  reigns  in  a  state  where  before  it  was 
excluded,  as  to  leave  only  a  pale  hue.  He  uses  the  word  pale  somewhere  else  in  this 
manner  for  fairness  ;  in  the  spring  the  blood  turns  redder  from  the  nitrous  particles 
which  the  arterial  veins  inhale  from  the  vegete,  elastic,  or  livelier  air  than  what 


164 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 

7 


The  white  Jheete  bleaching  on  the  hedge , 

With  hey  the  fweet  birds ,  0  how  they  Jing\ 

Doth  fet  my  pugging  tooth  an  edge ,  9 


9-  pugging]  progging  Han.  Warb.  9.  an]  on  Theob.  et  seq. 

Cap.  prigging  Coll.  (MS). 


remains  in  a  more  torpid  state  in  winter.  [It  is  fortunate  that  we  can  turn  to  Shake¬ 
speare  for  light.  Deighton’s  note  is,  I  think,  just :  ‘  Though  Shakespeare  used 
both  the  substantive  and  the  verb  in  this  sense  ’  ( Deighton  is  speaking  of  Farmer's 
mention  of  ‘  the  English  pale  ’  and  the  ‘  Irish  pale  ’),  ‘  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  he 
here  meant  anything  more  than  that  the  red  blood  of  spring  reigns  in  the  place  of  the 
pale  blood  of  winter.  Autolycus  is  hardly  to  be  credited  with  a  knowledge  of  the 
word  in  its  other  sense.’ — Ed.] 

9-  pugging]  Johnson  :  It  is  certain  that  ‘pugging’  is  not  now  understood.  But 
Dr  Thirlby  observes  that  it  is  the  cant  of  gypsies. — Steevens  :  The  word  ‘  pugging  ’ 
is  used  by  Greene  in  one  of  his  pieces  [No  one,  it  appears,  has  yet  found  this  passage 
— Ed.]  ;  and  puggard  was  a  cant  name  for  some  particular  kind  of  thief.  So  in  The 
Roaring  Girl ,  1611: — ‘Of  cheators,  lifters,  nips,  foists,  puggards,  curbers.’[ — V,  i. 
Dyce,  in  a  note  on  this  passage  gives  the  meanings  of  these  words :  ‘  cheators  ’  are 
those  who  use  false  dice  ;  ‘  lifters  ’  those  who  lift  goods  clean  away  ;  ‘  nips  ’  are  cut- 
purses  ;  ‘  foists,’  pickpockets  ;  *  curbers,’  those  who  hook  goods  out  of  a  window,  but 
of  ‘  puggards  ’  he  can  find  no  mention.  Nares  says,  and  he  is  quoted  by  Halliwell, 
that  ‘there  seems  sufficient  reason  to  believe  that  [‘pugging’]  means  thieving ’  in  the 
present  passage,  and  adds  ‘  I  do  not  see  that  prigging  and  proguing  have  anything 
to  do  with  the  word.’  ‘  It  is  very  likely,’  says  Collier  (ed.  ii),  ‘  that  “  pugging  ”  is 
misprinted  for  prigging  or  thieving.  The  Clown  afterwards  uses  the  word  “prig” 
for  a  thief.  However,  “a  puggard”  was  a  well-known  kind  of  cheat,  and  hence 
Autolycus  may  have  obtained  his  participle.  It  is  amended  to  prigging  in  the  MS.’ 
The  word  ‘pugging’  occurs  in  Appius  and  Virginia,  1575,  near  the  beginning: — 

‘  What  tugging,  what  lugging,  what  pugging  by  the  ear,’  but  it  has  evidently  no  con¬ 
nection  in  sense  with  the  word  here  used.  [From  the  fact  that  there  is  a  verb  to  pug 
with  its  participle,  pugging,  used  in  architecture  and  in  mechanics  applied  to  mills 
for  grinding,  or  to  breaking  up  clay  or  lime  for  bricks,  a  correspondent  in  Notes  &• 
Qu.  I,  vii,  256  contends  that  ‘pugging’  and  not  prigging  is  ‘the  correct  word,  and 
is  most  expressive.  Autolycus  means  his  molar — his  grinding  tooth  is  set  on  edge.’ 
Unquestionably  ‘  most  expressive  ’  is  not  too  strong  language,  if  Autolycus  longs  for 
a  sheet  in  order  to  chew  it.  Equally  apt  is  the  definition  given  by  Wise  ( Shakspere , 
His  Birthplace,  etc.)  and  quoted  by  Deighton  as  follows  :  ‘  Wise  says  that  “ pugging 
tooth  was  the  same  as  pegging  or  peg  tooth,  that  is  the  canine  or  dog  tooth,”  and  that 
the  expression  is  still  in  use  in  Warwickshire.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  see  wrhy  the  sight 
of  sheets  bleaching  should  set  any  one’s  “ canine  tooth”  on  edge.’  In  a  Glossary 
of  Words  used  (1893)  in  the  district  round  Evesham  and  Pershore,  only  about 
twelve  miles  from  Stratford,  the  compiler,  J.  Salisbury,  gives  the  verb  ‘  Pug,  to 
pull,  and  in  a  note  (p.  84)  queries,  whether  it  be  not  probable,  inasmuch  as  the 
sheets  would  have  to  be  pugged  off  the  hedges,  that  Autolycus  ‘  simply  means  that 
the  sight  of  the  sheets  (his  traffic),  excites  his  “  pugging"  propensity?’  This  explan¬ 
ation  would  carry  conviction  if  it  is  to  be  supposed  that  Autolycus  pulls  the  sheets 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


165 

For  a  quart  of  Ale  is  a  difli  for  a  King.  10 

The  Larke ,  that  tirra-Lyra  chaunts , 

With  heigh,  the  Thrujli  and  the  lay  :  12 


11.  Larke,  that]  lark  with  Rowe, 
Pope. 

tirra-Lyra  chaunts]  Fa,  Cam.  Wh. 
ii.  tirra-Lyrachaunts  F  .  tirra  Lycra- 
chaunts  F^.  tirra-lirra  chaunts  Cap. 
et  seq. 

12.  With  heigh,]  With  heigh,  with 


heigh  Ff,  Cap.  With  hey ,  with  hey  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  with  hey  !  with  hey  !  Theob. 
Warb.  with  heigh  !  with  hey  !  Var.  ’21, 
Knt.  With  heigh  ho  Walker  frit,  iii, 
104). 

12.  lay]  lay  F3.  Lay  F4,  Rowe. 


from  the  hedges  with  his  teeth.  It  is  merely  an  accident  in  connection  with  this  verse 
that  Cotgrave  gives  as  a  definition  of  the  French,  Pillars :  ‘  Pilferers,  purloyners, 
henne-stealers ;  or,  such  as  take  (other  mens)  sheets  off  hedges.’ — Ed.] 

10.  For  a  quart,  etc.]  Deighton  :  If  this  has  any  real  connection  with  the  former 
line,  it  means  ‘  for  by  the  sale  of  the  stolen  sheets  I  could  buy  a  quart  of  ale.’  [Un¬ 
questionably,  this  is  the  point  of  the  stanza,  just  as  in  the  preceding  stanza  it  is  the 
sweet  of  the  year  because  the  red  blood  is  then  reigning.  If  proof  were  needed,  it 
is  supplied  in  a  stanza  sung  by  Three  Beggars  in  The  Three  Ladies  of  London,  1584: 
‘  Our  fingers  are  lime-twigs,  and  barbers  we  be,  To  catch  sheets  from  hedges,  most 
pleasant  to  see ;  Then  to  the  alewife  roundly  we  set  them  to  sale,  And  spend  the 
money  merrily  upon  her  good  ale.’ — p.  347,  ed.  Hazlitt-Dodsley. — Ed.] 

11.  tirra-Lyra]  Holt  White:  ‘La  gentille  allouette  avec  son  tire-lire  \  Tire 
lire  a  lire  et  tire-lirant  tire  |  Vers  la  voute  du  Ciel,  puis  son  vol  vers  ce  lieu  |  Vire  et 
desire  dire  adieu  Dieu,  adieu  Dieu.’ — Du  Bartas,  Liv.  5,  de  sa  premibre  Semaine. — 
Malone:  So,  in  an  ancient  poem  entitled  The  Silke  Worms  and  their  Flies,  1599, 
‘  Let  Philomela  sing,  let  Progne  chide,  Let  Tyry-tyry-leerers  upward  flie.’  In  the 
margin  the  author  explains  ‘  Tyryleerers’  by  its  synonym,  larks. — Hunter  (i,  419) : 
Sylvester’s  rendering  of  the  passage  in  Du  Bartas  deserved  to  have  been  added  for 
its  singularity  and  aptness—1  The  pretty  lark,  climbing  the  welkin  clear,  Chaunts  with 
a  chear,  Hear  peer- 1  neer  my  deer :  Then  stooping  thence,  seeming  her  fall  to  rew, 
Adieu,  she  saith,  adieu,  deer  deer,  adieu.' 

12.  With  heigh,  etc.]  The  metre  is  here  so  evidently  defective  that  editors  are 
justified  in  adopting  the  reading  of  the  Ff.  For  my  part,  I  should  prefer :  1  With 
heigh,  the  Thrush,  and  heigh,  the  Jay,’ — the  cadence  of  the  line  seems  to  be  thereby 
better  preserved.  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  suggests  that  1  perhaps  the  name  of  some  bird  has 
dropped  out.’ — Ed. 

12.  Thrush]  Harting  (p.  137):  It  is  somewhat  singular  that  the  Thrush 
( Turdus  musicus ),  a  bird  as  much  famed  for  song  as  either  the  nightingale  or  the 
lark,  has  been  so  little  noticed  by  Shakespeare ;  there  are  but  three  passages  in  which 
this  well-known  bird  is  mentioned  ; — here,  and  as  a  1  throstle  ’  in  Mid.  N.  D.  Ill,  i, 
and  Mer.  of  Ven.  Many  naturalists,  who  have  paid  particular  attention  to  the  song 
of  the  thrush,  have  insisted  upon  its  taking  equal  rank  as  a  songster  with  the  more 
favoured  nightingale.  Certain  it  is,  that  the  notes  of  this  bird,  although  not  so  varied, 
nor  so  liquid,  so  to  say,  as  those  of  Philomel,  are  yet  of  a  clear,  rich  tone,  and  have 
something  indescribably  sweet  about  them. 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


1 66 


Are  Summer  fongs  for  me  and  my  Aunts  13 

While  we  lye  tumbling  in  the  hay. 

I  haue  feru’d  Prince  Florizell ,  and  in  my  time  wore  three  1 5 

pile,  but  now  I  am  out  of  feruice. 

But  Jhall  I  go  niourne  for  that  (my  deere) 
the  pale  Moone  Jhines  by  night  : 

And  when  I  wander  here  ,and  there 

I  then  do  mofl  go  right.  20 

If  Tinkers  may  haue  leaue  to  line  , 
and  beare  the  Sow-skin  Bowget , 

Then  my  account  I  well  may  giue , 
and  in  the  Stockes  auouch-it . 

My  Trafficke  is  fheetes  :  when  the  Kite  builds,  looke  to  25 

13.  Summer]  Summers  F4.  22.  Sow-skin]  Show-skin  F  . 

20.  molt  go]  go  most  Pope-f,  Var.  Bowget]  Budget  Rowe. 

Rann,  Mai.  24.  auouch-it]  avouch  it  Ff  et  seq. 


13.  Aunts]  Dependent  on  the  connection,  this  may  mean  a  woman  of  a  character 
rather  more  free  than  a  mere  hoyden. 

15,  16.  three  pile]  Nares  :  The  finest  and  most  costly  kind  of  velvet;  worn, 
therefore,  only  by  persons  of  wealth  and  consequence.  It  alludes  to  something  in 
the  construction  of  the  velvet.  It  seems  to  have  been  thought  that  there  was  a  three¬ 
fold  accumulation  of  the  outer  surface,  or  pile.  Hence  Shakespeare  gives  the  name 
of  ‘  Three-pile  ’  to  a  mercer  in  Meas.for  Meas.  IV,  iii,  11. 

17-24.  But,  etc.]  Deighton  :  But  that  is  no  reason  why  I  should  be  downcast; 
by  the  light  of  the  moon  I  am  able  to  carry  on  my  petty  thefts,  and  when  I  seem  to 
be  going  wrong,  to  have  lost  my  way,  I  am  then  going  in  what  is  the  right  path  for 
me,  i.  e.  I  am  most  successful  in  my  thieving.  If  tinkers  are  allowed  to  live  and 
wander  about  the  country  carrying  with  them  their  leathern  sack  for  tools  and  freely 
piying  their  trade,  then  there  is  no  reason  why  I  should  not  give  an  account  of  my 
occupation,  or  openly  avow  it  when  put  in  the  stocks. 

22.  Bowget]  Cotgrave  :  ‘  Bouge  :  f.  A  budget,  wallet,  great  pouch,  male,  or  case 
of  leather,  seruing  to  Carrie  things  in  behind  a  man  on  horsebacke.’ 

24.  auouch-it]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  It  will  require  no  proof  that  these  three  distinct 
fragments,  sung  by  Autolycus,  could  not  go  to  the  same  tune ;  and  the  old  Corrector 
of  F,  marks  the  fact  in  his  margin,  that  the  first  three  stanzas  were  sung  to  one  tune, 
the  fourth  to  another  tune,  and  the  fifth  to  a  third  tune.  We  are,  nevertheless,  no 
nearer  the  tunes  themselves. 

25,  26.  My  .  .  .  Linnen]  Tn  the  first  three  Variorums  Steevens  interpreted  <  sheets  ’ 
as  referring  to  the  street  ballads  in  which  Autolycus  traded;  herein  he  anticipated 
Walker  ( Cnt.  iii,  104);  both  critics  recognised,  of  course,  the  quibble  involved  in 
the  two  kinds  of  sheet.  In  1785  M.  Mason  (p.  133)  criticised  Steevens’s  interpre¬ 
tation  which  he  said  was  erroneous.  ‘  Autolycus  does  not  yet  appear,’  he  continues, 

in  the  character  of  a  ballad-singer,  which  he  assumed  afterwards  occasionally,  in 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 


167 


leffer  Linnen.  My  Father  nam’d  me  Autolicus,  who  be¬ 
ing  (as  I  am)  lytter’d  vnder  Mer  curie  ,  was  likewife  a 
fnapper-vp  of  vnconfidered  trifles  :  With  Dye  and  drab, 


26 


28 


27.  lytler’d~\  litter'd  F^. 


order  to  have  an  opportunity  of  exercising  his  real  profession,  that  of  thievery  and 
picking  of  pockets;  he  means  here  merely  to  say  that  his  practice  was  to  steal  sheets 
and  large  pieces  of  linen,  leaving  the  smaller  pieces  for  the  kites  to  build  with.  He 
says  afterwards  that  “his  revenue  was  thievery.”’  In  his  next  edition,  in  1 7 93» 
Steevens  withdrew  his  note,  substituting  therefor  a  statement,  hardly  more  to  be  com¬ 
mended  and  for  which  he  gives  no  authority,  to  the  effect  that  by  ‘  lesser  linen  ’  was 
meant  what  ‘  modern  laundresses  ’  term  small  clothes. — Holt  White  corroborates 
Mason.  ‘  When  the  good  women,’  he  says,  ‘  in  solitary  cottages  near  the  woods 
where  kites  build  miss  any  of  their  “  lesser  linen,”  as  it  hangs  to  dry  on  the  hedge  in 
Spring,  they  conclude  that  the  kite  has  been  marauding  for  a  lining  to  her  nest ;  and 
there  adventurous  boys  often  find  it  employed  for  that  purpose.’  To  the  interpreta¬ 
tion  that  Autolycus  is  here  contrasting  his  thefts  and  those  of  the  kite,  Deighton’s 
is,  I  think,  the  only  dissenting  voice ;  he  considers  the  contrast  ‘  doubtful,’  and  con¬ 
tinues,  ‘  Autolycus  immediately  afterwards  speaks  of  himself  as  resembling  in  charac¬ 
ter  the  original  Autolycus  in  being  a  snapper  up  of  unconsidered  trifles  (in  that  re¬ 
spect  being  also  like  a  kite),  and  goes  on  to  say  that  all  more  daring  robberies  are  out 
of  his  line.  He  therefore  means,  I  think,  “  When  I  am  on  the  tramp,  people  may 
expect  to  have  their  sheets  stolen,  just  as  when  the  kite  is  building  they  may  expect 
to  have  odd  pieces  of  linen  carried  off  if  left  on  the  drying  lines  after  washing,  or 
exposed  anywhere  in  the  open  air.”  He  is  the  human  kite  that  carries  off  everything 
that  comes  in  his  way.’  The  contrast,  however,  involved  in  ‘  lesser  linen  ’  is,  I  think, 
unavoidable. 

Harting  (p.  46) :  This  line  may  be  illustrated  by  giving  a  description  of  a  kite’s 
nest  which  we  have  seen,  and  which  was  taken  many  years  ago  in  Huntingdonshire. 
The  outside  of  the  nest  was  composed  of  strong  sticks ;  the  lining  consisted  of  small 
pieces  of  linen,  part  of  a  saddle-girth,  a  bit  of  a  harvest  glove,  part  of  a  straw  bon¬ 
net,  pieces  of  paper,  and  a  worsted  garter.  In  the  midst  of  this  singular  collection 
were  deposited  two  eggs.  The  kite  is  now  almost  extinct  in  England,  and  a  kite’s 
nest  is,  of  course,  a  great  rarity. 

Tieck,  who  translates  ‘  sheets  ’  by  Hemden,  i.  e.  shirts  (wherein  he  is  followed 
by  Dr  A.  Schmidt),  observes  (vol.  ix,  p.  356)  that  the  slang  word  ‘sheets’  can¬ 
not  be  reproduced  in  German,  because  it  is  pronounced  like  ‘  cheats,’  which  it 


signifies. 


26.  Autolicus,  who,  etc.]  Theobald’s  text  reads,  ‘ — nam’d  me  Autolicus,  being 
litter’d  under  Mercury,  who,  as  I  am,  was,’  etc.  (wherein  he  was  followed  by  War- 
burton  and  Johnson),  whereon  he  remarks  as  follows :  ‘  The  slight  transposition  I 
have  ventur’d  to  make  of  four  short  Monosyllables  in  this  passage,  was  prescrib’d  by 
my  ingenious  Friend  Mr  Warburton.  The  Poet’s  Meaning  seems  to  be  this.  My 
Father  nam’d  me  Autolicus  because  I  was  born  under  Mercury ;  who  was  a  Thief, 
as  I  am.  [See  Names  of  the  Actors,  note  Ij6.] 

28.  Dye  and  drab]  With  gaming  and  women,  I  acquired  these  rags.  ‘  Purchase  ’ 
applies  to  any  mode  of  acquisition  other  than  that  by  inheritance. — Ed. 


1 68 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


I  purchas’d  this  Caparifon,  and  my  Reuennew  is  the  filly 
Cheate.  Gallowes,  and  Knocke,  are  too  powerfull  on  30 
the  Highway.  Beating  and  hanging  are  terrors  to  mee  : 

For  the  life  to  come,  I  fleepe  out  the  thought  of  it.  A 
prize,  a  prize.  33 

29.  /his]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe.  Pope,  Han.  Cheat.  ...highway ;  Theob. 

/Sly]  sly  Han.  Warb.  et  seq. 

30,31.  Cheate.  ...Highway.]  Cheat,...  30.  Knock e]  knocks  Han. 

Highway,  F^.  Cheat.  Highway,  Rowe, 


29>  3°-  silly  Cheate]  Steevens  :  This  is  one  of  the  technical  terms  belonging  to 
the  art  of  Coney  catching ,  or  thievery,  which  Greene  has  mentioned.  I  think  it  means 
picking  pockets.  [As  a  ‘  technical  term  ’  I  have  not  noted  it  in  Greene,  but  neither 
‘  silly  nor  ‘  cheat  ’  is  difficult  of  comprehension,  nor  is  any  difficulty  added  when 
they  are  combined.  Greene  (Art  of  Conny- catching,  p.  36,  ed.  Grosart)  says  that  the 
‘  Cheting  law  ’  is  the  ‘  play  at  false  dice.’ — Ed.] 

30.  Gallowes,  and  Knocke]  Johnson:  The  resistance  which  a  highwayman 
encounters  in  the  fact,  and  the  punishment  which  he  suffers  on  detection,  withhold 
me  from  daring  robbery,  and  determine  me  to  the  silly  cheat  and  petty  theft. 

31.  Beating  and  hanging]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  He  should  rather  have  said  hang¬ 
ing  and  beating,  in  order  to  correspond  with  ‘  gallows  and  knock.’  [Shakespeare 
does  not  always  use  a  ‘  respective  ’  construction.  He  sometimes  uses  a  chiasm,  or 
criss-cross  construction,  as  here,  and  as  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  i,  57  :  ‘  warmed  and 
cooled  by  the  same  winter  and  summer;’  lb.  I,  iii,  23:  ‘land  rats  and  water  rats, 
water  thieves  and  land  thieves.’— Ed.] 

32.  the  life  to  come,  etc.]  Coleridge  (p.  255) :  Fine  as  this  is,  and  delicately 
characteristic  of  one  who  had  lived  and  been  reared  in  the  best  society,  and  had  been 
precipitated  from  it  by  dice  and  drabbing ;  yet  still  it  strikes  against  my  feelings  as 
a  note  out  of  tune,  and  not  as  coalescing  with  that  pastoral  tint  which  gives  such  a 
charm  to  this  Act.  It  is  too  Macbeth-like  in  the  ‘  snapper-up  of  unconsidered  trifles.’ 
— Lloyd  (p.  135):  But  it  is  quite  consistent  with  his  nature;  it  expresses  a  latent 
superstition  or  conscientiousness  that  is  still  more  decidedly  marked  in  his  last  scene, 
and  that  gives  contrast  and  counterchange  to  his  roguery,  even  as  in  the  case  of  Ca- 
millo,  we  trace  a  line  of  prudence  darkening  almost  into  duplicity,  that  permeates 
the  very  purest  and  most  single-hearted  of  natures.  [Coleridge  is  wholly  right.  As 
always,  where  consistency  of  character  is  concerned,  his  poetic  instinct  is  unerring. 
That  the  idea  of  a  future  existence  should  be  so  tremendous  to  Autolycus  that  he 
drowned  in  sleep  all  thought  of  it,  is  as  much  out  of  place  in  his  mouth  as  would  be 
a  delight  in  daffodils  because  they  take  the  winds  of  March  with  beauty,  and  not 
because  they  are  the  precursors  of  his  frolics.  But  does  he  here  refer  to  a  future 
existence?  I  think  the  ‘  life  to  come’  bears  the  same  meaning  to  Autolycus  that  it 
does  to  Macbeth,  who  hesitates  to  risk  the  peace  of  his  *  days  and  nights  to  come,’ 
because  we  now  have  judgement  and  must  drink  the  poison’d  chalice  now;  were  it 
not  for  this  present  punishment  Macbeth  would  risk  his  coming  days,  he’d  jump  the 
life  to  come.  Thus  it  is  with  Autolycus ;  he’ll  have  no  terrors  of  the  gallows  hang¬ 
ing  over  him ;  the  thought  of  what  the  next  day  may  bring  shall  never  break  his 
slumber;  all  thoughts  of  his  future  living  shall  be  forgotten  in  sleep.— Ed.] 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 


169 


Enter  Clowne. 

Clo.  Let  me  fee,  euery  Leauen-weather  toddes,  euery 
tod  yeeldes  pound  and  odde  fhilling  :  fifteene  hundred 
fhorne,  what  comes  the  wooll  too  ? 

Aut.  If  the  fprindge  hold,  the  Cocke’s  mine. 

Clo.  I  cannot  do’t  without  Compters.  Let  mee  fee, 


34.  Scene  iii.  Warb.  Johns. 

35.  Leauen-weather]  eleven  Weather 
Rowe  + ,  Var.  ’73.  eleventh  weather 
Han.  'leven  weather  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85, 
Rann.  ’leven  wether —  Mai.  et  seq. 
living  wether  Mai.  conj. 

36.  tod]  told  Ff. 

pound  and  odde]  a  pound  and 
cne  odd  Han. 


36.  Jhilling]  /killings  F  ,  Rowe  i. 

37.  too?]  F,  Theob.  ii  +  .  to?  FF. 
et  cet. 

38.  fprindge]  fprindg  F  .  springe 
Johns.  Var.  ’73  et  seq. 

[Aside.  Rowe  et  seq. 

39.  do’t]  do  it  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 
Compters]  counters  Cap.  et  seq. 


35-  Leauen-weather  toddes]  Malone:  Dr  Farmer  observes  to  me  that  to  tod 
is  used  as  a  verb  by  dealers  in  wool ;  thus,  they  say :  ‘  Twenty  sheep  ought  to  tod 
fifty  pounds  of  wool,’  etc.  The  meaning,  therefore,  of  the  Clown’s  words  is :  Every 
eleven  wether  tods,  i.  e.  will  produce  a  tod,  or  twenty-eight  pounds  of  wool ;  every 
tod  yields  a  pound  and  odd  shilling,’  etc.  The  occupation  of  his  father  furnished  our 
poet  with  accurate  knowledge  on  the  subject ;  for  two  pounds  and  a  half  of  wool  is, 
I  am  told,  a  very  good  produce  from  a  sheep  at  the  time  of  shearing. — Ritson  :  Each 
fleece  [at  eleven  wethers  equalling  28  lb.]  would,  therefore,  be  2  lb.  8  oz.  ll]4  dr., 
and  the  whole  produce  of  fifteen  hundred  shorn  136  tod,  1  clove,  2  lb.  6  oz.  2  dr.,  which, 
at  a  pound  and  odd  shilling  per  tod,  would  be  143/.  3s.  o d.  Indeed,  it  appears 
from  Stafford’s  Breefe  Conceipte  of  English  Pollicye,  1581,  p.  16  [p.  36  Sh.  Soc.  Re¬ 
print]  that  the  price  of  a  tod  of  wool  was  at  that  period  twenty  or  two  and  twenty 
shillings ;  so  that  the  medium  price  was  exactly  ‘  pound  and  odd  shilling.’  [It  is  a 
matter  of  small  moment,  but  it  is  doubtful  that  Stafford  means  in  this  passage  to  give 
the  actual  current  price  of  wool,  inasmuch  as  he  is  stating  a  hypothetical  case. — R.  G. 
White  (ed.  i)  has  made  another  calculation  from  Stafford,  fols.  14  b,  15,  and  15  b, 
with  even  nicer  accuracy,  thus :  ‘  there  had  been  an  advance  of  prices  equal  to  about 
fifty  per  cent,  within  the  thirty  years  previous  to  the  publication  of  that  work  (“yee 
sell  that  yee  were  wont  to  sell  aforetime  [‘  xxx  yeares  agoe  ’]  for  xx  groats  now  for 
xxx  ’)  and  that  “  aforetime  ”  the  husbandman  sold  “  his  wooll  at  a  marke  the  Todde.” 
This,  the  mark  being  13L  6 d.,  would  make  “every  tod  yield  pound  and  odd  shilling” 
in  Shakespeare’s  time.’  According  to  Forby  (  Vocabulary  of  East  Anglia )  the  verb 
to  tod  was  still  in  use  in  Norfolk  in  1830.] 

39.  Compters]  Way  ( Foot-note  in  Prompt.  Parv.  s.  v.  Awgrym)  :  Towards  the 
commencement  of  the  XVIth  century  the  use  of  the  Arabic  numerals  had  in  some 
degree  superseded  the  ancient  mode  of  calculating  by  the  abacus ;  and  counters, 
which,  at  the  period  when  the  Promptorium  was  compiled,  were  generally  used.  .  .  . 
They  were  not,  indeed,  wholly  disused  at  a  time  long  subsequent.  [See  ‘counter¬ 
caster,’  Oth.  I,  i,  33.]— Steevens  (Note  on  ‘Counter,’  As  You  Like  It,  II,  vii,  66) : 
Dr  Farmer  observes  to  me  that  about  1600  the  French  counters  (i.  e.  pieces  of  false 
money  used  as  a  means  of  reckoning)  were  brought  into  use  in  England.  They  are 
mentioned  in  Tro.  Cress.  II,  ii,  28. 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


170 


what  am  I  to  buy  for  our  Sheepe-fhearing-Feaft?  Three  40 
pound  of  Sugar,  hue  pound  of  Currence,  Rice  :  What 
will  this  fitter  of  mine  do  with  Rice  ?  But  my  father  hath 
made  her  Miftris  of  the  Feaft,  and  fhe  layes  it  on  .  Shee 
hath  made-me  four  and  twenty  Nofe-gayes  for  the  (hea¬ 
rers  (three-man  fong-men,  all,  and  very  good  ones)  but  45 
they  are  moft  of  them  Meanes  and  Bafes  ;  but  one  Puri- 


40.  Feajl  ?]  feast,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns,  feast?  [Reads]  Sta. 

41.  Sugar, ~]  sugar ;  [reading  out  of  a 
Note]  Cap. 

Currence~\  Currants  Rowe. 


41.  Rice  .•]  rice — Rowe. 

44.  made-me ]  F2. 

45.  three-man  fong-men\  three-man 
-song-men  Var.  ’73. 

46.  Meanes]  Mean  Rowe  i. 


40.  Feast]  Steevens  :  The  expence  attending  these  festivities  appears  to  have 
afforded  matter  of  complaint.  Thus  in  Questions  of  profitable  and  pleasant  Con- 
cermngs,  1594  :  ‘  If  it  be  a  sheep-shearing  feast,  maister  Baily  can  entertaine  you  with 
his  bill  of  reckonings  to  his  maister  of  three  shepheards  wages,  spent  on  fresh  cates, 
besides  spices  and  saffron  pottage.’ 

45.  three-man  song-men]  Theobald  :  By  a  ‘  three-man  ’  songster  we  are  to 
understand,  a  singer  of  catches,  which  were  then  and  are  now  most  commonly  in 
three  parts.— Percy  :  A  ‘six  mens  song’  is  alluded  to  in  The  Tournament  of 
Tottenham  see  Reliques  of  Anc.  Poet,  ii,  24.— Malone  :  Florio  renders  Berlingozzo, 
— ‘  a  dronken  song,  a  threemens  song.’  Halliwell  cites  six  or  seven  instances  of 
the  use  of  the  term. 

[In  the  first  letter  from  Theobald  to  Warburton  (Nichols’s  Illustrations,  ii,  209), 
Theobald,  then  in  his  salad  days  and  very  green  in  judgement,  proposed,  merely  for 
the  sake  of  ‘  awakening  a  more  curious  speculation,’  as  he  says,  that  the  present  text 
should  read ‘  They  ’ re  men,  songmen  all,’  or  ‘  They're  main  songmen  all.’  ‘  But 
as,  he  continues,  ‘  since  your  note,  the  Weavers  have  run  much  in  my  head,  is  it  prob¬ 
able  to  thinking,  as  our  Shakespeare  says,  that  he  might  have  wrote,  “  thrum-men, 
songmen  all,”  i.  e.  Weavers  and  Songsters  ?’  This  was  written  in  a  private  letter,  five 
years  before  Theobold  published  his  edition  of  Shakespeare,  wherein  no  allusion  what¬ 
ever  is  made  to  these  early  conjectures,  which  never  appeared  in  print  until  nigh  a 
hundred  years  after  they  were  made.  This  explanation  is  due  to  Theobald  (to  whom 
and  to  Capell  we  owe  our  largest  debt  of  gratitude  for  the  text  of  Shakespeare  as  it 
stands  to-day),  inasmuch  as  Halliwell  in  his  edition  quotes  these  proposed  changes 
and  attributes  them  ‘to  the  rage  for  conjectural  emendation.’  Halliwell  gives  no 
name  as  the  author,  but  a  reference  to  the  footnotes  of  the  Cambridge  Edition  fur¬ 
nishes  it,  and  then  the  indirect  slight  put  upon  Theobald  is  revealed.  There  is  no 
intimation  in  Halliwell’s  note  that  the  conjectures  were  never  published  by  their 
author,  but  were  practically  withdrawn.  It  behooves  us  to  be  sensitive  and  touchy 
under  any  slur  thrown  on  Theobald,  and,  wherever  possible,  to  vindicate  his  memory, 
as  the  only  reparation  now  in  our  power  for  the  unmerited  contumely  cast  on  him 
during  his  unhappy  lifetime  by  Pope  and  by  his  ‘most  affectionate  friend’  War- 
urton,  and  after  his  death  by  Steevens  and  Malone,  and,  I  am  sorry  to  add,  by  Dr 
Johnson. — Ed.]  7 

46.  Meanes]  Steevens:  That  is,  tenors.— Chappell  (p.  223):  The  ‘mean’  in 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  171 

tan  amongft  them,  and  he  fings  Pfalmes  to  horne-pipes.  47 
I  muff  haue  Saffron  to  colour  the  Warden  Pies,  Mace  : 

47.  among ft~\  among  F^,  Rbwe  +  .  48.  Warden  Pies ]  Wardens  Pies 

Rowe  i.  warden-pies  Rowe  ii. 

music  was  the  intermediate  part  between  the  tenor  and  treble ;  not  the  tenor  itself,  as 
explained  by  Steevens. — TlECK  (ix,  356)  asserts  that  ‘means  and  bases’  are  used 
with  a  double  meaning. 

47.  to  horne-pipes]  This  is  not,  I  think,  he  sings  Psalms  ‘  to  the  accompaniments 
of  horn-pipes,’  as  Deighton  says,  for  who  was  there  to  accompany  him  ? — but  rather, 
he  sings  Psalms  to  the  lively  tunes  to  which  Horn-pipes  were  danced, — a  practice 
which,  we  know,  was  extremely  popular  in  France,  and  from  allusions  like  the  present 
we  can  infer  that  it  was  not  unknown  in  England. — Ed. 

48.  Saffron  .  .  .  Warden  Pies]  In  the  Two  Fifteenth-Century  Cookery-Books 

(about  1430  and  1450),  reprinted  by  the  E.  E.  T.  Soc.,  and  edited  by  Thomas  Austin, 
‘  Saffron  ’  or,  as  it  is  spelled,  Saferoun ,  Safroun,  or  Sapheron,  is  a  frequent  ingredient. 
In  one  of  the  Recipes  (p.  87)  directions  are  given  for  its  use  in  colouring,  not  Warden 
Pies  to  be  sure,  but  Wardens  in  syrup,  as  follows  : — ‘  Take  Wardons,  and  cast  hem  in 
a  faire  potte,  And  boile  hem  til  thei  ben  tendre ;  and  take  hem  vppe,  and  pare  hem 
in  ij.  or  in  iij.  And  take  powder  of  Canell  [Cinnamon],  a  good  quantite,  and  cast  hit 
in  good  red  wyne,  And  cast  sugur  thereto,  and  put  hit  in  an  erthen  potte,  And  lete 
boile ;  And  then  cast  the  pears  thereto,  And  late  hem  boile  togidre  awhile ;  take 
powder  of  ginger,  And  a  litell  saffron  to  colloure  hit  with,  And  loke  that  hit  be 
poynante  [piquant  with  vinegar]  And  also  Doucet  [sweetish].’  On  p.  51  is  a  Recipe 
for  a  Warden  Pie  : — 1  Quyncis  or  Wardouns  in  past — Take  and  make  fayre  Rounde 
cofyns  of  fayre  past  [a  ‘  cofyn  ’  was  the  crust  of  a  pie,  and  considering  the  sequent 
effects  of  the  ingredients  which  it  frequently  enclosed  was  apparently  not  a  misnomer. 
— Ed.]  ;  then  take  fayre  Raw  Quyncis,  &  pare  hem  with  a  knyf,  &  take  fayre  out  the 
core  ther-of ;  than  take  Sugre  y-now,  &  a  lytel  pouder  Gyngere,  &  stoppe  the  hole 
fulle;  &  cowche  .ij.  or  .iij.  wardonys  or  quynces  in  a  cofyn,  &  keuere  hem,  &  lat 
hem  bake  ;  &  for  defaut  of  Sugre,  take  hony ;  but  then  putte  pouder  Pepir  ther-on, 
&  Gyngere,  in  the  maner  be-for  sayd.’  ‘  It  [saffron]  was  especially  cultivated,’  says 
the  Encycl.  Brit.,  ‘  near  Hinton  in  Cambridgeshire  and  in  Essex  at  Saffron  Walden 
(i.  e.  Saffron  Woods,  not  Saffron  Walled-in,  as  the  canting  crest  of  the  town  would 
imply),  its  cultivators  being  called  “  crokers.”  This  industry,  though  very  important 
in  the  15th  century,  .  .  .  appears  to  have  died  out  about  1768.’  ‘  One  grain  of  saffron 

rubbed  to  powder  with  sugar  and  a  little  water  imparts  a  distinctly  yellow  tint  to  ten 
gallons  of  water.’  The  cultivation  of  saffron  in  the  sixteenth  century  in  England  was 
important  enough  for  Harrison  to  devote  a  chapter  to  it.  See  Harrison’s  Description 
of  England,  Bk  iii,  Chap,  viii,  ed.  1587  ;  Reprint  by  New  Sh.  Soc.  Part  ii,  p.  50.— 
Skeat  says  a  ‘  warden  ’  meant  a  keeping  pear,  and  quotes  Cotgrave  : — ‘ Poire  de  garde. 
A  warden,  or  winter  Peare ;  a  Peare  which  may  be  kept  very  long.’  Minshieu 
{Guide  into  Tongues )  to  the  same  effect  :  ‘  a  Warden,  or  great  Peare.  Poire  de  garde, 
i,  a  peare  to  gard  or  keepe  long.’  But  Ellacombe  (p.  154)  says  ‘this  is  certainly  a 
mistake.  In  an  interesting  paper  by  Mr  Hudson  Turner,  “  On  the  State  of  Horti¬ 
culture  in  England  in  early  times,”  etc.,  printed  in  the  Archaeological  Journal,  v,  301, 
it  is  stated  that  “  the  Warden  Pear  bad  its  origin  and  name  from  the  horticultural 
skill  of  the  Cistercian  Monks  of  Wardon  Abbey  in  Bedfordshire,  founded  in  the 


172 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


Dates,  none  :  that’s  out  of  my  note  :  Nutmegges,  feuen  ; 
a  Race  or  two  of  Ginger,  but  that  I  may  begge  :  Foure  50 
pound  of  Prewyns,  and  as  many  of  Reyfons  o’th  Sun. 


51.  Prewyns]  Ff.  Pruns  Rowe  i.  51.  Reyfons]  RcafonsYJl .  Rasins 

Pruins  Rowe  ii,  Cap.  Prunes  Pope  et  Rowe,  raisins  Pope, 
cet. 


twelfth  century.  Three  Warden  Pears  appeared  in  the  armorial  bearings  of  the 
Abbey.”  ’ — Ed. 

49.  note]  Capeli.  inferred  from  this  word  that  the  Clown  had  a  written  list  from 
which  he  read  the  items;  he,  therefore,  inserted  after  ‘Three  pound  of  sugar’  the 
stage-direction  ‘  [Reading  out  of  a  Note]  ’  and  printed  in  Italics  all  the  articles  which 
the  Clown  had  to  buy.  This  inference  was  shared  by  the  subsequent  editors  begin¬ 
ning  with  the  Var.  1778  down  to  Dyce,  ed.  i,  and  R.  G.  White,  ed.  i,  but  not  inclu¬ 
sive  (these  two  appeared  in  the  same  year,  1857),  by  Collier,  by  Staunton,  who 
adds  the  stage-direction  ‘  [Reads],’  by  Singer  and  by  Keightley,  inasmuch  as  one 


and  all  printed  the  items  either  in  Italics  or  in  quotation  marks. — R.  G.  White  para¬ 
phrases  the  present  passage  thus : — ‘  that’s  not  among  the  matters  of  which  I  am  to 
take  note,’  and  adds :  ‘  not  “  out  of  my  list  ”  as  most  editors  evidently  understand  it, 
by  printing  the  items  which  the  Clown  enumerates,  as  if  he  read  them  from  a  list. 
Shakespeare  would  not  have  represented  a  Clown  in  his  day  reading;  and  manu¬ 
script,  too.  Had  he  done  so,  a  shout  of  laughter,  not  with  him,  but  at  him,  would 
have  gone  up  from  even  the  penny-paying  part  of  his  audience.’ — Dyce  remarks : 
‘  I  believe  that  the  Clown  is  trusting  to  his  memory  alone.’  That  Dyce  and  White 
are  right  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  the  Clown  enumerates  ‘  dates,’  which  those 
who  follow  Capeli  print  also  in  italics,  thereby  representing  the  Clown  as  reading 
from  his  list  an  item  which  was  not  in  it. — Ed.] 

50.  Race]  That  is,  a  root.  ‘  Old  French,  rats,  razz,  a  root  (Burguy)  ;  cf.  Spanish, 
raiz,  a  root. — Lat.  radicem ,  acc.  of  radix,  a  root.’ — Skeat. 

51.  Reysons  o’th  Sun]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  All  raisins  were  so  called. 

‘  Among  us  in  England  they  be  of  two  sortes,  that  is  to  say  great  Raysons  and  smal 
Raysons,  otherwise  called  Corans  [Currants],  The  greatest  sort  are  called  raysons 

of  the  sunne,  the  other  are  commonly  to  be  had  and  are  much  used  in  meats,’  etc. _ 

The  Hauen  of  Health,  1584,  p.  97.  [Raisins  were  thus  called  to  distinguish  them 
from  raisins  dried  artificially.  In  Holland’s  Pliny,  xiv,  cap.  iii,  mention  is  made  of 
the  vine  ‘  Scirpula,  the  grapes  whereof  seem  as  if  they  were  Raisins  of  the  sun,  dried 
already ;’  and  in  Batman  vppon  Bartholome,  p.  328,  verso,  we  find : — ‘  Reison  in  the 


singular  number  is  called  Vua  passa,  and  is  made  in  many  manner  wise.  For  some¬ 
time  the  stalke  thereof  is  woue  and  wounde,  so  that  the  humour  may  no  more  come 
to  the  grape  from  the  vine.  And  so  the  grape  in  certeine  dayes  is  fordryed  by  heate 
of  the  Sunne.  And  this  Grape  and  Reison  is  called  Vua  passa  :  for  they  suffer  heate 
of  the  Sunne :  and  this  is  the  best  to  eat.  And  sometime  the  grapes  be  wounde  in 
vine  leaues,  and  bee  bound  with  threed,  for  the  grapes  should  not  seede,  and  be  put 
into  an  Ouen  so  bound  &  wrapped  after  that  bread  is  taken  out  and  be  dried,  when 
the  heate  is  temperate,  and  bee  Reisons  when  they  be  so  dryed.  In  such  manner 
they  bee  called  Vue  passe,  for  they  suffer  a  manner  of  violence  of  heate  of  the  Ouen. 
In  such  manner  sometime  Vua  passa  is  made  in  chimneyes.  .  .  .  Raisons  bee  made 
in  Ouens,  Chimneies,  and  in  heat  of  the  Sunne.’ — Ed.] 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.J 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


173 


Aut.  Oh,  that  euer  I  was  borne.  52 

Clcr  I’th’name  of  me. 

52.  [Grovelling  on  the  ground.  Rowe  53.  mc.~\  me —  Rowe  et  seq. 
et  seq. 

53.  of  me]  Theobald  ( Nichols ,  ii,  363) :  I  suspect,  ‘  I'th’  name  of  the  — .’ 
The  Clown,  hearing  Autolycus  groan,  begins  to  be  afraid ;  and  apprehending  a  spirit, 
according  to  the  old  superstition,  falls  to  invoking  the  Trinity.  [This  was  not  repeated 
in  Theobald’s  edition.] — Johnson  :  I  believe  ‘  me  ’  should  be  blotted  out.  [This 
was  not  repeated  in  any  of  the  subsequent  Variorum  editions.  Possibly  on  account 
of  the  assault  made  on  it  by  Kenrick,  whose  note,  albeit  of  great  length  over  so  small 
a  matter,  is  worth  reviving  as  a  specimen  of  the  style  of  criticism  among  our  for¬ 
bears;  after  quoting  Johnson’s  conjecture  that  ‘me  ’  should  be  blotted  out,  Kenrick 
proceeds  as  follows :  ‘  Here  we  have  another  article  of  Dr  Johnson’s  critical  creed. 
It  is  certain  that,  whether  ‘  me  ’  be  in  or  out  is,  in  this  place,  of  very  little  conse¬ 
quence  ;  but  I  so  much  revere  the  text  of  Shakespeare,  that,  without  I  see  an  absolute 
necessity  for  it,  I  will  never  defile  it  with  a  blot.  It  seems  as  if  the  very  name  of 
fohnson  was  fated  to  cast  invidious  reflections  on  that  of  Shakespeare ;  as  if  it  was 
malignantly  formed  to  absorb  the  rays  diffused  by  superior  lustre,  and  enviously  to 
sully,  with  a  reflected  gloom,  the  fountain  of  its  own  light.  This  scheme  of  blotting- 
out  was  originally  suggested  by  a  Johnson ;  who,  when  the  players  made  their  boast( 
in  honour  of  Shakespeare,  that  he  never  blotted  a  line,  replied,  “  Would  he  had 
blotted  out  a  thousand.”  This  was  Ben  Johnson,  who  only  expressed  his  wish  that 
Shakespeare  had  done  what  Sam  Johnson  boldly  determined  to  do  for  him.  For  it 
is  to  be  observed  that  here  was  no  tenderness  due  to  living  reputation  to  stop  his  hand ; 
and  he  might  think  to  indulge  himself  safely  in  the  innocent  discussion  of  a  dead 
poet's  pretensions  to  renown.  [These  are  quotations  from  Dr  Johnson’s  Preface. ] 
If  it  be  not  owing  to  some  such  antipathy  or  invidious  influence  subsisting  between 
the  names  of  Johnson  and  Shakespeare,  to  what  else  can  we  impute  Dr  John¬ 
son’s  objection  to  the  harmless  me  in  the  above  passage  ?  He  very  possibly  can¬ 
not  find  any  use  for  it.  But  if  we  consider  that  the  whole  line  is  a  mere  exclama¬ 
tion  ;  testifying  the  Clown’s  surprise  at  hearing  Autolicus  cry  out,  and  seeing  him  lie 
groveling  on  the  earth.  Had  he  said  In  tke  name  of  Heaven — or,  In  the  name  of 
Mercy, — the  line,  however  bordering  on  profanity,  would  have  past;  but  nothing  is 
more  common  than  for  conscientious  people  to  check  themselves  in  the  middle  of 
such  exclamations,  or  to  substitute  some  innocent  word  in  the  place  of  the  exception¬ 
able  one.  Again,  if  any  objection  be  made  to  the  supposition  of  the  Clown’s  stop¬ 
ping  in  the  middle  of  the  word  mercy,  let  us  take  another  view  of  the  exclamation, 
and  admit  the  word  me  to  stand  as  a  personal  pronoun.  It  is  notorious  that  persons, 
who,  as  Hotspur  says,  “  swear  like  comfit-maker’s  wives,  and  give  such  sarcenet 
security  for  their  oaths,  as,  in  good  faith — as  true  as  I  live — as  God  shall  mend  me — 
and  as  sure  as  I  live."  I  say  it  is  very  common  for  these  uncommon  swearers,  who 
cannot  gulp  down  or  digest  a  good  mouth-filling  oath,  to  protest  upon  their  Word. 
Now  I  cannot  see  why  a  person,  who,  to  avoid  a  profane  oath,  should  protest  upon 
his  word,  might  not,  with  equal  propriety,  in  order  to  avoid  a  profane  exclamation, 
cry  out  in  his  name.  Admitting  this,  the  Clown,  instead  of  crying  out  in  the  name 
of  heav’n,  exclaimed  in  the  name  of  himself;  viz.:  I'th'  name  of  me.  And  this 
expression  may  surely  pass  among  expletives  of  this  kind,  as  well  as  for  the  SOUL  of 


*74 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


Aut.  Oh  helpe  me,  helpe  mee  :  plucke  but  off  thefe 
ragges  :  and  then,  death,  death. 

Clo.  Alacke  poore  foule,  thou  haft  need  of  more  rags 
to  lay  on  thee,  rather  then  haue  thefe  off. 

Aut.  Oh  fir ,  the  loathfomneffe  of  them  offend  mee, 
more  then  the  ftripes  I  haue  receiued,  which  are  mightie 
ones  and  millions. 

Clo.  Alas  poore  man,  a  million  of  beating  may  come 
to  a  great  matter. 

Aut.  I  am  rob’d  fir,  and  beaten  :  my  money,  and  ap- 
parrell  tane  from  me,  and  thefe  dereftable  things  put  vp- 
on  me. 

Clo.  What,  by  a  horfe-man,  or  a  foot-man  ? 

Aut.  A  footman  (fweet  fir)  a  footman. 

Clo.  Indeed,  he  fhould  be  a  footman,  by  the  garments 
he  has  left  with  thee  :  If  this  bee  a  horfemans  Coate  ,  it 
hath  feene  very  hot  feruice.  Lend  me  thy  hand,  lie  helpe 
thee.  Come,  lend  me  thy  hand. 


55 


60 



54-  Oh  helpe ]  Oh,  held  Sox.  ’73  (mis¬ 
print). 

55-  death.]  death —  Rowe  ii.  death  ! 
Cap. 


58.  offend}  Dyce,  Sta.  offends  Ff, 
Rowe  et  cet. 

64.  derejlable ]  detejlable  Ff. 

71.  [Helping  him  up.  Rowe  et  seq. 


me-for  the  life  of  me-for  the  heart  of  me,  etc.— After  all,  whether  I  have  con¬ 
vinced  the  reader  or  not  of  the  propriety  of  letting  me  stand  in  the  text,  I  must  have 
some  better  reason  given  me  for  expunging  it  than  the  ifse-credidit  of  a  Johnson  ’— 
AWr*  p-  85.  [Kenrick’s  plea  for  ‘  I’the  name  of  mercy  >  might  have  received  some 
support  had  he  recalled  the  exclamation  of  the  Clown’s  father,  III,  iii,  109:— <  Name 
of  mercy,  when  was  this,  boy.’]— Steevens  pronounces  the  Clown’s  speech  <  a  vulvar 
exclamation  ’  which  he  had  often  heard.  ‘  So,  Sir  Andrew  Ague-cheek  [Twel.  Night, 

,  in,  194]  ' “  Before  me,  she’s  a  good  wench  !”  ’—Cambridge  Edition  :  A  writer 

in  The  Gent.  Mag.  1st  Ser.  vol.  lx,  p.  306,  suggests  that  by  ‘  me  —  ’  in  this  place  is. 
meant  mercy,  and  that  the  Clown’s  exclamation  is  interrupted  by  Autolycus. 

58.  offend]  See  note  on  lines  26,  32  in  the  preceding  Scene.  , 

62.  matter.]  Deighton  :  When  you  come  to  reckon  it,  a  million  of  beating 
amounts  to  a  good  deal ;  an  adage  worthy  of  Dogberry. 

66,  67,  68.  foot-man  .  .  .  footman]  Perhaps  it  may  be  to  attach  too  much  im- 
portance  to  the  spelling  even  in  this  well  printed  play,  but  it  seems  noteworthy  that 
m  the  Clown’s  question  <  horse-man  ’  and  <  foot-man  ’  are  printed  with  hyphens  which 
are  omitted  in  the  repetition  of  the  words.  May  it  not  be  that  the  meaning  intended 
to  be  conveyed  thereby,  can  be  thus  freely  paraphrased  ?  «  Was  it  a  man  on  horse¬ 

back  or  a  man  on  foot?’  asks  the  Clown.  « It  was  a  footman,  a  servant,’  answers 
o  ycus  ‘  It  must  indeed  have  been  a  fellow  who  footed  it,  a  downright  tramp,  to- 

judge  by  his  clothes,’  responds  the  Clown.— Ed. 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


175 


Aut .  Oh  good  fir,  tenderly,  oh.  72 

Clo.  Alas  poore  foule. 

Aut.  Oh  good  fir,  foftly,  good  fir  :  I  feare  (fir)  my 
fhoulder-blade  is  out.  75 

Clo.  How  now?  Canft  ftand  ? 

Aut.  Softly,  deere  fir  :  good  fir,  foftly  :  you  ha  done 
me  a  charitable  office. 

Clo.  Doeft  lacke  any  mony  ?  I  haue  a  little  mony  for 
thee.  80 

Aut.  No, good  fweet  fir  :  no,  I  befeech  you  fir: I  haue 
a  Kinfman  not  paft  three  quarters  of  a  mile  hence  ,  vnto 
whome  I  was  going  :  I  fhall  there  haue  money,  or  anie 
thing  I  want  :  Offer  me  no  money  I  pray  you,  that  killes 
my  heart.  85 

Clow.  What  manner  of  Fellow  was  hee  that  robb’d 
you  ? 

Aut.  A  fellow  (fir)  that  I  haue  knowne  to  goe  about 
with  Troll-mydames  :  I  knew  him  once  a  feruant  of  the  89 

77.  deere  fir .-]  dear  sir ;  [picks  his  88-101.  As  mnemonic  lines,  Warb. 

Pocket]  Cap.  Var.  ’78  et  seq.  (subs.).  89.  Troll-mydames)  troll-madams 

dear  sir:  [cuts  his  purse.]  Coll,  ii  (MS).  Han.  trol-madames  Cap. 

ha ]  ha'  Rowe  et  seq.  him]  him  him  Iq. 

79.  Doefi)  Doji  F3F4. 

75-  °ut]  Bucknill  (p.  131)  says  justly  that  the  ‘shoulder-blade  cannot  be  dis¬ 
located,’  but  an  oversight  by  Autolycus  in  anatomy,  under  the  circumstances,  is  not  to 
be  imputed  to  Shakespeare. — Ed. 

77.  deere  sir]  Capell’s  stage-direction  here,  is  noticed  in  the  Preface. 

89.  Troll-mydames]  Farmer:  ‘The  ladyes,  gentle  woomen,  wyves,  and 
maydes,  may  in  one  of  the  galleries  walke ;  and  if  the  weather  bee  not  aggreeable 
to  theire  expectacion,  they  may  have  in  the  ende  of  a  benche  eleven  holes  made, 
intoo  the  whiche  to  trowle  pummates,  or  bowles  of  leade,  bigge,  little,  or  meane,  or 
also  of  copper,  tynne,  woode,  eyther  vyolent  or  softe,  after  their  owne  discretion ; 
the  pastyme  troule-in-madame  is  termed.’ [ — The  Benefit  of  the  Ancient  Bathes  of 
Buckstones,  compiled  by  John  Jones  at  the  King’s  Mede,  nigh  Darby,  1572,  p.  12. 
The  foregoing  extract  is  copied  from  Brand  (Pop.  Ant.  ii,  445),  who  gives  date  and 
page,  which  Farmer  does  not  give,  and  who  follows  the  original  with  greater  fidelity, 
apparently,  than  Farmer.]— Steevens  :  The  old  English  title  of  this  game  was 
Pigeon  holes ;  as  the  arches  in  the  machine  through  which  the  balls  are  rolled, 
resemble  the  cavities  made  for  pigeons  in  a  dove-house.  [Cotgrave  gives :  ‘  Trou 
Madame.  The  Game  called  Trunkes,  or  the  Hole.’  Brand  also  gives  (ii,  447) 
Trunks  as  another  name  for  Troule-in-madame,  and  quotes  a  passage  from  Poor 
Robin's  Almanack  for  17 15  where  it  is  mentioned. — Halliwell  ( Archaic  Diet.) 
says  that  the  game  is  still  called  trunks ,  and  that  ‘  troll-madam  ’  appears  to  have  been 
somewhat  like  the  modern  game  of  bagatelle .] 


176  THE  WINTERS  TALE  [act  iv, 

Prince  :  I  cannot  tell  good  fir,  for  which  of  his  Ver- 
tues  it  was,  but  hee  was  certainely  Whipt  out  of  the 
Court. 

C/o.His  vices  you  would  fay  :  there’s  no  vertue  whipt 
out  of  the  Court  :  they  cherifh  it  to  make  it  ftay  there  ; 
and  yet  it  will  no  more  but  abide. 

Ant.  Vices  I  would  fay  (Sir.)  I  know  this  man  well, 
he  hath  bene  fince  an  Ape-bearer,  then  a  Proceffe-feruer 

95.  more  but]  more  jot  or  more  whit  or  more  bit  Perring. 

95.  but  abide]  Capell,  after  saying  that  he  does  not  ‘clearly  enter  into’  this 
joke,  adds,  ‘  perhaps  the  intended  sense  of  “  abide  ”  is  one  vulgarly  given  it,  viz. 
endure  or  put  up  with  ;  and  the  joke — that  the  utmost  “  virtue  ”  can  do  for  a  “  court  ” 
is— to  be  patient  when  forc’d  upon  it.’ — Johnson  :  To  ‘  abide  ’  here  must  signify  to 
sojourn,  to  live  for  a  time  without  a  settled  habitation. — Collier  (ed.  ii) :  This  inter¬ 
pretation  [of  Johnson  and  of  subsequent  editors]  is  clearly  wrong,  for  where  can  it  be 
shown  that  to  ‘  abide  ’  means  only  to  remain  for  a  time  ?  On  the  contrary,  it  means 
most  emphatically  to  continue  permanently;  Johnson  ( Diet .)  says,  ‘to  “abide”  is  to 
dwell  in  a  place,  not  to  remove,  to  stay, to  remain,  to  be  immoveable;’  and  Richardson 
tells  us  the  same.  .  .  .  What  must  have  been  the  language  of  Shakespeare  is  restored  in 
a  moment  by  a  very  slight  change,  the  converse  of  that  in  Love's  L.  L.  V,  ii,  747,  where 
but  has  been,  time  out  of  mind,  misprinted  ‘not;’  in  the  passage  before  us  not  has 
been  misprinted  ‘  but,’  and  instead  of  saying  that  virtue  will  ‘  but  abide,’  we  ought  to 
say  ‘ not  abide,’  and  print  the  text  as  we  have  given  it:  ‘  and  yet  it  will  no  more,  not 
abide,’  meaning  that  however  virtue  may  be  cherished  at  court,  it  will  not  any  the 
more  stay,  or  ‘  abide  ’  there.  [Collier  returned  to  the  present  reading  in  his  Third 
Edition  with  the  short  note :  ‘  It  will  do  no  more  than  remain  there  for  a  short  time.’ 
— Dyce,  in  his  Strictures  on  Collier  (p.  81),  observes  that  it  is  ‘surely  easier  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  Shakespeare  may  have  used  “  abide  ”  in  [the  sense  of  dwelling  for  a  time] 
than  to  believe  that  he  wrote  “it  will  no  more,  not  abide,” — which  enigma  Mr  Collier 
explains  [in  the  words  just  quoted].’ — Staunton  has  given  what  seems  to  be  the  just 
interpretation  ;  according  to  him,  the  phrase  is  equivalent  to  ‘  And  yet  it  will  barely, 
or  with  difficulty,  remain.’  For  those  who  prefer  to  believe  (among  whom  the  pres¬ 
ent  editor  is  not  to  be  reckoned)  that  ‘  abide  ’  here  means  to  stay  for  a  time ,  there  are 
several  examples  so  classified  in  Schmidt’s  Lexicon.—  Ed.] 

97.  Ape-bearer]  Staunton  quotes  Gifford’s  note  on  The  Bondman,  III,  iii, 
p.  60,  as  follows:  ‘Our  ancestors  certainly  excelled  in  the  education  w’hich  they 
gave  to  their  animals.  Banks’s  horse  far  surpassed  all  that  have  been  brought  up  in 
the  academy  of  Mr  Astley ;  and  the  apes  of  these  days  are  mere  clowns  to  their 
progenitors.  The  apes  of  Massinger’s  time  were  gifted  with  a  pretty  smattering  of 
politics  and  philosophy.  The  Widow  Wild  had  one  of  them  :  “  He  would  come  over 
for  all  my  friends,  but  was  the  dogged’st  thing  to  my  enemies !  he  would  sit  upon  his 

tail  before  them,  and  frown  like  Jack-a-napes  when  the  Pope  is  named.” _ The 

Tarson's  Wedding-  [V,  ii].  Another  may  be  found  in  Ram  Alley  [IV,  i]  :  «  Men 
say  you’ve  tricks;  remember,  noble  captain.  You  skip  when  I  shall  shake  my  whip. 
Now,  sir,  What  can  you  do  for  the  great  Turk  ?  What  can  you  do  for  the  pope  of 


sc.  iii. 
90 

95 

97 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  177 

(a  Bayliffe)  then  hee  compaft  a  Motion  of  the  Prodigall  98 

98.  ( a  Bayliffe )]  to  a  bailiff  Cam.  Edd.  conj. 


Rome  ?  Lo !  He  stirreth  not,  he  moveth  not,  he  waggeth  not.  What  can  you  do 
for  the  town  of  Geneva,  sirrah?  [ Captain  holds  up  his  hand,  etc.”  ’  This  note, 
which  is  taken  direct  from  Gifford  ad  loc.  and  stands  as  Staunton  has  quoted  it,  is 
incomprehensible  if  we  are  to  understand  it  as  illustrating  the  proficiency  of  apes  in 
Elizabethan  days.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  Staunton  did  not  verify  Gifford’s  quotations, 
and  still  more  that  Gifford  calculated  on  their  not  being  verified,  otherwise  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  believe  that  either  Staunton  or  Gifford  would  ever  have  quoted  these  passages, 
neither  of  which  refers  to  a  genuine  ape.  In  The  Parson' s  Wedding  a  keen  satire 
on  the  abjectness  of  lovers  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  Widow  Wild,  and  in  Ram-Alley 
a  braggart  Captain  is  forced  to  perform  antic  tricks  like  an  ape,  mounted  on  a  table. 
• — El>.]  Staunton  continues :  This  perfect  mastery  [of  the  ape-bearer  over  the  ape] 
gave  occasion  for  a  saying  attributed  to  James  I. — “  If  I  have  a  Jack-a-napes,  I  can 
make  him  bite  you;  if  you  have  a  Jack-a-napes,  you  can  make  him  bite  me.”  In  the 
Induction  to  Jonson’s  Bartholomew  Fair,  the  stage-keeper  speaks  of  “  a  juggler  with 
a  well-educated  ape,  to  come  over  the  chain  for  a  King  of  England,  and  back  again 
for  the  prince ;  and  sit  still  for  the  Pope  and  the  King  of  Spain.”  This  evolution  of 
coming  over,  etc.  was  performed  by  the  animal’s  placing  his  fore-paws  on  the  ground, 
and  turning  over  the  chain  on  his  head,  and  going  back  again  in  the  same  fashion,  as 
the  feat  is  represented  in  an  illuminated  manuscript  of  the  fourteenth  century.’  [Sir 
Thomas  Overburie  had  a  supreme  contempt  for  a  ‘  Rymer,’  he  calls  him  ‘  a  Juggler 
with  words,’  and  in  his  Character  (the  edition  of  1627  is  not  paged),  concludes 
with  saying  that ‘  there  is  nothing  on  the  earth  so  pittifull,  no  not  an  Ape-carrier.’ 
—Ed.] 

98.  Motion]  Warburton  :  That  is,  a  puppet-show,  then  called  motions.  A  term 
frequently  occurring  in  our  author. — Knight:  The  subjects  which  were  usually 
chosen  for  these  exhibitions  were  mostly  scriptural.  In  Jonson’s  Bartholomew  Fair 
[V,  i,]  the  puppet-show  professor  says  :  ‘  O  the  motions  that  I,  Lanthorn  Leatherhead, 
have  given  light  to,  in  my  time,  since  my  master  Pod  died !  Jerusalem  was  a  stately 
thing,  and  so  was  Nineveh  and  the  City  of  Norwich,  and  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.’ 
The  Spectator,  No.  14,  speaking  of  Powell,  the  puppet-show  man,  says  :  ‘  There  can¬ 
not  be  too  great  encouragement  given  to  his  skill  in  motions,  provided  he  is  under 
proper  restrictions.’  Even  in  the  days  of  Anne  these  successors  of  the  old  Mysteries 
still  presented  scriptural  subjects.  Strutt,  in  his  Sports  and  Pastimes  [p.  166,  ed. 
1841],  has  printed  a  Bartholomew  Fair  bill  of  that  time,  as  follows:  ‘At  Crawley’s 
Booth,  over  against  the  Crown  Tavern  in  Smithfield,  during  the  time  of  Bartholomew 
Fair,  will  be  presented  a  little  Opera,  called  the  Old  Creation  of  the  World,  yet  newly 
revived ;  with  the  addition  of  Noah’s  Flood ;  also  several  fountains  playing  water 
during  the  time  of  the  play. — The  last  scene  does  present  Noah  and  his  family  com¬ 
ing  out  of  the  Ark,  with  all  the  beasts  two  and  two,  and  all  the  fowls  of  the  air  seen 
in  a  prospect  sitting  upon  trees ;  likewise  over  the  Ark  is  seen  the  Sun  rising  in  a 
most  glorious  manner;  moreover,  a  multitude  of  Angels  will  be  seen  in  double  rank, 
which  presents  a  double  prospect,  one  for  the  sun  and  another  for  a  palace,  where 
will  be  seen  six  Angels  ringing  of  bells. — Likewise,  Machines  descend  from  above, 
double  and  treble,  with  Dives  rising  out  of  Hell  and  Lazarus  seen  in  Abraham’s 
bosom,  besides  several  figures  dancing  jiggs,  sarabands,  and  country  dances  to  the 


12 


178 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


fonne,  and  married  a  Tinkers  wife,  within  a  Mile  where 
my  Land  and  Liuing  lyes  ;  and  (hauing  flowne  ouer  ma-  loo 
ny  knauifh  profeffions)  he  fetled  onely  in  Rogue  :  fome 
call  him  Autolicus . 

Clo.  Out  vpon  him  :  Prig,  for  my  life  Prig:he  haunts 
Wakes,  Faires,and  Beare-baitings. 

Aut.  Very  true  fir  :  he  fir  hee  :  that’s  the  Rogue  that  105 
put  me  into  this  apparrell. 

Clo.  Not  a  more  cowardly  Rogue  in  all  Bohemia  ;  If 
you  had  but  look’d  bigge,  and  fpit  at  him,  hee’ld  haue 
runne. 

Aut.  I  muft  confeffe  to  you  (fir)  I  am  no  fighter  :  I  am  1 10 
falfe  of  heart  that  way,  &  that  he  knew  I  warrant  him. 

Clo.  How  do  you  now  ? 

Aut.  Sweet  fir,  much  better  then  I  was  :  I  can  hand, 
and  walke:  I  will  euen  take  my  leaue  of  you,  &  pace  foft- 
ly  towards  my  Kinfmans.  1 1 5 

Clo.  Shall  I  bring  thee  on  the  way  ? 

Aut.  No,  good  fac’d  fir,  no  fweet  fir. 

Clo.  Then  fartheewell,  I  muft  go  buy  Spices  for  our 
fheepe-fhearing.  Exit . 

Aut.  Profper  you  fweet  fir.  Your  purfe  is  not  hot  e-  120 
nough  to  purchafe  your  Spice  :  lie  be  with  you  at  your 
fheepe-fhearing  too  :  If  I  make  not  this  Cheat  bring  out 
another,  and  the  fheerers  proue  fheepe,  let  me  be  vnrold, 
and  my  name  put  in  the  booke  of  Vertue.  124 


99.  where]  of  where  Ktly. 

101.  in]  in  a  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns. 
Var.  Rann. 

104.  baitings]  baiting  Rowe  i. 

106.  this]  his  Rowe  ii,  Pope. 

1 1 2.  do  you]  do  you  do  F  ,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

1 1 6.  the  way]  thy  way  F  ,  Rowe  +  , 
Var.  Rann. 


118.  fartheewell]  farewell  Fa.  fare- 
wel  F3F4,  Rowe  + .  fare  thee  well  Cap. 
et  seq. 

buy]  to  buy  Ff,  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Var. 
and  buy  Rowe  i. 

1 19.  Exit.]  After  sir.  in  next  line,  Cap. 

123.  vnrold]  enrolled  Coll,  ii,  iii 
(MS). 

124.  in]  into  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Var.  Rann. 


admiration  of  the  spectators ;  with  the  merry  conceits  of  squire  Punch  and  sir  Tohn 
Spendall.’ 

100.  Land  and  Liuing]  Deighton  :  Almost  equivalent  to  landed  property ,  an 
ambitious  term  used  to  impress  the  Clown  with  an  idea  of  the  speaker’s  social 
position. 

123.  vnrold]  Warburton  :  Begging  gypsies,  in  the  time  of  our  author,  were  in 
gangs  and  companies,  that  had  something  of  the  show  of  an  incorporated  body. 


iv,  sc.  iv.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 

179 

Song.  Iog-on,  log-on,  the  foot-path  way, 

125 

And  merrily  hent  the  Stile-a  : 

A  merry  heart  goes  all  the  day, 

Your  fad  tyres  in  a  Mile-a. 

Exit . 

128 

Scena  Quarta. 


Enter  Florizell ',  Perdita ,  Shepherd ',  Clowne ,  Polixenes ,  Ca¬ 
mille >,  Mopfa ,  Dorcas ,  Serjeants,  Autolicus. 

Flo .  Thefe  your  vnvfuall  weeds,  to  each  part  of  you 
Do’s  giue  a  life  :  no  Shepherdeffe,  but  Flora 


126.  hent]  hend  Han.  Cap.  Var.  ’73. 
bend  Scott  ( Guy  Mannering ,  chap,  xxii, 
motto). 

1.  Scena  Quarta]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Glo. 
Cam.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.  Scene  iii.  Cap.  et 
cet. 

The  Prospect  of  a  Shepherd’s  Cotte. 


5 

Theob.  The  old  Shepherd’s  House. 
Han.  A  Room  in  the  Shepherd’s  House. 
Cap. 

2.  Enter... Autolicus]  Enter  Florizel 
and  Perdita.  Rowe  et  seq. 

5.  Do's]  Ff.  Does  Rowe,  Pope,  Ktly. 
Do  Theob.  et  cet. 


From  this  noble  society  he  wishes  he  may  be  ‘  unrolled,’  if  he  does  not  so  and  so. — 
Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  What  Autolycus  means  is  that,  if  he  did  not  perform  these  cheat¬ 
ing  exploits,  he  should  deserve  to  have  his  name  enrolled  [as  it  is  corrected  in  the 
MS]  in  the  book  of  virtue  as  an  incapable  thief,  and  consequently  excluded  from  the 
‘fraternity  of  vagabonds.’— R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  But  Autolycus  means  ‘let  me  be 
struck  off  of  the  roll  of  thieves,  and  put  upon  that  of  honest  men.’ — Dyce  ( Strictures , 
etc.  p.  81) :  Woful  is  the  tautology  which  Collier’s  MS  Corrector  introduces  into  the 
passage,  ‘  let  me  be  enrolled,  and  my  name  put,’  etc. — Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  *  But  ’  observes 
Mr  W.  N.  Lettsom,  ‘  unrolled,'  without  anything  to  determine  its  application,  cannot 
well  stand  alone.  I  believe  it,  however,  to  be  a  mere  blunder  of  the  ear  for  unrogued.' 
[This  infelicitous  emendation  Lettsom  had  already  published  in  Notes  &  Qu.  I,  viii, 
378-1 

125.  Song.]  The  old  tune  of  the  song  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix:  Music. 

126.  hent]  Steevens:  That  is,  to  take  hold  of  it. 

1.  Scena  Quarta]  Hudson  (p.  29) :  For  simple  purity  and  sweetness,  the  scene 
which  unfolds  the  loves  and  characters  of  the  Prince  and  Princess  is  not  surpassed 
by  anything  in  Shakespeare.  Whatsoever  is  enchanting  in  romance,  lovely  in  inno¬ 
cence,  elevated  in  feeling,  and  sacred  in  faith,  is  here  concentrated ;  forming,  all 
together,  one  of  those  things  which  we  always  welcome  as  we  do  the  return  of  Spring, 
and  over  which  our  feelings  may  renew  their  youth  for  ever.  So  long  as  flowers  bloom 
and  hearts  love,  they  will  do  it  in  the  spirit  of  this  scene. 

5.  Do’s]  A  singular  by  attraction  from  ‘each  part;’  it  is  needless  to  change  it. 
—Ed. 

5.  Flora]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 


i8o 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Peering  in  Aprils  front.  This  your  Iheepe-Ihearing,  6 

Is  as  a  meeting  of  the  petty  Gods, 

And  you  the  Queene  on’t. 

Perd.  Sir  :  my  gracious  Lord, 

To  chide  at  your  extreames,  it  not  becomes  me  :  io 

(Oh  pardon,  that  I  name  them:)  your  high  felfe 

The  gracious  marke  o’th’Land,  you  haue  obfcurid 

With  a  Swaines  wearing  :  and  me  (poore  lowly  MaideJ 

Moft  Goddeffe-like  prank’d  vp  :  But  that  our  Feafts 

In  euery  Meffe,  haue  folly  ;  and  the  Feeders  15 

6.  Peering ]  'Fearing  Wh.  ii.  7.  Pas']  Is  Rowe  ii. 

Aprils]  April  F4>  meeting]  merry  meeting  Ff,  Rowe. 

7.  petty  Gods]  The  classical  DU  minores. 

9.  Perdita.]  Mrs  Jameson  (i,  231):  The  character  of  Perdita  is  properly  kept 
subordinate  to  that  of  her  mother,  Hermione ;  yet  the  picture  is  perfectly  finished  in 
every  part;  Juliet  herself  is  not  more  firmly  and  distinctly  drawn.  But  the  colouring 
in  Perdita  is  more  silvery-light  and  delicate;  the  pervading  sentiment  more  touched 
with  the  ideal ;  compared  with  Juliet,  she  is  like  a  Guido  hung  beside  a  Giorgione, 
or  one  of  Paesiello’s  airs  heard  after  one  of  Mozart’s.  The  qualities  which  impart  to 
Perdita  her  distinct  individuality  are  the  beautiful  combination  of  the  pastoral  with 
the  elegant — of  simplicity  with  elevation — of  spirit  with  sweetness.  The  exquisite 
delicacy  of  the  picture  is  apparent.  To  understand  and  appreciate  its  effective  truth 
and  nature,  we  should  place  Perdita  beside  some  of  the  nymphs  of  Arcadia,  or  the 
Cloris  and  Sylvias  of  the  Italian  pastorals,  who,  however  graceful  in  themselves, 
when  opposed  to  Perdita,  seem  to  melt  away  into  mere  poetical  abstractions ;  as  in 
Spenser,  the  fair  but  fictitious  Florimel,  which  the  subtle  enchantress  had  moulded 
out  of  snow,  ‘  vermeil  tinctured,’  and  informed  with  an  airy  spirit,  that  knew  ‘  all 
wiles  of  woman’s  wits,’  fades  and  dissolves  away,  when  placed  next  to  the  real  Flori¬ 
mel,  in  her  warm,  breathing,  human,  loveliness. 

9.  Sir]  See  I,  ii,  369,  where,  as  here,  Collier  (ed.  ii)  follows  his  MS,  and  changes 
*  Sir  ’  to  Sure. 

10.  extreames]  Johnson  :  That  is,  your  excesses,  the  extravagance  of  your 
praises. — M.  Mason:  Perdita  means  rather  the  extravagance  of  his  conduct  in 
obscuring  himself  ‘in  a  swain’s  wearing,’  while  he  ‘prank’d  her  up  most  goddess¬ 
like.’  The  following  words,  ‘  Oh  pardon  that  I  name  them,’  proves  this  to  be  her 
meaning. 

12.  marke]  Johnson  :  The  object  of  all  men’s  notice  and  expectation. 

13.  Swaines  wearing]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

14.  prank’d  vp]  Cotgrave  has :  ‘  Ajolier.  To  pranke,  tricke  vp,  set  out,  make 
fine.’ 

15.  Messe]  Schmidt  wrongly  gives  to  ‘messe’  the  meaning  of  dish.  Can  it  be 
that  he  supposes  it  is  to  ‘  mess  ’  that  Perdita  refers  when  she  speaks  of  ‘  digesting  it  ?’ 

‘  Mess  ’  has  here  the  same  general  meaning  which  it  bears  in  I,  ii,  266,  and  the  whole 
sentence  may  be  paraphrased :  ‘  were  it  not  that  at  every  table,  or  in  every  group, 
there  are  strange  antics,  which  the  guests  accept  as  customary,  I  should,  etc.’ 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


1 8 1 


Digeft  with  a  Cuftome,  I  fhould  blufh  16 

To  fee  you  fo  attyr’d  :  fworne  I  thinke, 

To  fhew  my  felfe  a  glaffe.  1 8 


1 6.  Digejl]  Difgejl  it  F2F3.  Digejl 
it  F  ,  Rowe  et  seq. 

17.  fworne~\  swoon  Han.  Cap.  Rann, 
Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Dtn,  Hunter,  so  worn 


Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  scorn  Mitford  [Gent. 
Mag.  1844,  Aug.,  p.  127). 

17,  18.  fworne...glaffe~\  swoon...  Flo. 
Ah  !  lass  Daniel. 


16.  Digest]  A  case  of  absorption,  which  in  sundry  other  cases  the  printers  have 
marked  with  an  apostrophe.  Thus  it  should  be  here  :  ‘  Digest  ’  [it]  with  a  Custome 
or  as  it  is  in  the  other  Folios.  See  II,  i,  18. — Ed. 

17.  sworne]  Theobald  [Nichols,  ii,  363) :  I  venture  to  read,  ‘  swoon,  I  think,  To 
see  myself  i’th'  glass,’  i.  e.  she  should  blush  to  see  the  Prince  so  obscured ;  and  swoon, 
to  see  herself  so  pranked  up.  [This  emendation  w’as  written  to  Warburton  in  1729. 
Warburton’s  response  has  not  been  preserved;  (Warburton  shrewdly  destroyed  his 
voluminous  correspondence  with  Theobald ;)  but  we  may  infer  that  he  so  criticised  the 
proposed  change  that  Theobald  relinguished  it ;  no  mention  is  made  of  it  in  Theo¬ 
bald’s  subsequent  edition.  Warburton  openly  accused  Hanmer  of  ‘  trafficking  with 
his  papers  ’  and  of  ‘  taking  his  conjectures.’  It  is  barely  possible  that  this  present 
emendation  of  Theobald’s  might  thus,  through  Warburton,  have  reached  Hanmer,  in 
whose  edition  ‘  sworn  ’  appears  as  swoon.  Warburton’s  own  note  on  the  passage  is  as 
follows  :]  That  is,  one  would  think  that  in  putting  on  this  habit  of  a  shepherd,  you  had 
sworn  to  put  me  out  of  countenance ;  for  in  this,  as  in  a  glass,  you  shew  me  how  much 
below  yourself  you  must  descend  before  you  can  get  upon  a  level  with  me. — Capell 
says  of  Hanmer’s  emendation,  which  he  adopted,  that  it  is  ‘  a  most  natural  sentiment, 
and  of  great  sweetness ;  and  following  naturally  what  she  has  been  saying  about  her 
lover’s  attirements.’ — Johnson  :  Dr  Thirlby  inclines  rather  to  Hanmer’s  emendation, 
which  certainly  makes  an  easy  sense,  and  is,  in  my  opinion,  preferable  to  the  present 
reading.  But  concerning  this  passage,  I  know  not  what  to  decide. — Steevens  : 
Warburton  has  well  enough  explained  this  passage  according  to  the  old  reading. 
Though  I  cannot  help  offering  a  transposition,  which  I  would  explain  thus : — ‘  and 
the  feeders  Digest  it  with  a  custom  (sworn  I  think),  To  see  you  so  attired,  I  should 
blush  To  show  myself  a  glass,’  i.  e.  But  that  our  rustick  feasts  are  in  every  part  accom¬ 
panied  with  absurdity  of  the  same  kind,  which  custom  has  authorised  (custom  which 
one  would  think  the  guests  had  sworn  to  observe),  I  should  blush  to  present  myself 
before  a  glass,  which  would  shew  me  my  own  person  adorned  in  a  manner  so  foreign 
to  my  humble  state,  or  so  much  better  habited  than  even  that  of  my  prince. — Malone  : 
She  means  only  to  say,  that  the  prince,  by  the  rustick  habit  that  he  wears,  seems  as  if 
he  had  sworn  to  show  her  a  glass,  in  which  she  might  behold  how  she  ought  to  be 
attired,  instead  of  being  ‘  most  goddess-like  pranked  up.’  Florizel  is  here  Perdita’s 
glass.  The  words  ‘  to  shew  myself  ’  appear  to  me  inconsistent  with  Hanmer’s  read¬ 
ing.  Hanmer  probably  thought  the  similitude  of  the  words  ‘  sworn  ’  and  swoon 
favourable  to  his  emendation ;  but  he  forgot  that  swoon  in  the  old  copies  of  these 
plays  is  always  written  sound  or  swound.  [See  Dyce,  below.] — Collier  (ed.  ii) : 
*  Sworn  ’  is  indubitably  a  misprint  for  so  worn,  which  is  the  emendation  of  the  MS. 
Such  too  was  the  suggestion  of  Zachary  Jackson  in  his  Shakespeare  Restored.  Perdita 
tells  Florizel  that  he  is  disguised  as  a  shepherd,  while  she  is  pranked  up  like  a  goddess, 
and  that  his  humble  attire  is  worn,  as  it  were,  to  show  her  in  a  glass  how  simply  she 


1 82 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


[17.  sworne  I  thinke,  To  shew  my  selfe  a  glasse.] 

ought  to  be  dressed.  [Collier  repeats  Malone’s  remark  about  the  spelling  of  swoon. ] 
— Ingleby  ( Notes  &•  Qu.  1853,  I,  vii,  378)  instead  of  ‘sworn  ’  proposed  and  more, 
and  thus  paraphrased : — ‘  I  should  blush  to  see  you  attired  like  a  swain :  and  still 
more  should  I  blush  to  look  at  myself  in  the  glass,  and  see  a  peasant  girl  pranked 
up  like  a  princess,’  ‘  In  MS,’  he  observes,  ‘  more  might  very  easily  have  been 
mistaken  for  “sworn”  by  the  compositor.’— R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  Perdita  says,  and 
to  my  apprehension,  as  plainly  and  pertinently  as  possible,  that  Prince  Florizel,  in 
obscuring  himself  ‘  with  a  swain’s  wearing  ’  would  seem  ...  to  have  sworn  to  shew 
her,  a  swain’s  daughter,  a  reflex  of  her  own  condition,  as  if  in  a  mirror,  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  the  difference  between  her  actual  condition  and  his.  [In  the  change  so  worn 
it  is  forgotten]  that  ‘you  ’  (t.  e.  Florizel)  would  then  be  the  antecedent  of  ‘worn.’ — 
Bailey  (i,  210)  ‘  hazarded  ’  frown  ;  and  then  as  *  the  phrase  “  I  think  ”  looks  very 
much  like  an  excrescence,’  he  says  that  ‘  we  might  read,  “  sorely  shrink  To  show 
myself  i'th’  glass.”  ’  And  then,  with  prophetic  insight,  he  adds  :  ‘  This  emendation 
is  by  no  means  so  felicitous  as  to  command  adoption.’  He  then  ‘hazards  ’  a  third  : 

‘  more ,  I  think,  To  show  myself  a  glass,’  or  perhaps  better  ‘  i'th'  glass  ’ ;  of  this  last 
change  he  remarks  that  it  is  ‘  perhaps,  superior  in  simplicity  to  any  hitherto  men¬ 
tioned:’  [See  Hudson,  infral\ — Staunton  :  The  emendation  swoon  is  so  con¬ 
vincingly  true,  that  we  are  astonished  it  should  ever  have  been  questioned. — Dyce 
(ed.  iii)  quotes  Malone’s  remark  about  the  old  spelling  of  swoon,  and  then  replies : 

1  Yet  Malone  might  have  found  in  F, :  “  Many  will  swoon  when  they  do  look  on 
bloud,”  As  You  Like  It,  IV,  iii;  “Or  else  I  swoone  with  this  dead-killing  newes,” 
Rich.  Ill:  IV,  ii;  “What?  doth  shee  swowne,”  j  Hen.  VI:  V,  v.’  Dyce  then 
quotes  R.  G.  White’s  note  and  adds :  ‘  But  surely  the  passage,  with  the  reading 
“sworn,”  cannot  possibly  bear  such  an  explanation, — the  wrord  “myself”  at  once 
refutes  it ;  Perdita  could  not  say,  “  you  .  .  .  sworn  to  shew  myself  a  glass she 
must  have  said,  “  to  show  me  a  glass.”  ’  Dyce  then  quotes  Collier’s  note,  and  ob¬ 
serves  :  ‘  Now,  in  the  first  place,  “  you  ...  so  worn,"  in  the  sense  of  “  you  ...  so 
dressed,"  is  an  intolerable  violation  of  all  the  proprieties  of  language;  and  secondly, 
the  word  “  myself”  is  as  objectionable  with  the  reading  so  worn  as  with  the  reading 
“sworn.”  The  lection  which  I  adopt  [is  Theobald’s  swoon,  which]  means  of  course, 

“  I  should  blush  to  see  you  so  attired  (like  a  shepherd),  and  I  should  swoon,  I  think, 
to  show  myself  a  glass  (which  would  reflect  my  finery).”  In  Timon,  IV,  iii,  371  : 

“  Away,  thou  issue  of  a  mangy  dog  !  Choler  does  kill  me  that  you  art  alive ;  I  swoon 
to  see  thee,"  are  the  words  of  Timon  to  Apemantus ;  and  if  there  be  no  unfitness  in 
the  rough  misanthrope  thus  figuratively  declaring  that  he  swoons  at  the  sight  of  the 
philosopher,  much  less  can  there  be  any  in  the  gentle  Perdita’s  figuratively  declaring 
that  she  should  swoon  at  the  sight  of  her  rich  apparel.  I  may  add,  that  though  in  this 
passage  I  have  printed  *  attired,’  it  would  seem  from  the  spelling  of  the  Folio  that  here 
the  word  was  formerly  pronounced  attierd.' — The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  To  our  minds 
swoon  would  have  an  affected  and  exaggerated  sound  in  the  mouth  of  Perdita,  who 
is  composed  of  simplicity,  rectitude,  and  innate  dignity.  .  .  .  The  whole  tenour  of 
Perdita’s  present  speech  is  to  ‘name’  Florizel’s  ‘extremes,’  and  she  dwells  upon  his 
conduct  throughout ;  finally  saying,  that  by  his  unbefitting  attire  he  seems  determined 
to  show  her  reflectedly  how  unbefitting  is  her  own.  With  this  interpretation,  the 
phrase  ‘to  shew  myself  a  glass’  is  used  figuratively,  ‘  to  mirror,’  ‘to  show  by  reflection  or 
by  parallel  image  ’ ;  but  with  the  interpretation  necessary  if  swoon  be  adopted,  we  should 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


183 


Flo.  I  bleffe  the  time 

When  my  good  Falcon,  made  her  flight  a-croffe  20 

Thy  Fathers  ground. 

Perd.  Now  Ioue  affoord  you  caufe  : 

To  me  the  difference  forges  dread  (your  Greatneffe 
Hath  not  beene  vs’d  to  feare:)  euen  now  I  tremble 
To  thinke  your  Father,  by  feme  accident  25 

Should  paffe  this  way,  as  you  did  :  Oh  the  Fates, 

How  would  he  looke,  to  fee  his  worke,  fo  noble, 

Vildely  bound  vp  ?  What  would  he  fay  ?  Or  how  28 

28.  Vildely]  F3F3.  Vildly  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Vilely  Han.  Johns, 
et  seq. 

have  to  imagine  Perdita  talk  of  showing  herself  a  looking-glass,  of  looking  at  herself 
in  an  absolute  dressing-glass. — Rolfe  :  To  our  thinking,  the  emendation,  swoon,  is 
ridiculously  out  of  keeping  with  the  character ;  and  the  others  that  have  been  pro¬ 
posed  are  all  as  bad  in  their  way. — Hudson  :  I  cannot  abide  that  reading  [swoon]  ; 
Perdita  could  never  speak  so.  [Hudson’s  text,  a  combination  of  Ingleby’s  and 
Bailey’s,  is  :]  ‘  more,  I  think,  To  see  myself  i'the  glass,’  whereof  he  says :  ‘  The  read¬ 
ing  here  printed  is  something  bold  indeed,  but  it  gives  a  sense  so  charmingly  apt,  that 
I  cannot  choose  but  adopt  it.’ — Deighton  :  The  attempts  of  the  earlier  commentators 
to  explain  ‘  sworne  ’  are  amusing.  [It  would  be  pardonable  to  take  refuge  in  an  in¬ 
decision  which  even  Dr  Johnson  had  openly  acknowledged,  and  say,  I  know  not  what 
to  decide,  and  it  would  be  even  justifiable,  were  it  not  that  there  is  one  objection  to 
‘  sworn  ’  which  appears  insurmountable,  and  this  is  the  reflexive  pronoun  ‘  my  self  ’ ; 
it  has  not  been  questioned  that  ‘sworn’  refers  to  Florizel;  and  if  this  be  so,  then 
‘  my  self’  cannot  be  right.  If  it  were  only  ‘  me,  my  self,’  then  ‘  sworn  ’  could  be  re¬ 
tained  without  grammatical  impropriety,  but,  as  the  text  now  stands,  it  seems  to  be 
irremediably  wrong.  Whether  or  not  swoon  is  the  proper  substitute  for  ‘  sworn  ’  is 
another  question.  There  is  a  weakness  about  swoon  which  does  not  seem  to  har¬ 
monize  with  the  character  either  of  Perdita  or  of  any  young  girl ;  it  is  appropriate 
enough  in  Timon’s  wild  and  vehement  exaggeration,  but  I  doubt  that  the  sight  of  her¬ 
self  bewitchingly  bedecked  like  Flora  would  be  likely  now-a-days  to  make  any  young 
girl  faint.  Dyce  quotes  the  spelling  of  swoon  in  As  You  Like  It,  s7voone  in  Rich.  III., 
and  swowne  in  j>  Hen.  VI.,  and  strangely  overlooked  the  present  play,  where  in  V, 
ii,  90  we  read  ‘  some  swownded,  all  sorrowed.’  Inasmuch  as  the  Folio  was  com¬ 
posed  in  certainly  more  than  one  office,  and  possibly  piecemeal  in  half  a  dozen,  no 
conclusive  argument  can  be  drawn  from  the  spelling  in  the  various  plays,  set  up  as 
they  were  by  various  compositors,  all  of  them  probably  with  different  rules,  or  no 
rules.  Nevertheless,  had  swoon  been  the  word  in  the  present  passage,  I  think  it  ex¬ 
tremely  probable  that  the  same  compositor  would  have  spelled  it  swownd. — Ed.] 

20.  Falcon]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

23.  difference]  M.  Mason  (p.  134) :  That  is,  the  difference  between  his  rank  and 
hers.  So  in  Mid.  N.  D  :  ‘  The  course  of  true  love  never  did  run  smooth,  But  either 
it  was  different  in  blood,’  I,  i,  144. 

28.  bound  vp]  Johnson  :  It  is  impossible  for  any  man  to  rid  his  mind  of  his  pro- 


184 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Should  I  (in  thefe  my  borrowed  Flaunts)  behold 
The  fternneffe  of  his  prefence  ?  30 

Flo.  Apprehend 

Nothing  but  iollity  :  the  Goddes  themfelues 
.(Humbling  their  Deities  to  loue)  haue  taken 
The  fliapes  of  Beafts  vpon  them.  Iupiter, 

Became  a  Bull,  and  bellow’d  :  the  greene  Neptune  35 

A  Ram,  and  bleated  :  and  the  Fire-roab’d-God 
Golden  Apollo,  a  poore  humble  Swaine, 

As  I  feeme  now.  Their  transformations, 

Were  neuer  for  a  peece  of  beauty,  rarer, 

Nor  in  a  way  fo  chafte  :  fince  my  defires  40 

Run  not  before  mine  honor  :  nor  my  Lufts 
Burne  hotter  then  my  Faith. 

Perd.  O  but  Sir, 

Your  refolution  cannot  hold,  when  ’tis  44 


29.  borrowed ]  Ff,  Wh.  i.  borrow'd 
Rowe  i,  Pope  et  seq. 

35.  the  greene]  sea  green  Anon.  ap. 
Cam. 

38,  39.  now.  Their  ...beauty ,  rarer,] 
now.  Their  ...beauty  rarer,  Rowe  + . 
now  :  Their  ...beauty  rarer  ;  Cap.  Steev. 


Mai.  Var.  Knt.  now  : — Their  ...beauty 
rarer, —  Dyce. 

42.  Faith]  faith  does  Ktlv. 

43.  Sir]  deere  fir  F2.  dear  fir  F3F4, 
Rowe+,  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Steev. 

44.  Your]  Yur  F2. 


fession.  The  authorship  of  Shakespeare  has  supplied  him  with  a  metaphor,  which, 
rather  than  he  would  lose  it,  he  has  put  with  no  great  propriety  into  the  mouth  of  a 
country  maid.  Thinking  of  his  own  works,  his  mind  passed  naturally  to  the  binder. 
I  am  glad  that  he  has  no  hint  at  an  editor. — Steevens  cites  the  passage  in  Rom.  dr> 
Jul.  I,  iii,  81-92,  where  there  is  the  same  comparison  of  a  lover  with  a  book  and 
its  binding.  Whiter  (pp.  107-115)  has  gathered  many  more  similar  passages,  which 
show  how  fond  Shakespeare  was  of  the  allusion  and  of  the  comparison. 

29.  borrowed]  R.  G.  White  fed.  i)  :  All  modern  editions  read  borrow'd;  losing 
by  the  contraction  the  pleasing  variety  of  rhythm,  and  the  finer  flow  of  the  line  which 
is  secured  by  the  retention  of  the  full  participial  form.  We  are  bound  to  attribute  this 
to  the  Poet’s  intention;  but  if  it  is  due  to  accident,  let  us  thank  Fortune,  by  not  reject¬ 
ing  her  gift.  [In  his  Second  Edition  White  did  reject  the  gift,  and  without  a  syllable 
of  apology  to  Fortune. — Ed.] 

34.  shapes  of  Beasts]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

40.  in  a  way]  Ritson  ( Remarks ,  p.  70)  :  In  what  way  ?  We  should  certainly 
read  (in  the  margin  at  least)  ‘  Nor  any  way.’  [So  also  Collier’s  MS,  but  Collier 
did  not  adopt  it  in  his  text.  It  is  an  extremely  plausible  conjecture.  The  one  phrase 
is  almost  idem  sonans  with  the  other,  and  the  two  might  be  easily  confounded,  espe¬ 
cially  if  the  compositors  set  up  their  types  from  hearing  the  copy  read  aloud  to  them, 
which  is  more  than  likely. — Ed.] 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


185 

45 


Oppos’d  (as  it  muft  be)  by  th’powre  of  the  King  : 

One  of  thefe  two  muft  be  necefsities, 

Which  then  will  fpeake,  that  you  muft  change  this  pur- 
Or  I  my  life.  (pofe, 

Flo,  Thou  deer’ft  Perdita , 

With  thefe  forc’d  thoughts,  I  prethee  darken  not  50 

The  Mirth  o’th’Feaft  :  Or  lie  be  thine  (my  Faire) 

Or  not  my  Fathers.  For  I  cannot  be 
Mine  owne,  nor  any  thing  to  any,  if 
I  be  not  thine.  To  this  I  am  moft  conftant, 

Though  deftiny  fay  no.  Be  merry  (Gentle)  55 

Strangle  fuch  thoughts  as  thefe,  with  any  thing 

That  you  behold  the  while.  Your  guefts  are  comming  : 

Lift  vp  your  countenance,  as  it  were  the  day 

Of  celebration  of  that  nuptiall,  which  59 


45.  of  the]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  o'  th ’  Pope-f ,  Wh.  i.  of  th.'  Wh. 
ii.  o'  the  Cap.  et  cet. 

46.  muft  be  necefsities]  mofl  be  necef¬ 
sities  F4>  necessities  must  be  Han. 


49.  deer'fl]  Wh.  i.  deerejl  F2.  aear- 
eft  F3F4,  Rowe  et  cet. 

55.  ( Gentle) \  Gentlest!  Han. 

57.  behold]  be  bold  Gould. 

58.  your ]  you  F  . 

as  it  were']  as  'twere  Pope  +  . 


48.  Or  I  my  life]  The  Cowdf.n-Ci.arkes,  Rolfe,  and  Deighton,  all  interpret 
these  words  of  Perdita  as  meaning  that  she  will  forfeit  her  life.  I  doubt  that  her 
despondency  went  quite  so  far.  She  was  convinced  that,  if  Florizel  persisted  in  his 
purpose,  the  king  would  certainly  separate  them  by  forcing  Florizel  to  return  to  his 
home,  and  thus  leave  her  to  weep  out  the  rest  of  her  days — a  changed  ‘  life  ’  indeed 
for  her.  When  the  blow  actually  fell  she  said  to  her  lover : — ‘  I  told  you  what  would 
come  of  this,’  ‘  I’ll  Queen  it  no  inch  farther  But  milk  my  Ewes  and  weep.’ — Ed. 

49.  deer’st]  Walker  (  Vers.  p.  144) :  From  the  frequency  of  dear' st  in  Shake¬ 
speare,  I  suspect  that  here  also  we  ought  to  read  dear' st.  [Walker  quotes  from  the 
Var.  ’21,  probably];  and  so  the  Folio  has  it;  pronounced  dear'st.  [Is  anything 
gained  by  this  pronunciation  ?  See  I,  ii,  109,  and  line  95,  below. — Ed.] 

50.  forc’d  thoughts]  M.  Mason  (p.  134) :  That  is,  thoughts  far-fetched,  and  not 
arising  from  the  present  objects. 

51.  52.  Or  .  .  .  Or]  For  this  idiomatic  use  of  *  or  .  .  .  or,’  much  more  common 
in  Beaumont  &  Fletcher  than  in  Shakespeare,  see  Abbott,  §  136. 

55.  Gentle]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  follows  his  MS  in  reading  girl  instead  of  ‘Gentle,’ 
‘  an  epithet,’  he  says,  ‘  that  cannot,  and  never  did,  stand  alone  in  this  way,  without 
being  followed  by  *  maid,’  ‘  lady,’  etc.  In  his  Third  Edition  he  terms  ‘  gentle  ’  an 
‘old  absurd  reading  which  is  an  easy  misprint  when  girl,  as  of  old,  was  printed  with 
a  final  e. — Staunton  :  The  meaning  is  obviously, — ‘  Be  merry,  gentle  one  !'  So  in 
Ant.  Cleop.  IV,  xv,  47  :  ‘  Gentle,  hear  me.’ 

59.  nuptiall]  Used  by  Shakespeare’s  compositors  in  the  singular,  as  here,  except 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc,  iv. 

6o 


1 86 


We  two  haue  fworne  fhall  come. 

Perd.  O  Lady  Fortune, 

Stand  you  aufpicious. 

Flo.  See,  your  Guefts  approach, 

Addreffe  your  felfe  to  entertaine  them  fprightly, 

And  let’s  be  red  with  mirth.  65 

Shep.  Fy  (daughter)  when  my  old  wife  liu’d  :  vpon 
This  day,  the  was  both  Pantler,  Butler,  Cooke, 

Both  Dame  and  Seruant  :  Welcom’d  all  :  feru’d  all, 

Would  fing  her  fong,  and  dance  her  turne  :  now  heere 
At  vpper  end  o’th  Table;  now,  i’th  middle  : 

On  his  fhoulder,  and  his  :  her  face  o’fire 
With  labour,  and  the  thing  the  tooke  to  quench  it 
She  would  to  each  one  fip.  You  are  retyred, 

As  if  you  were  a  feafted  one  :  and  not 
The  Hofteffe  of  the  meeting  :  Pray  you  bid 
Thefe  vnknowne  friends  to’s  welcome,  for  it  is 
A  way  to  make  vs  better  Friends,  more  knowne. 

Come,  quench  your  blufhes,  and  prefent  your  felfe 


7  o 

75 

78 


62.  [Enter  all.  Ff.  Enter  Shepherd, 
Clown,  Mopsa,  Dorcas,  Servants ;  with 
Pol.  and  Cam.  disguised.  Rowe  et  seq. 
(subs.).  After  line  65,  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. 

65.  Scene  v.  Pope,  Warb.  Johns. 

66-73.  As  mnemonic  lines,  Warb. 

71.  ant/]  and  on  Ktly. 

72.  labour,  and]  Ff,  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta. 
labour  and  Cam.  labour ;  and  Rowe 
et  cet  (subs.). 


72.  thing]  things  F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  thing.  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Mai. 
Steev.  Var. 

it]  it ;  F4.  it,  Cap.  et  seq. 

75.  the]  thee  F4. 

76.  to’s]  to  us  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 

vnknowne]  unknow  F4. 

78.  your  felfe]  you  felf  F4. 


in  Oth.  II,  ii,  9,  where  the  Ff  have  *  nuptiall  ’  and  the  Qq  ‘  nuptialls  ’ ;  and  in  Per.  V, 
iii,  80.  It  occurs  again  in  line  436  of  this  scene. 

67.  Pantler]  The  servant  ( panetier ,  in  Cotgrave)  who  had  charge  of  the  pantry 
where  bread  was  kept,  just  as  the  ‘  Butler  ( bouteillier ,  in  Cotgrave)  was  he  who  had 
charge  of  the  cellar  where  bottles  of  wine  were  kept. 

71,  72-  her  face  o’fire  ...  it]  Whether  the  fire  in  the  old  dame’s  face  was  due 
solely  to  her  labour,  or  to  her  labour  combined  with  ale,  depends  on  the  punctuation. 
The  Text.  INotes  will  show  the  sides  of  this  grave  question  on  which  the  editors  have 
ranged  themselves.  When  a  reputation  for  sobriety  is  at  stake,  and  the  issue  depends 
on  a  semi-colon,  I,  personally,  prefer  to  withdraw  from  the  panel. — Ed. 

76.  vnknowne  friends  to’s]  For  many  examples  of  this  frequent  and  peculiar 
construction  with  the  adjective,  see  either  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  160),  or  Abbott 
(5419  a).  See  also  Corson’s  note  on  ‘  vnstain’d  shepheard,’  line  172,  below. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


1 87 


That  which  you  are,  Miftris  o’th’Feafh  Come  on, 

And  bid  vs  welcome  to  your  fheepe-fhearing,  80 

As  your  good  flocke  fhall  profper. 

Perd.  Sir,  welcome  : 

It  is  my  Fathers  will,  I  fhould  take  on  mee 
The  Hofteffefhip  o’th’day  :  you’re  welcome  fir. 

Giue  me  thofe  Flowres  there  {Dorcas.')  Reuerend  Sirs,  85 

For  you,  there’s  Rofemary,  and  Rue,  thefe  keepe 


82.  Sir,  welcome ]  Sirs,  welcome 
Rowe  +  .  Sirs,  you're  welcome  Han. 
Welcome,  sir  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Sir, 
you're  welcome  Ktly. 


82.  [To  Polix.  and  Cam.  Rowe.  To 
Pol.  Mai.  et  seq. 

84.  fir]  sirs  Rowe  + .  sir.  [To  Cam. 
Mai.  et  seq. 

86-89.  As  mnemonic  lines,  Warb. 


79-81.  Come  .  .  .  prosper]  Theobald  ( Nichols ,  ii,  363) :  I  think,  verily,  Polix- 
enes  ought  to  speak  this  to  Perdita. 

82.  welcome]  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Most  probably  (as  Hanmer  reads)  ‘ you're  wel¬ 
come.’  Compare  the  next  line  but  one. — Keightley  (Exp.  203) :  A  syllable  is  lost 
apparently.  We  might  add  hither  or  to  us  at  the  end,  or,  as  I  have  done,  ‘ you're 
welcome.’  [Where  a  line  is  divided  between  two  characters,  it  is  needless  to  regard 
the  loss  of  a  syllable.  Unless  the  lines  are  to  be  chanted  in  exact  time  and  rhythm, 
regardless  of  sense  or  action,  the  proper  pause  of  respect  after  ‘  Sir  ’  will  supply  any 
missing  syllable,  even  were  there  no  pause  between  the  speeches. — Ed.] 

82,  84.  welcome]  Unquestionably  these  two  *  welcomes  ’  are  addressed  to  Polix- 
enes  and  Camillo  respectively.  See  Text.  Notes. 

86.  Rosemary]  Ellacombe  (p.  201) :  In  Shakespeare’s  time  this  herb  was  in 
high  favour  for  its  evergreen  leaves  and  fine  aromatic  scent,  remaining  a  long  time 
after  picking,  so  long,  indeed,  that  both  leaves  and  scent  were  considered  almost 
everlasting.  This  was  its  great  charm,  and  so  Spenser  spoke  of  it  as  ‘  the  cheerful 
Rosemarie  ’  and  ‘  refreshing  Rosemarine,’  and  good  Sir  Thomas  More  had  a  great 
affection  for  it.  ‘  As  for  Rosemarine,’  he  said,  ‘  I  lett  it  run  alle  over  my  garden 
walls,  not  onlie  because  my  bees  love  it,  but  because  tis  the  herb  sacred  to  remem¬ 
brance,  and  therefore  to  friendship ;  whence  a  sprig  of  it  hath  a  dumb  language  that 
maketh  it  the  chosen  emblem  at  our  funeral  wakes  and  in  our  buriall  grounds.’  The 
name  is  popularly  but  erroneously  supposed  to  mean  the  Rose  of  Mary.  It  has  no 
connection  with  either  Rose  or  Mary,  but  is  the  Ros  marinus  or  Ros  maris — the  plant 
that  delights  in  the  sea-spray. 

86.  Rue]  Henley:  Ophelia  distributes  the  same  plants,  and  accompanies  them 
with  the  same  documents  :  ‘  There’s  rosemary,  that’s  for  remembrance.  There’s  rue 
for  you ;  we  may  call  it  Herb  of  Grace.’ — Ellacombe  (p.  203) :  Though  at  first 
sight  there  seems  to  be  little  or  no  connection  between  the  two  names  (Rue  and 
Herb  of  Grace),  yet  really  they  are  so  closely  connected,  that  the  one  name  was 
derived  from,  or  rather  suggested  by,  the  other.  Rue  is  the  English  form  of  the 
Greek  and  Latin  Ruta,  a  word  which  has  never  been  explained,  and  in  its  earlier 
English  form  of  Rude  came  still  nearer  to  the  Latin  original.  But  ruth  was  the 
English  name  for  sorrow  and  remorse,  .  .  .  and  so  it  was  a  natural  thing  to  say  that  a 


1 88 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 

87 


Seeming,  and  fauour  all  the  Winter  long  : 

Grace,  and  Remembrance  be  to  you  both, 

And  welcome  to  our  Shearing. 

Pol.  Shepherdeffe, 

(A  faire  one  are  you:)  well  you  fit  our  ages 
With  flowres  of  Winter. 

Perd.  Sir,  the  yeare  growing  ancient, 

Not  yet  on  fummers  death,  nor  on  the  birth 
Of  trembling  winter,  the  fayrefl  flowres  o’th  feafon 
Are  our  Carnations,  and  ftreak’d  Gilly-vors, 


88.  to  you]  unto  you  Pope  +  . 
93-149.  As  mnemonic  lines,  Warb. 

94.  Not']  Nor  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

95.  fayrejl]  fair' st  Cap.  Walker. 

96.  our]  your  Brae  (MS). 


96.  freak'd]  Jlreak't  F^F^. 

Gilly-vors]  Ff.  gilly'vors  Knt. 
gillyvors  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  Sta.  Ktly, 
Cam.  Huds.  gillyflowers  Rowe  et  cet. 


plant  which  was  so  bitter,  and  had  always  borne  the  name  Rue  or  Ruth ,  must  be  con¬ 
nected  with  repentance.  It  was,  therefore,  the  Herb  of  Repentance,  and  this  was 
soon  transformed  into  the  Herb  of  Grace,  repentance  being  the  chief  sign  of  Grace. 
[Its  name  Herb  of  Grace  is  referred  to  in  ‘  Grace,  and  Remembrance.’  In  Batman 
vffon  Bartholome  it  says  (p.  317,  verso) :  ‘  Rew  is  called  Ruta,  and  is  a  medicinable 
hearbe,  and  hath  that  name,  for  it  is  full  feruent,  and  thereof  is  double  kinde,  wilde 
and  tame,  and  either  is  full  feruent.  But  the  wilde  is  more  feruent  then  that  other, 
as  Isidore  sayth,  li.  17,  cap.  vltima.  Weesells  teach  that  this  hearbe  is  contrary  to 
venim,  and  to  venimous  beastes,  for  he  eateth  first  Rew,  and  balmeth  himselfe  with 
the  smell  &  the  vertue  therof,  before  he  fighteth  with  the  Serpent,  as  he  sayth.  And 
the  Weesell  knoweth  the  vertue  of  Rew  and  eateth  thereof,  and  fighteth  afterward 
safely,  and  resith  [?]  on  the  Cockatrice,  and  slaieth  him,  as  Plinius,  Dioscorides,  & 
Constantine  saye.  .  .  .  Ruta  Hortensis,  and  Ruta  Siluestris,  hearbe  grace,  it  is  called 
Eriphion,  and  the  small  Rue,  Viperalis,  in  shops,’  etc. — Ed.] 

88.  Remembrance]  For  the  spelling,  remember ance,  adopted  by  Capell  and 
followed  by  Keightley,  see  Walker  (  Vers.  9)  or  Abbott  (§  477). 

91.  well  you]  Staunton  :  From  the  reply  of  Perdita,  we  might  conjecture  that 
Polixenes  had  asked  reproachfully, — ■<  Will  you  fit  our  ages  with  flowers  of  winter  ?’ 

93.  ancient]  Hunter  (i,  421)  :  The  urbanity  of  Shakespeare’s  mind  is  perhaps 
nowhere  more  strikingly  manifested  than  in  the  dialogue  between  Perdita  and  the  two 
old  men  who  had  come  to  the  sheep-shearing.  She  had  given  them  rosemary  and 
rue.  These,  Polixenes  says,  •  well  fit  their  age.’  Perdita,  perceiving  that  she  might 
have  reminded  them  unpleasantly  of  their  advanced  period  of  life,  says  that  she 
would  not  have  presented  them  with  the  ‘flowers  of  winter  ’  were  not  the  garden 

barren  of  such  flowers  as  belonged  to  the  period  of  life  which  precedes  age,  the 
gillivors. 

95.  fayrest]  See  I,  ii,  109. 

96.  Carnations]  Ei.lacombe  (p.  35) :  Dr  Johnson  and  others  have  supposed  that 
the  flower  is  so  named  from  the  colour.  In  Lyte’s  Herball  it  is  spelled  *  coronations 
or  comation.’  This  takes  us  at  once  to  the  origin  of  the  name.  The  plant  was  one 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iv.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  1 89 

(Which  fome  call  Natures  baftards)  of  that  kind  9 7 

Our  rufticke  Gardens  barren,  and  I  care  not 
To  get  flips  of  them. 

Pol.  Wherefore  (gentle  Maiden^)  100 

Do  you  negle<5l  them. 

Perd.  For  I  haue  heard  it  faid, 

There  is  an  Art,  which  in  their  pideneffe  fhares  103 


97.  call)  cail  F3.  103.  pidenejfe)  Rowe  + ,  Cap.  pied- 

98.  Gardens]  Garden's  Ff.  ness  Theob. 


of  those  used  in  garlands  [corona),  and  was  probably  one  of  the  most  favourite 
plants  used  for  that  purpose,  for  which  it  was  well  suited  by  its  shape  and  beauty. 
Pliny  gives  a  long  list  of  garland  flowers  ( Coronamentorum  genera)  used  by  the 
Romans  and  Athenians,  and  Nicander  gives  similar  lists  of  Greek  garland  plants  in 
which  the  Carnation  holds  so  high  a  place  that  it  was  called  by  the  name  it  still  has : 
Dianthus,  or  Flower  of  Jove.  Its  second  specific  name,  Caryophyllus ,  i.  e.  Nut¬ 
leaved,  seems  at  first  very  inappropriate  for  a  grassy-leaved  plant,  but  the  name  was 
first  given  to  the  Indian  Clove-tree,  and  from  it  transferred  to  the  Carnation,  on 
account  of  its  fine  Clove-like  scent,  Its  popularity  as  an  English  plant  is  shown  by 
its  many  names :  Pink,  Carnation,  Gilliflower  (an  easily  traced  and  well-ascertained 
corruption  from  Caryophyllus),  Clove,  Picotee,  and  Sops-in-Wine,  from  the  flowers 
being  used  to  flavour  wine  and  beer. 

96.  Gilly-vors]  Dyce  [Remarks,  p.  83) :  *  Gillyvor’  (written  gillofer,  gillofre, 
gelofer)  cannot  properly  be  termed  an  old  spelling;  it  is  the  old  form  of  the  word; 
for  which  .  .  .  modern  editors  ought  not  to  have  substituted  gillyflower.  .  .  .  The  word 
should  be  written  neither  with  a  hyphen  nor  as  a  contraction. — Collier  (ed  ii)  : 
[Mr  Dyce]  must  excuse  us  for  saying  that  this  is  the  very  pedantry  of  criticism ;  and 
he  himself,  not  satisfied  with  the  word,  even  as  it  stands  in  the  old  editions,  after 
talking  very  gravely  about  hyphens  and  contractions,  supplies  an  orthography  of  his 
own.  It  is  amusing  to  see  what  false  importance  is  sometimes  given  to  such  trifles. 
With  regard  to  the  old  spelling  of  the  word,  both  Spenser  and  Hakluyt,  as  Richard¬ 
son  proves,  have  it  ‘  gilliflowers,’  and  in  our  own  day  such  has  been  the  universal 
orthography. — Cambridge  Editors  :  We  have  retained  here  the  spelling  ‘  gillyvors  ’ 
in  preference  to  the  more  familiar  form  gillyflowers,  because  the  latter  is  due  to  an 
etymological  error.  The  original  word  is  caryophyllus,  which  becomes  girofle  in 
French,  and  thence  by  metathesis  gilofre,  gillyvor.  [‘  Gariopillus  is  the  cloue 
Gilowflowre.’ — Batman  vppon  Bartholome,  p.  297,  verso.  See  further  on  Gillflowers, 
line  116.] 

102.  For]  For  other  examples  of  ‘  for  ’  in  the  sense  of  because,  see  Abbott,  §151. 

103.  Art]  Hunter  (i,  421)  :  The  reason  which  she  assigns  for  not  having  culti¬ 
vated  the  ‘  streaked  gillivor  ’  is  in  accordance  with  her  character,  as  one  brought  up 
amidst  the  beauties  of  Nature,  and  regarding  any  art  but  as  a  debasement  of  the  pro¬ 
ductions  of  that  Nature  which  she  worshipped.  Attempts  to  modify  the  form  and 
colours  of  flowers  have  made  part  of  the  art  of  gardening  in  all  ages.  The  gillivor 
was  one  on  which,  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  these  attempts  were  made.  Parkinson, 
who  regards  such  efforts  as  ‘  the  mere  fancies  of  men,  without  any  ground  of 


190 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


With  great  creating-Nature. 

Pol.  Say  there  be  : 

Yet  Nature  is  made  better  by  no  meane, 

But  Nature  makes  that  Meane  :  fo  ouer  that  Art, 
(Which  you  fay  addes  to  Nature J  is  an  Art 
That  Nature  makes  :  you  fee  (fweet  Maid)  we  marry 
A  gentler  Sien,  to  the  wildeft  Stocke, 

And  make  conceyue  a  barke  of  bafer  kinde 
By  bud  of  Nobler  race.  This  is  an  Art 
Which  do’s  mend  Nature  :  change  it  rather,  but 
The  Art  it  felfe,  is  Nature. 


104.  creating-Nature ]  Ff,  Rowe,  cre¬ 
ating  nature  Pope  et  seq. 

107.  ouer ]  Ff,  Rowe-f,  Knt,  Wh. 
Cam.  o'er  Cap.  et  cet. 


no.  Sien]  Ff,  Rowe,  scyon  Pope  4- . 
scyen  Cap.  cyon  Var.  ’78.  scion  Steev. 
wildeJT\  wilder  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 


reason  or  truth,’  says  that  if  men  would  have  lilies  or  gillivors  to  be  of  a  scarlet  red 
colour,  they  put  vermilion  or  cinnabar  between  the  rind  and  the  small  heads  growing 
about  the  root;  if  they  would  have  them  blue,  azure  or  bisse;  if  yellow,  orpiment; 
if  green,  verdigris,  and  thus  of  any  other  colour. 

106.  Yet  Nature,  etc.]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  ii) :  It  is  no  part  of  an  editor’s  function 
to  utter  notes  of  admiration ;  but  being  obliged  to  point  out  so  many  instances  of  loose 
and  reckless  writing  in  this  play,  I  may  be  pardoned  for  calling  attention  to  the  mar¬ 
vellous  skill  and  ease  with  which  a  profound  philosophy  of  nature  is  wrought  out  in 
this  speech,  with  a  union  of  all  the  precision  of  science  and  all  the  possible  grace  of 
poetry.  Yet  it  is  but  one  of  the  lesser  stars  in  the  heaven  of  this  scene. 

107.  ouer  that  Art]  Craik  (p.  23) :  Is  it  not  self-evident  that  [this  phrase] 
should  run  as  follows? — ‘So  ever  that  art.’ — Schmidt  (p.  283):  It  is  quite  incom¬ 
prehensible  to  us  how  any  thoughtful  reader  could  have  failed  to  object  to  this  ‘  o’er,’ 
or  to  perceive  that  it  is  merely  a  misprint  for  e'er-,  it  is  even  more  incomprehensible 
that  the  meaningless  ‘o’er’  should  have  retained  its  place  in  the  text  after  the  emen¬ 
dation  of  e  er,  offered  it  is  true  anonymously,  had  been  proposed  — Hudson  :  With 
‘o’er,’  I  cannot  make  the  expression  tally  with  the  context.  The  reading  [even, 
which  Hudson  adopted]  is  Craik’s.  [In  both  the  First  and  the  Second  Cambridge 
Edition  the  emendation  even  is  attributed  to  Craik,  and  ever  or  e'er  to  an  Anonymous 
contributor,— an  oversight  which,  unless  Craik  elsewhere  changed  his  emendation 
quoted  above,  misled  Hudson.  Gould  proposed  even,  but  long  subsequently  to  Hud¬ 
son  s  text.  I  think  the  text  should  stand  and  that  emendation  is  needless.  What 
Polixenes  means  is,  that  over  those  arts  which  change  Nature  there  rule  laws 
which  Nature  makes.  We  may  by  our  art  or  skill  apply  vermilion  to  the  roots  of  a 
plant,  but  it  would  there  remain  inert  were  it  not  that  by  Nature’s  law  it  is  absorbed 
and  driven  by  an  unknown  force  into  the  petals  of  the  flower.  We  may  marry  a 
gentler  scion  to  the  wildest  stock,  and  there  our  art  ends.  But  by  Nature’s  higher 

over-ruling  laws  the  scion  is  adopted,  and  converts  the  wild  sap  which  feeds  it  into 
beneficent  fruits.— Ed.] 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iv.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 

Perd.  So  it  is. 

Pol.  Then  make  you  Garden  rich  in  Gilly’vors. 
And  do  not  call  them  baftards. 

Il6.  you ]  your  FT. 


I9I 

115 
11 7 


1 15.  So  it  is]  Perdita,  true  to  her  charming  feminine  nature,  instantly  makes  a 
personal  application  of  what  Polixenes  has  been  saying,  who,  unwittingly,  by  his  simile 
of  marrying  the  gentler  scion  to  the  wildest  stock  has  been  stating  the  relative  posi¬ 
tions  of  his  royal  son  and  the  shepherd’s  daughter,  and  this  ‘  So  it  is  ’  is  uttered  with 
a  swift,  furtive,  smiling  glance  at  Florizel.  That  it  is  no  real  assent  to  the  philosophy 
she  has  just  heard  is  evident  from  her  next  words. — Ed. 

1 16.  Gilly’vors]  Steevens  :  There  is  some  further  conceit  relative  to  gillyflowers 
than  has  yet  been  discovered.  Gilly’vors  is  a  term  still  used  by  low  people  in  Sussex 
to  denote  a  wanton.  In  In  a  New  Wonder,  or  A  Woman  never  Vex’d,  1632  [III,  i] 
a  lover  is  behaving  with  freedom  to  his  mistress  as  they  are  going  into  a  garden,  and 
after  she  has  alluded  to  the  quality  of  many  herbs,  he  adds  :  ‘  You  have  fair  roses, 
have  you  not?’  ‘Yes  sir,’  says  she,  ‘but  no  gillifiowers .’  Meaning,  perhaps,  that 
she  would  not  be  treated  like  a  gill-flirt,  i.  e.  a  wanton,  a  word  often  met  with  in  old 
plays,  but  written  ‘  flirt-gill  ’  in  Rom.  dr5  Jul.  I  suppose  gill-flirt  to  be  derived,  or 
rather  corrupted,  from  gillyflower  or  carnation. — Douce  (i,  356) :  The  solution  of  the 
riddle  that  has  embarrassed  Mr  Steevens  is  probably  this :  The  gilly-flower  or  carna¬ 
tion  is  streaked,  as  every  one  knows,  with  white  and  red.  It  this  respect  it  is  a 
proper  emblem  of  a  painted  or  immodest  woman  ;  and  therefore  Perdita  declines  to 
meddle  with  it.  She  connects  the  gardener’s  art  of  varying  the  colours  of  the  above 
flowers  with  the  art  of  painting  the  face,  a  fashion  very  prevalent  in  Shakespeare’s 
time.  [It  is  hardly  probable  that  Steevens  would  have  accepted  Douce’s  ‘solution.’ 
First,  there  are  not  wanting  those  who  deny  that  the  gillyflower  and  the  carnation  are 
the  same.  Secondly,  there  is  many  another  flower  which  is  streaked,  but  which  has 
not  been  therefor  deemed  an  emblem  of  immodesty.  Douce  is  right  enough  in  seeing 
that  it  is  artificiality  which  Perdita  dislikes,  but  he  has  not  touched  the  obscure  con¬ 
ceits  which  Steevens  finds  in  allusions  to  the  gillyflower ;  what  these  conceits  are 
belongs  more  properly  than  here  to  the  folk-lore  of  Botany,  and  can  be  learned  in 
old  books  of  Anatomy,  notably  Crookes’s ;  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  they  are  founded 
on  a  fancied  anatomical  resemblance  akin  to  those  supposed  to  exist  in  other  flowers 
to  which  ‘  liberal  shepherds  give  a  grosser  name.’  It  is  here  of  more  importance 
(yet  small  enough  in  any  event)  to  decide  what  that  flower  is  which  Perdita  calls  a 
‘  gillivor,’ — on  this  point  authorities  are  at  variance,  which  is  possibly  due  to  the  many 
varieties  of  the  plant.  The  comment  is  disproportionate  to  the  value  of  the  question, 
but  then  Dyce  has  seen  fit  to  quote  in  his  Glossary  what  had  appeared  down  to  his  day, 
and  his  example  is  a  safe  one  to  follow. — Ed.] — Nares:  The  name  for  the  whole 
class  of  carnations,  pinks  and  sweetwilliams ;  from  the  French  girofle,  which  is  itself 
corrupted  from  the  Latin  caryophyllum.  See  an  ample  account  of  them  in  Lyte’s 
Dodocns,  pp.  172-175  [pp.  151-157,  ed.  1578].  In  Langham’s  Garden  of  Health 
they  are  called  galofers.  See  p.  281.  Our  modern  word  gillyflower  is  corrupted 
from  this.  See  Stocke  Gillofer  in  Lyte’s  Dodoens,  p.  168  [p.  152,  ed.  1578]. — 
Beisly  (p.  82) :  Carnations  and  Gillovors,  or  gilloflowers,  belong  to  the  genus 
Dianthus.  Parkinson,  in  his  Garden  of  all  sorts  of  Pleasant  Flowers,  dedicated  to 


192 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 

1 18 


Perd .  He  not  put 

The  Dible  in  earth,  to  fet  one  flip  of  them  : 


the  Queen  of  Charles  I.,  and  published  in  1629,  says  that  *  carnations  and  gilloflowers 
be  the  chiefest  flowers  of  account  in  all  our  English  gardens and  he  calls  them  the 
pride  of  our  English  gardens,  and  the  queen  of  delight  and  of  flowers,  and  adds  : 
‘  They  flower  not  until  the  heat  of  the  year,  which  is  in  July,  and  continue  flowering 
until  the  colds  of  the  Autumn  check  them,  or  until  they  have  wholly  outspent  them¬ 
selves  ;  and  these  fair  flowers  are  usually  increased  by  slips.’  Gerarde  in  his  Herball 
describing  the  carnation  gillofloure,  says :  ‘  On  the  top  of  the  stalks  do  grow  very 
fair  flowers,  of  an  excellent  sweet  smell,  and  pleasant  carnation  colour,  whereof  it 
took  its  name.’  Tusser,  in  Eive  Hundred  Points  of  Good  Husbandry,  notices  gillo¬ 
flowers  red,  white,  and  carnation,  as  distinct  from  wall  gilloflowers  and  stock  gillo¬ 
flowers,  and  adds  :  ‘  The  Gilliflower  also,  the  skillful  do  know.  Doth  looke  to  be 
couered,  in  frost  and  in  snow’  [p.  51,  ed.  1614].  Spenser,  in  ‘  Hobbinol’s  Dittie,’ 
has  the  following :  ‘  Bring  hither  the  Pincke  and  Cullumbine,  |  with  Gillifloures 
Bring  Coronations,  and  Sops  in  wine,  |  Worne  of  Paramours.’  [Skep  beard's  Calender, 
Aprill,  p.  102,  ed.  Grosart.]— Roach  Smith  (p.  10)  :  Perdita  objects  to  the  streaked 
gillyflowers,  by  which,  I  believe  (contrary  to  the  received  opinion),  Shakespeare 
meant  the  wallflower :  and  this  is  what  the  people  of  Stratford-upon-Avon  and  its 
neighbourhood  understand  by  the  word  gilliflower  at  the  present  day.  Mr  W.  O. 
Hunt,  of  Stratford-on-Avon,  to  whom  I  applied,  writes : — *  The  flower  understood 
here  as  the  gilliflower  is  the  common  wallflower,  of  the  genus  Cheiranthus,  which,  in 
its  wild  state  grows  on  old  walls  and  stony  places.’  In  the  Isle  of  Wight  the  stock 
is  termed  gilliflower. — Prior  (p.  91)  :  The  name  was  originally  given  in  Italy  (Italian, 
garofalo )  to  plants  of  the  Pink  tribe,  especially  the  carnation,  but  has  in  England 
been  transferred  of  late  years  to  several  cruciferous  plants,  that  of  Chaucer  and 
Spenser  being  Dianthus  caryophyllus,  that  of  later  writers  and  gardeners,  Matthiola 
and  Cheiranthus.  Much  of  the  confusion  in  the  names  of  plants  has  arisen  from  the 
vague  use  of  the  French  terms,  Giroflle,  Oeillet,  and  Violette,  which  were,  all  three  of 
them,  applied  to  flowers  of  the  Pink  tribe,  but  subsequently  extended,  and  finally 
restricted  in  English  to  very  different  plants.  GirofUe  has  become  Gilliflower,  and 
passed  over  to  the  Crucifer*,  Oeillet  been  restricted  to  the  Sweet  Williams,  and 
Violette  been  appropriated  to  one  of  the  numerous  claimants  of  its  name,  the  genus 
to  which  the  Pansy  belongs.  [Prior  then  gives  the  botanical  names  of  the  Clove 
Gilliflower,  the  Marsh-,  the  Rogue’s,  or  Winter-,  the  Stock-,  the  Wall-,  and  the 
Water-.  And  a  reference  to  Lyte  (pp.  151-176,  ed.  157S)  will  give  several  more, 
all  called  Gilofers,  ‘with  the  0  long’  says  Prior.] 

1 18,  etc.  lie  not  put,  etc.]  Mrs  Jameson  (i,  239) :  It  has  been  well  remarked 
of  this  passage  that  Perdita  does  not  attempt  to  answer  the  reasoning  of  Polixenes ; 
she  gives  up  the  argument,  but,  woman  like,  retains  her  own  opinion,  or  rather,  her 
sense  of  right,  unshaken  by  his  sophistry.  She  goes  on  in  a  strain  of  poetry,  which 
comes  over  the  soul  like  music  and  fragrance  mingled  ;  we  seem  to  inhale  the  blended 
odours  of  a  thousand  flowers,  till  the  sense  faints  with  their  sweetness ;  and  she  con¬ 
cludes  with  a  touch  of  passionate  sentiment,  which  melts  into  the  very  heart :  ‘O 
Proserpina,’  etc. 

1 19.  Dible]  Steevens:  An  instrument  used  by  gardeners  to  make  holes  in  the 
earth  for  the  reception  of  young  plants.— Walker  (  Vers.  68)  gives  this  as  an  example 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i V.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


193 


No  more  then  were  I  painted,  I  would  with 

This  youth  fhould  fay  ’twer  well  :  and  onely  therefore 

Delire  to  breed  by  me.  Here’s  flowres  for  you  : 

Hot  Lauender,  Mints,  Sauory,  Mariorum, 

120.  then  were]  than,  were  Theob.  Warb.  et  seq.  (subs.). 


in  his  Article  showing  that  there  are  certain  classes  of  words,  the  greater  part  of  them 
composed  of  two  short  syllables,  which  are  frequently  contracted  into  one  syllable,  or 
placed  in  monosyllabic  places  of  the  line.  This  takes  place  chiefly  when  they  are 
followed  by  a  vowel.  [It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Walker  would  have  this  word 
pronounced  as  a  monosyllable,  the  attempt  would  be  as  needless  as  it  is  impossible ;  he 
merely  notes  the  fact  that  there  is  a  class  of  disyllabic  words  which  occur  in  mono¬ 
syllabic  places.] 

122.  Here’s,  etc.]  Capell  thinks  that  this  is  addressed  *  to  a  different  part  of  this 
numerous  company,  and  the  “  welcome  ”  there  is  to  that  part  separately.’  [I  confess 
that  I  do  not  quite  understand  this  last  clause,  unless  the  ‘welcome’  in  line  127  be 
referred  to.] 

123.  Lauender]  Ellacombe  (p.  104) :  This  is  not  a  British  plant,  but  is  a  native 
of  the  south  of  Europe,  in  dry  and  barren  places,  and  it  was  introduced  into  England 
in  the  sixteenth  century,  but  it  probably  was  not  a  common  plant  in  Shakespeare’s 
time,  for  though  it  is  mentioned  by  Spenser  as  the  ‘  Lavender  still  gray  ’  ( Muiopotmos , 
187),  and  by  Gerarde  as  growing  in  his  garden,  it  is  not  mentioned  by  Bacon  in  his 
list  of  sweet-smelling  plants.  [It  is,  however,  mentioned  by  Tusser  in  his  list  (p.  73) 
of  ‘Strowing  hearbs,’  in  two  varieties:  ‘Lauender’  and  ‘Lauender  spike’;  ‘Lauen¬ 
der  cotten  he  also  mentions,  but  this  is  a  Lavender  only  in  name.  Deighton  says : 

‘  hot,’  that  is,  ‘  strongly  smelling,’  But  its  smell  is  no  stronger  than  ‘  mint  ’ ;  in  fact, 
it  is  not  as  strong.  It  is  more  likely,  I  think,  to  refer  to  the  fact  that  Lavender  wai 
the  flower  for  an  ardent  lover.  In  Robinson’s  Handful  of  Pleasant  Delights ,  1584, 
a  popular  song-book  during  Elizabeth’s  reign,  there  is  (p.  3,  ed.  Arber)  A  Nosegaie 
alvvaies  sweet,  for  Louers  to  send  for  Tokens,  etc.,  wherein  we  find  that  ‘  Lauander' 
is  for  louers  true,  which  euermore  be  faine  :  Desiring  alwaies  for  to  haue,  some  pleas¬ 
ure  for  their  pain  :  And  when  that  they  obtained  haue,  the  loue  that  they  require,  Then 
haue  they  al  their  perfect  ioie,  and  quenched  is  the  fire.’— Ed.] 

123.  Mints]  Walker  ( Crit .  i,  246)  says,  in  effect,  that  the  final  j-  in  this  word, 
which  he  once  regarded  as  corrupt,  is  probably  sane ;  he  then  goes  on  to  ask : 

Quere,  whether  our  ancestors  in  the  time  of  Elizabeth  used  “mints”  as  we  do 
cabbages,  parsnips,  and  the  like  ?  This  was  certainly  the  usage  in  the  time  of 
Chaucer;  Romaunt  of  the  Rose,  p.  176, — I  have  the  quotation  from  the  Encyclo¬ 
pedia  Metropolitan,  in  v.  Mint.  [Fol.  112,  ed.  1602],— “Tho  went  I  forth  on  my 
right  hand  ( hond )  Down  by  a  litel  path  I  fond  Of  mintes  full  ( ful )  and  fenel 
greene  ( grene ).  ’  And  a  passage  of  Bacon,  Essay  of  Gardens ,  near  the  end  of  the 
second  paragraph,  where  he  associates  together  “  burnet,  wild  thyme,  and  water- 
mints,”  seems  to  prove  the  correctness  of  the  received  reading  [i.  e.  ‘  mints’  in  the 
present  passage]  in  The  Winter's  Tale.'  [Tusser  (pp.  72,  73,  74)  in  a  list  of  ‘Seeds 
and  hearbs  for  the  kitchin  to  be  planted  in  March,’  gives,  among  many  others : 

‘  Mints  at  all  times.’  Again  among  ‘  Hearbs  and  roots  for  sallets  and  sauce  ’ : 

‘  Muske-million,  in  Aprill  and  May.  Mints.  Purslaine.  Radish,’  etc.  Again  in 

13 


i94 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


The  Mary-gold,  that  goes  to  bed  with’Sun, 

And  with  him  rifes,  weeping  :  Thefe  are  flowres  125 

Of  middle  fummer,  and  I  thinke  they  are  giuen 

124.  with'~\  with  th.'  Rowe  -I- ,  Wh.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly.  wi’th'  Wh.  ii. 
i.  wi'the  Cap.  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  126.  they  are ]  they're  Dyce  ii,  iii, 

with  the  Var.  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Huds. 

‘  Hearbs  to  still  in  Summer’: — Endiue.  Eiebright.  Fennell.  Fumetory.  Isop.  Mints. 
Plaintaine,’  etc.  where,  as  may  be  noticed,  the  nouns  are  in  the  singular,  as  in  the 
present  line  under  consideration.  It  is  not,  however,  to  be  thence  inferred  that 
‘  Mints  ’  is  used  in  the  singular,  or  even  that  it  is  used  liked  ‘  Cabbages  ’  or  ‘  Pars¬ 
nips,’  but  merely  that  there  were  several  varieties.  Bartholome  speaks  of  ‘  Mint 
sodde  in  Wine  ’  and  ‘  Mint  of  Gardeines  ’  and  to  what  Bartholome  says,  Batman  adds : 
‘  There  are  sixe  kindes  of  Mintes,  Curd  mint,  crispe  mint,  Balme,  Spere  mint,  Hart 
mint,  horse  mint,  and  water  mint.’ — Batman  vppon  Bartholome ,  p.  305,  verso. — Ed.] 

123.  Sauory]  Ellacombe  (p.  216) :  The  name  comes  from  the  Latin  Satureia, 
through  the  Italian  Savoreggia.  It  is  a  native  of  the  south  of  Europe,  probably 
introduced  into  England  by  the  Romans,  for  it  is  mentioned  in  the  Anglo-Saxon 
recipes  under  the  imported  name  of  Savorie. 

123.  Mariorum]  Ellacombe  (p.  122) :  In  Shakespeare’s  time  several  species  of 
Marjoram  were  grown,  especially  the  Common  Marjoram  ( Origanum  vulgare),  a 
British  plant,  the  Sweet  Marjoram  ( O.  Majorana ),  a  plant  of  the  south  of  Europe, 
from  which  the  English  name  comes,  and  the  Winter  Marjoram  ( O.  Heraclcoticum). 

124.  Mary-gold]  Again  there  seems  to  be  some  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  this 
flower.  Hunter,  (i,  422)  says  that  it  is  ‘  not  the  plant  now  so  denominated,  but  the 
sun-flower,’  and  he  has  been  followed  by  several  editors.  What  is  known  in  this 
country  as  the  sunflower  is  the  Helianthus  annuus,  which,  from  the  description,  must 
be  that  which  Lyte  calls  Chrysanthemum  Peruuianum.  The  weight  of  authority, 
however,  is  in  favour  of  the  plant  which  now  bears  the  name  Calendula  officinalis. — Ed. 
Beisly  (p.  79)  calls  it  Chrysanthemum  Coronariurn ,  and  quotes  Plyll  as  saying  that, 

‘  this  flower  also  of  certain  is  called  the  husbandman’s  dyall,  for  that  the  same  too 
aptly  declareth  the  houres  of  the  morning  and  eveninge,  by  the  openinge  and  shut- 
tinge  of  it ;  also  named  the  sunn's  flower ,  for  that  after  the  rysinge  of  the  sunne 
unto  noone,  this  flower  openeth  larger  and  larger;  but  after  the  noontime  with  the  set¬ 
ting  of  the  sunne,  the  flower  closeth  more  and  more,  and  after  setting,  is  wholly  shut 
up  together.’ — Prior  (p.  145)  and  Ellacombe  (p.  120)  agree  that  the  true  name  is 
Calendula  officinalis.  The  latter  says  ‘  I  have  little  doubt  this  is  the  flower  meant ;  it 
was  always  a  great  favourite  in  our  forefathers’  gardens.  .  .  .  The  two  properties  of 
the  Marigold, — that  it  was  always  in  flower,  and  that  it  turned  its  flowers  to  the  sun 
and  followed  his  guidance  in  their  opening  and  shutting, — made  it  a  very  favourite 
flower  with  the  poets  and  emblem  writers.  ...  It  was  the  Heliotrope,  or  Solsequium, 
or  Turnesol  of  our  forefathers,  and  is  the  flower  often  alluded  to  under  that  name.’ 

124.  with  Sun]  Again  note  the  absorption  of  the  definite  article.  See  also  lines 
369  and  800  of  this  scene;  and  for  other  absorptions  see  II,  i,  18. — Steevens  : 
Lupton,  in  his  Book  of  Notable  Things,  has: — ‘Some  calles  it  Sponsus  Solis,  the 
Spowse  of  the  Sunne;  because  it  sleepes  and  is  awakened  with  him.’ 

126.  giuen]  Hunter  (i,  419) :  This  word  is  here  heraldic.  The  old  heralds  had 
various  systems  of  blazoning,  each  colour  and  metal  being  designated  by  a  planet,  a 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


195 

To  men  of  middle  age.  Y’are  very  welcome.  127 

Cam.  I  fhould  leaue  grafing,  were  I  of  your  flocke, 

And  onely  liue  by  gazing. 

Perd.  Out  alas :  1 30 

You’ld  be  fo  leane,  that  blafts  of  Ianuary  (Friend, 

Would  blow  you  through  and  through. Now  (my  fairft 
I  would  I  had  fome  Flowres  o’th  Spring,  that  might 
Become  your  time  of  day  :  and  yours,  and  yours, 

That  weare  vpon  your  Virgin-branches  yet  135 

Your  Maiden.heads  growing  :  O  Proferpina , 


127.  Y'are ]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Wh. 
you're  Cap.  Cam.  Wh.  ii.  ye're  Dyce, 
Sta.  Huds.  you  are  Var.  ’73  et  cet. 
very]  Om.  F^,  Rowe,  Pope. 

132.  my  fairft  Friend ]  F2.  my 

fairft  Friend  F3,  Cap.  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh. 
Sta.  Cam.  my  fair' ft  Friends  F  .  my 


fairest  friends  Rowe,  Pope,  fairest 
friend  Han.  my  fairest  friend  Theob. 
et  cet. 

135.  Virgin-branches ]  virgin  branches 
Cap.  et  seq. 

136.  growing ]  blowing  Warb.  MS 
(N.  &  iQu.  18  Mar.  1893). 


precious  stone,  an  age  of  man,  a  flower,  an  element,  a  season  of  the  year,  at  the 
pleasure  of  the  blazoner,  and  sometimes  in  a  fancifull  relation  to  the  rank  and  quality 
of  the  person  whose  arms  he  was  describing.  This  fancy  may  be  traced  downward 
to  the  beginning  of  the  last  century,  but  it  has  now  disappeared,  and  only  the  French 
terms  are  in  use.  .  .  .  Thus  an  association  was  formed  between  certain  flowers  and 
certain  ages  of  the  life  of  man — certain  flowers  were  given ,  in  the  heraldic  phrase, 
to  certain  ages.  Sir  John  Feme  has  a  large  table  of  these  various  modes  of  blazoning 
( Blazon  of  Gentry,  1586,  p.  169),  from  which  I  extract  the  part  relating  to  men’s 
ages  and  to  flowers:  Infancy :  The  Lilly  and  White  Rose;  Puerility :  The  Blue 
Lilly;  Adolescence :  The  Mary  Gold;  Lusty  Green  Youth:  All  manner  of  verdures 
or  green  things;  Virility:  Gillofer  and  Red  Rose;  Grey  Hairs:  The  Violet; 
Decrepitude :  The  Aubifaine.  If  we  look  closely  at  the  language  of  Perdita  we 
shall  see  that  Shakespeare  had  in  his  mind  these  associations  when  he  represented 
her  distributing  flowers  to  the  persons  of  various  ages  who  had  come  to  the  sheep¬ 
shearing,  though  using  the  licence  of  a  poet  when  he  thought  he  could  improve  on 
the  disposition.  Thus  to  the  young  she  gives,  or  rather  would  give,  were  the  season 
of  the  year  favourable,  for  this  sheep-shearing  is  represented  to  be  in  autumn,  daffo¬ 
dils,  violets,  primroses,  oxlips,  the  crown-imperial,  and  the  various  kinds  of  lilies.  To 
the  persons  of  middle  age  the  marygold  is  the  only  flower  she  gives,  but  she  gives 
with  it  lavender,  mint,  savory,  and  marjoram,  that  is,  ‘  all  manner  of  verdures  or  green 
things.’  Carnations  and  gillivers,  she  says,  are  for  persons  whose  time  of  life 
approaches  old  age;  and  to  the  two  old  men  she  gives  rosemary  and  rue. 

132.  fairst]  See  I,  ii,  109. 

136.  Proserpina]  Steevens:  So  in  Ovid,  Metarn.,  v,  398:  ‘  et,  ut  summa  vestem 
laniarat  ab  ora,  Collecti  flores  tunicis  cecidere  remissis.’  Thus  translated  by  Golding 
[p.  63,  verso]  :  ‘  While  in  this  garden  Proserpine  was  taking  hir  pastime,  In  gather¬ 
ing  eyther  Violets  blew,  or  Lillies  white  as  Lime,  .  .  .  Dis  spide  her:  loude  hir; 
caught  hir  vp.  .  .  .  The  Ladie  with  a  wailing  voyce  afright  did  often  call.  .  .  .  And 


196 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


For  the  Flowres  now,  that  (frighted)  thou  let’ ft  fall  137 

From  Dyffes  Waggon  :  Daffadils, 

That  come  before  the  Swallow  dares,  and  take 

The  windes  of  March  with  beauty  :  Violets  (dim,  140 

138.  Dyffes]  Diffes  Ff,  Rowe  i.  Dis’s  daffadils  Han.  Cap.  daffodils  Johns. 

P  twe  ii  et  seq.  yellow  daffodils  Ktly.  golden  daffodils 

Daffadils~\  Deffadils  F4.  early  Coleridge,  Huds. 


as  she  from  the  vpper  part  hir  garment  would  haue  rent,  By  chaunce  she  let  hir  lap 
slip  downe,  and  out  her  flowres  went.’ 

138.  Waggon]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  in  a  long  note  defends  the  American  use  of 
this  word  as  both  a  vehicle  of  rapid  motion, — a  chariot, — and  one  suited  to  the  slow 
transportation  of  great  burthens,  by  examples  from  Shakespeare  and  from  the  Bible. 

138.  Daffadils]  Coleridge  (p.  255) :  An  epithet  is  wanted  here,  not  merely  or 
chiefly  for  the  metre,  but  for  the  balance,  for  the  aesthetic  logic.  Perhaps  golden  was 
the  word  which  would  set  off  the  ‘  violets  dim.’ — Walker  (  Crit.  iii,  104)  :  Coleridge’s 
golden  is  plausible.  It  would  contrast  with  ‘ dim  violets.’ — Keightley  (Exp.  203)  : 
An  epithet,  probably  yellow ,  which  I  have  given,  has  evidently  been  lost  here.  All 
the  other  flowers,  we  may  see,  have  epithets.  Coleridge  also  saw  the  want,  and  sup¬ 
plied  golden.  How  ill-qualified  he  was  for  emendatory  criticism !  Hanmer’s  early 
was  much  better.  [When  Keightley  asks  us  to  prefer  yellow  to  golden  I  am  afraid 
we  can  only  say,  how  ill-qualified  he  is  for  poetic  criticism !  But  any  epithet  here, 
by  whomsoever  placed,  is  an  attempt  to  improve  Shakespeare,  which  let  those  attempt 
who  list. — Ed.] — E.  S.  Dallas  ( The  Gay  Science,  i,  330) :  When  the  poet  makes 
Perdita  babble  of  the  daffodils  that  come  before  the  swallow  dares,  and  take  the 
winds  of  March  with  beauty,  he  displays  a  suggestiveness  which  outruns  the  whole  art 
of  painting.  Qui pingit florem,  non  pingit  fforis  odorem.  How  Can  a  painter  in  the 
tinting  of  a  daffodil  convey  fine  suggestions  of  the  confidence  and  power  of  beauty 
in  a  tender  flower.  The  painter  may  give  us  ‘  pale  primroses,’  but  how  can  he  con¬ 
vey  what  Perdita  means  when  she  tells  us  they  die  unmarried  ere  they  can  behold 
bright  Phebus  in  his  strength. 

138-142.  Daffadils  .  .  .  breath]  Bagehot  (i,  45) :  A  perfectly  poetic  appreciation 
of  nature  contains  two  elements :  a  knowledge  of  facts,  and  a  sensibility  to  charms. 
Everybody  who  may  have  to  speak  to  some  naturalist  will  be  aware  how  widely  the 
two  may  be  separated.  He  will  have  seen  that  a  man  may  study  butterflies  and  for¬ 
get  that  they  are  beautiful,  or  be  perfect  in  the  ‘  Lunar  theory  ’  without  knowing  what 
most  people  mean  by  the  moon.  Generally  such  people  prefer  the  stupid  parts  of 
nature— worms  and  Cochin-China  fowls.  But  Shakespeare  was  not  obtuse.  [These 
lines]  seem  to  show  that  he  knew  those  feelings  of  youth  to  which  beauty  is  more 
than  a  religion. 

139.  and  take]  That  is,  bewitch,  fascinate,  as  in  ‘  no  fairy  takes,  nor  witch  hath 
power  to  charm,’  in  Ham.  I.  i. 

140-142.  Violets  (dim  .  .  .  breath]  Johnson  :  I  suspect  that  our  author  mistakes 
Juno  for  Pallas,  who  was  the  goddess  of  blue  eyes.  Sweeter  than  an  eye-lid  is  an  odd 
image ;  but  perhaps  he  uses  sweet  in  the  general  sense  of  delightful. — M.  Mason 
(p*  !35)  •  But  we  are  not  told  that  Pallas  was  the  goddess  of  blue  ey 6-lids*,  besides 
as  Shakespeare  joins  in  this  comparison  the  breath  of  Cytherea  with  the  eye  lids  of 


act  iv,  sc.  iv.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 


197 


But  fweeter  then  the  lids  of  hind’s  eyes, 
Or  Cytherca’ s  breath)  pale  Prime-rofes, 
That  dye  vnmarried,  ere  they  can  behold 


H3 


141 


142.  Prime-rofes\  Prim-rofes  F  . 


Juno,  it  is  evident  that  he  does  not  allude  to  the  colour  but  to  the  fragrance  of  violets. 
— Steevens,  without  actually  asserting  that  such  is  the  meaning  of  the  passage,  has 
here  a  note  on  the  fashion  which  once  prevailed  of  ‘  kissing  the  eyes  as  a  mark  of 
extraordinary  tenderness.’  If  the  student  be  satisfied  with  the  numerous  quotations 
in  proof  of  this  custom  as  an  elucidation  of  the  present  passage,  the  commentator  is 
content.  If  the  student  be  not  satisfied,  the  commentator  can  urge  that  he  has  done 
his  best,  and,  as  a  final  word,  quotes  Homer’s  pownic  n-drvia  "H qt/  as  a  proof  that 
Juno’s  eyes  were  as  remarkable  as  those  of  Pallas. — Malone  rather  more  pertinently 
quotes  Spenser  as  attributing  beauty  to  the  eye-lid :  ‘  Vpon  her  eyelids  many  Graces 
sate,  Vnder  the  shadow  of  her  euen  browes.’ — Faerie  Queene,  II,  iii,  222  [ed.  Gro- 
sart].  And  in  his  40th  Sonnet: — ‘  When  on  each  eyelid  sweetly  doe  appeare,  An 
hundred  Graces  as  in  shade  to  sit.’ — Schmidt  (Lex.)  defines  ‘  dim  ’  by  ‘  wanting 
beauty,  homely  ’  a  definition  which  Littledale  pronounces,  all  too  leniently,  ‘  prosy.’ — 
Littledale  ( Two  Noble  Kinsmen,  I,  i,  9,  Note) :  In  ‘  violets  dim  ’  the  sweetness 
of  the  violet’s  smell  is  contrasted  with  the  radiant  beauty  of  the  daffodils  that  con¬ 
quers  the  winds  of  March,  ‘dim’  serving  to  subordinate  the  colour  to  the  perfume, 
and  perhaps  meaning  ‘  half-hidden  from  the  eye,’  retiring,  modest ;  or  as  Chapman 
(Minor  Poems ,  p.  130,  cf.  p.  39)  has  it:  ‘with  bosom-hung  and  hidden  heads.’ — 
Edw.  Malan  (N.  Qu.  1885,  VI,  xi,  362)  quotes  many  examples  to  prove  that  the 
practice  existed  of  painting  with  kohl  the  eye-lids  of  women.  This  practice  is  familiar 
to  all  readers  and  has  been  prevalent  from  the  earliest  times  to  the  present  day.  This, 
he  asserts,  is  ‘  the  custom  alluded  to,’  but  he  does  not  point  out  the  allusion.  [As 
compared  with  bright  golden  daffodils,  violets  may  well  be  called  ‘  dim  ’  as  well  as 
‘  half-hidden  from  the  eye.’  When  unspeakable  love  and  tenderness  are  expressed 
through  the  eyes,  the  eye-lids  instinctively  droop ;  then  it  is,  when  such  love-glances 
beam  from  the  half-veiled  eyes  of  the  queen  of  heaven,  that  her  eye-lids  become  a 
type  of  love,  as  Cytherea’s  breath  becomes  a  type  of  sweetness ;  and  in  both  of 
them  the  violet  excels. — Ed.] 

142.  Prime-roses]  The  printers  of  the  present  play  use  here  a  more  antiquated 
spelling  than  the  printers  of  A  Mid.  N.  D.,  who  spelled  (I,  i,  228)  this  word  ‘  Prim¬ 
rose.’  The  derivation  of  the  name  was  for  some  time  in  doubt.  The  popular  ety¬ 
mology,  derived  from  its  French  name,  primavere,  is  the  first  rose  of  spring,  the 
prima  veris,  which  could  never  have  been  given,  as  Dr  Prior  says  (p.  183),  ‘to  a 
plant  that  in  form  and  colour  is  so  unlike  a  rose.’  ‘  The  true  etymology,’  says  Skeat, 
in  a  note  quoted  by  Littledale  (  Two  Noble  Kins.  I,  i,  7)>  ‘  is  rather  primula  veris,  if 
the  word  was  taken  from  Latin ;  but  Brachet  supposes  that  it  was  merely  borrowed 
from  the  Ital.  primavera,  a  name  used  of  flowers  that  come  in  the  early  spring.’ 
‘Pry me  rolles  is  the  name,’  says  Prior,  ‘  it  bears  in  old  books  and  MSS.  Chaucer 
writes  it  one  word,  primerole,  which  is  an  abbreviation  of  Fr.  primevero/e,  Ital.  pri- 
maverola,  dim.  o {prima  vera,  from  Jlor  di prima  vera,  the  first  spring  flower.’  [‘  Pale  ’ 
here  corresponds,  I  think,  with  the  ‘  faint  primrose  ’  in  Mid.  N.  D.  in  the  passage 
above  referred  to. — Ed.] 

143.  vnmarried]  Steevens  quotes  a  note  of  Warton  on  Milton’s  line  in  Lycidas  : 


198 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Bright  Phoebus  in  his  ftrength  (a  Maladie 

Moft  incident  to  Maids:)  bold  Oxlips,  and  145 

The  Crowne  Imperiall  :  Lillies  of  all  kinds, 

(The  Flowre-de-Luce  being  one.)  O,  thefe  I  lacke,  147 

145.  bold]  gold  Han.  Warb.  Johns.  147.  Flowre-de-Luce]  Flower-de- Lis 

Var.  ’73.  Rowe.  flower-de-luce  Cap. 

147.  O,  thefe]  o' these  Garrick. 


‘  — the  rathe  primrose  that  forsaken  dies,’  as  follows  :  ‘  But  why  does  the  Primrose 
die  “  unmarried  ”  ?  Not  because  it  blooms  and  decays  before  the  appearance  of  other 
flowers  ;  as  in  a  state  of  solitude,  and  without  society.  Shakespeare’s  reason  why  it 
dies  unmarried  is  unintelligible,  or  rather,  is  such  as  I  do  not  wish  to  understand. 
The  true  reason  is  because  it  grows  in  the  shade,  uncherished  or  unseen  by  the  sun, 
who  was  supposed  to  be  in  love  with  some  sorts  of  flowers.’ 

145.  bold  Oxlips]  Steevens  :  The  ‘oxlip’  has  not  a  weak  flexible  stalk  like 
the  cowslip,  but  erects  itself  boldly  in  the  face  of  the  sun.  Wallis,  in  his  Hist,  of 
Northumberland,  says  that  the  great  oxlip  grows  a  foot  and  a  half  high.  It  should 
be  confessed,  however,  [in  regard  to  Hanmer’s  gold]  that  the  colour  of  the  oxlip  is 
taken  notice  of  by  other  writers.  So  in  The  Arraignment  of  Paris  :  ‘ — yellow  ox¬ 
lips  bright  as  burnish’d  gold.’[ — -I,  iii.] — Ellacombe  (p.  148):  The  ‘bold  oxlip’ 
( Primula  elatior)  is  so  like  both  the  Primrose  and  the  Cowslip  that  it  has  been  by 
many  supposed  to  be  a  hybrid  between  the  two.  Sir  Joseph  Hooker,  however,  con¬ 
siders  it  a  true  species. 

146.  Crowne  Imperiall]  Ellacombe  (p.  52) :  This  is  a  Fritillary  [F.  imperialis). 
It  is  a  native  of  Persia,  Affghanistan,  and  Cashmere,  but  it  was  very  early  introduced 
into  England  from  Constantinople,  and  at  once  became  a  favourite.  .  .  .  Gerarde  had 
it  plentifully  in  his  garden,  and  Parkinson  gave  it  the  foremost  place  in  his  Paradisus 
Terrestris.  ‘  The  Crown  Imperial,’  he  says,  ‘  for  its  stately  beautifulnesse  deserveth 
the  first  place  in  this  our  garden  of  delight,  to  be  entreated  of  before  all  other  Lillies.’ 
And  if  not  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  yet  certainly  very  soon  after,  there  were  as  many 
varieties  as  there  are  now. 

147.  Flowre-de-Luce]  Ellacombe  (p.  73) :  Some  writers  affirm  stoutly  that 
this  is  a  Lily,  others  as  stoutly  that  it  is  an  Iris.  For  the  Lily  theory  there  are  the 
facts  that  Shakespeare  calls  it  one  of  the  Lilies,  and  that  the  other  way  of  spelling  it 
is  Fleur-de-lys.  I  find  also  a  strong  confirmation  of  this  in  the  writings  of  St.  Francis 
de  Sales  (contemporary  with  Shakespeare)  :  ‘  Charity,’  he  says,  ‘  comprehends  the 
seven  gifts  of  The  Holy  Ghost,  and  resembles  a  beautiful  Flower-de-luce,  which  has 
six  leaves  whiter  than  snow,  and  in  the  middle  the  pretty  little  golden  hammers.’ — 
Philo,  bk  xi,  trans.  Mulholland.  This  description  will  in  no  way  fit  the  Iris,  but  it 
may  very  well  be  applied  to  the  White  Lily.  Chaucer,  too,  seems  to  connect  the 
Fleur-de-luce  with  the  Lily:  ‘  His  nekke  whit  was  as  the  flour-de-lys.’[ — Prol.  238]. 
These  are  certainly  strong  authorities  for  saying  that  the  Flower-de-luce  is  the  Lily. 
But  there  are  as  strong,  or  stronger,  on  the  other  side.  Spenser  separates  the  Lilies 
from  the  Flower-de-luces  in  his  pretty  lines :  1  Straw  me  the  ground  with  Daffadown¬ 
dillies,  |  And  Cowslips,  and  Kingcups,  and  loued  Lillies ;  |  The  prettie  pawnee,  | 
And  the  Chevisaunce,  |  Shall  match  with  the  faire  flour  Delice.’ — \_Aprill,  146.  But 
in  his  Glosse  Spenser  shows  that  he  recognises  in  the  flower  neither  a  lily  nor  an  iris : 


ACT  XV,  sc.  iv.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 

To  make  you  Garlands  of)  and  my  fweet  friend, 

To  ftrew  him  o’re,  and  ore. 

Flo.  What?  like  a  Coarfe  ? 

149.  Jlrew ]  strow  Var.  ’73,  ’78,  ’85,  Rann,  Mai. 

‘  Flowre  delice,’  he  observes,  ‘  that  which  they  use  to  misterme,  flowre  deluce,  being 
in  Latine  called  Flos  delitiarum.' — Ed.]  Ben  Jonson  separates  them  in  the  same 
way :  ‘  Bring  rich  Carnations,  Flower-de-luces,  Lillies.’  Lord  Bacon  also  separates 
them:  ‘In  April l  follow,  The  Double  white  Violet;  the  Wall-flower;  The  Stock- 
Gilly-flower;  The  Couslip,  Flower-De-lices,  and  Lillies  of  Natures.’ [p.  556,  ed. 
Arber],  In  heraldry,  also,  the  Fleur-de-lis  and  the  Lily  are  two  distinct  bearings. 
Then,  from  the  time  of  Turner  in  1568,  through  Gerarde  and  Parkinson  to  Miller,  all 
the  botanical  writers  identify  the  Iris  as  the  plant  named,  and  with  this  judgement 
most  of  our  modern  writers  agree.  We  may,  therefore,  assume  that  Shakespeare 
meant  the  Iris  as  the  flower  given  by  Perdita,  and  we  need  not  be  surprised  at  his 
classing  it  among  the  Lilies.  Botanical  classification  was  not  very  accurate  in  his 
day,  and  long  after  his  time  two  such  celebrated  men  as  Redoute  and  De  Candolle 
did  not  hesitate  to  include  in  the  Liliacece  not  only  Irises,  but  Daffodils,  Tulips,  Fritil- 
laries,  and  even  Orchids.  [The  student  interested  in  such  subjects  will  find  an  inves¬ 
tigation  of  the  origin  of  the  heraldic  Fleur-de-lis  by  ‘  C.  H.  P.’  in  Notes  <5r=  Qu.  1856, 
II,  i,  225  and  245,  wherein  as  an  armorial  bearing  it  has  been  supposed  to  represent 
successively  a  toad  ( crapaud ),  the  ‘  fers  de  Piques,  ou  de  Hallebardes,’  and  ‘  un 
trefle,’  a  trefoil. — Ed.] 

147.  O,  these]  Garrick’s  version,  ‘  Florizel  and  Perdita,’  reprinted  in  his  Works , 
1774,  contains  many  typographical  errors,  albeit  on  the  title  page  it  is  said  to  be  ‘  care¬ 
fully  corrected  ’ ;  for  instance,  where  Perdita  says  to  Camillo  in  line  130 ‘Out  alas, 
You’d  be  as  lean,  etc.,  Garrick’s  version  makes  Perdita  say  ‘  You’d  be  as  clean,'  etc. ; 
again  in  line  481  ‘  Farther  than  Deucalion  ’  is  converted  into  ‘  Far  than  our  deucation,' 
etc.  Hence  a  shade  of  suspicion  is  cast  over  any  unusual  reading.  Nevertheless, 
Garrick  has  one  here  which  has  hitherto  escaped  notice.  The  present  exclamation 
‘  O,’  which  we  perceive  to  be  almost  meaningless  here  when  our  attention  is  called 
to  it,  Garrick  reads  as  an  abbreviation  of  of:  ‘  o’  tkese  I  lack,’  etc.,  which  I  incline  to 
think  is  the  true  reading. — Ed. 

148,  149.  and  my  .  .  .  and  ore]  This  phrase  is  cited  by  Walker  ( Crit .  i,  56) 
among  many  others  as  an  instance  of  what  ‘  may,  perhaps,  be  described  as  an  in¬ 
stinctive  striving  after  a  natural  arrangement  of  words,  inconsistent,  indeed,  with 
modern  English  grammar,  but  perfectly  authorised  by  that  of  the  Elizabethan  age;’ 
and  Walker  thus  translates  it  into  Greek  idiom:  hoO'  iuar  u l v  oretyavacsai,  tovtov  fie 
Kai  Travra  KaTaoTopeoai.  It  is  not  easy  to  draw  a  distinction  between  this  ‘  instinctive 
striving  after  a  natural  arrangement  ’  and  a  change  of  construction  due  to  change  of 
thought.  It  is  perhaps  possible  to  apply  the  latter  explanation  to  the  present  passage. 
Perdita  begins  by  wishing  for  enough  flowers  to  make  garlands  of  for  all  her  com¬ 
panions  and  for  Florizel,  at  the  mere  thought  of  whom  the  wish  springs  up  not  only 
for  enough  to  make  garlands  for  him,  but  to  strew  him  o’er  and  o’er.  I  am  not  sure 
whether  the  following  instance  from  Sidney’s  Arcadia,  p.  319,  ed.  1598,  would  come 
under  Walker’s  ‘  instinctive  striving  ’  or  not :  ‘  I  must  be  the  death  of  my  mother ; 
who  how  wicked  soever,  yet  I  would  she  had  receiued  her  punishment  by  some  other.’ 
See  note  on  As  You  Like  It,  II,  iii,  11,  of  this  edition. — Ed. 


I99 

148 

150 


200 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Perd.  No,  like  a  banke,  for  Loue  to  lye,  and  play  on:  15 1 

Not  like  a  Coarfe  :  or  if :  not  to  be  buried, 

But  quicke,  and  in  mine  armes.  Come,  take  your  flours, 

Me  thinkes  I  play  as  I  haue  feene  them  do 
In  Whitfon-Paftorals  :  Sure  this  Robe  of  mine  155 

Do’s  change  my  difpofltion: 

Flo.  What  you  do, 

Still  betters  what  is  done.  When  you  fpeake  (Sweet)  158 

152.  or  if  :~\  or  if,  Theob.  pastorals  Johns.  whitsun'  pastorals 

155.  Whitfon-Pajl  orals]  Ff,  Rowe.  Cap. 

Whitsund ’  pastorals  Han.  whitsun  158.  betters ]  better  F  . 

152.  or  if  ]  There  maybe  here  either  an  omission  of  so,  whereof  Abbott,  §64, 
gives  several  examples,  or  there  may  be  an  omission  of  ‘  a  coarse,’ — howsoever  ex¬ 
plained,  it  is  an  idiom  which  is  to  be  found,  I  suppose,  in  every  language. _ Ed. 

155.  Whitson- Pastorals]  I  have  not  been  successful  in  finding  any  notice  of 
Pastorals  which  were  peculiar  to  Whitsuntide.  Mysteries  were  performed  at  that 
season,  and  all  manner  of  boisterous  games.  See  Harrison’s  England,  Stubbes, 
Anatomy  of  Abuses,  May  Games,  p.  14 8,— New  Sh.  Soe.  Reprint,  The  Chester  Plays, 
an<^  The  Coventry  Mysteries,  reprinted  by  The  Shakespeare  Soc.,  or  Strutt,  Brande, 
Douce,  Chambers’s  Book  of  Days,  and  Dyer’s  Folk-Lore.  It  is  a  matter  of  small 
moment.  It  would  hardly  be  fitting  that  Perdita  should  compare  her  speech  and 
actions  to  anything  less  refined  than  a  Pastoral,  and  it  was  only  at  Whitsuntide  that 
she  would  be  likely  to  see  any  theatrical  performances  at  all. _ Ed. 

158,  etc.  When  you  speake,  etc.]  C.  B.  Mount  (N.  &•  Qu.  1893,  VIII,  iii,  305) 
points  out  the  following  parallel :  ‘  The  force  of  loue  .  .  .  doth  so  enchaine  the  louers 
judgement  vpon  her  that  holdes  the  raines  of  his  mind,  that  whatsoeuer  she  doth  is 
euer  in  his  eyes  best.  And  that  best,  being  by  the  continuall  motion  of  our  changing 
life,  turned  by  her  to  any  other  thing,  that  thing  againe  becommeth  best.  ...  If  she 
sit  still,  that  is  best ;  ...  If  she  walke,  no  doubt  that  is  best,  ...  If  she  be  silent,  that 
without  comparison  is  best,  ...  But  if  shee  speake,  he  will  take  it  vpon  his  death  that 
is  best,  the  quintescence  of  each  word,  being  distilled  downe  into  his  affected  soule.’ 
—Sidney,  Arcadia  [p.  368,  ed.  1598].  ‘  The  thought,’  adds  Mount,  «  howsoever  true, 
is  not  trite  or  obvious,  and  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  Shakespeare  borrowed  it 
from  Sidney.  It  is  a  good  example  of  his  power  to  embellish  in  borrowing.’— 
NOTTELLE  (Etude,  etc.  p.  92)  calls  attention  to  the  similarity  of  Florizel’s  speech  to 
a  ‘  Cradle  Song  ’  of  Victor  Hugo,  as  follows : 


La 

Quand  tu  chantes,  bercee 
Le  soir,  entre  mes  bras, 
Entends-tu  ma  pensde 
Qui  te  repond  tout  bas  ? 

Ton  doux  chant  me  rappelle 
Les  plus  beaux  de  mes  jours ; 

Ah  !  chantez,  chantez,  ma  belle, 
Chantez,  chantez  toujours ! 


Berceuse. 

Quand  tu  ris,  sur  ta  bouche 
L’amour  s’ipanouit, 

Et  soudain  le  farouche 
Soup?on  s’evanouit. 

Ah  !  le  rire  fiddle 

Prouve  un  cceur  sans  detours  ! 

Ah  !  riez,  riez,  ma  belle, 

Riez,  riez  toujours ! 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


201 


I’ld  haue  you  do  it  euer  :  When  you  ling, 

Fid  haue  you  buy,  and  fell  fo  :  fo  giue  Aimes,  160 

Pray  fo  :  and  for  the  ord’ring  your  Affayres, 

To  fmg  them  too.  When  you  do  dance,  I  wifli  you 
A  waue  o’th  Sea,  that  you  might  euer  do 
Nothing  but  that  r  moue  ftill,  ftill  fo  : 

And  owne  no  other  Function.  Each  your  doing,  165 

I59»  160.  I'ld~\  I'le  F<(  Rowe.  164.  moue\  but  so  move  Ktly. 

164,  165.  Nothing  ...And  owne ]  One  fo:]  so,  my  fair  Cap. 

line,  Mai.  Steev.  Vai.  Knt,  Sing.  Huds. 


Quand  tu  dors  calme  et  pure 
Dans  l’ombre,  sous  mes  yeux, 
Ton  haleine  murmure 
Des  mots  harmonieux ; 


Ton  beau  corps  se  rgvdle 
Sans  voile  et  sans  atours ; 

Ah  !  dormez,  dormez,  ma  belle, 
Dormez,  dormez  toujours ! 


164.  moue  still,  still  so]  The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  The  iteration  of  ‘still’  in  the 
peculiar  way  in  which  Shakespeare  has  used  it  in  connection  with  the  two  mono¬ 
syllables  ‘  more  ’  and  ‘  so,’  gives  the  musical  cadence,  the  alternate  rise  and  fall,  the 
to-and-fro  undulation  of  the  water,  the  swing  of  the  wave,  with  an  effect  upon  the 
ear  that  only  a  poet  gifted  with  a  fine  perception  would  have  thought  of. — Abbott 
(§  5°9)  :  Here  ‘  still,’  which  means  always,  is  remarkably  emphatic,  and  may,  per¬ 
haps,  be  pronounced  as  a  quasi-dissyllable. 

165.  Each  your  doing,]  Johnson  :  That  is,  your  manner  in  each  act  crowns  the 
act. — Walker  ( Crit .  i,  74):  Here,  I  think,  a  line  has  dropt  out,  or  possibly  two, 
which,  if  preserved,  would  have  obviated  the  difficulty  of  construction,  which  forms 
the  only  blot  in  this  most  exquisite  speech.  Omissions  of  the  press  are,  I  think, 
remarkably  frequent  in  this  play. — The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  The  whole  sentence 
shows  its  interpretation  to  be  : — ‘  The  grace  with  which  you  perform  every  act  is  so 
choice  in  each  particular,  that  it  crowns  whatever  you  may  at  each  present  moment 
be  doing,  and  renders  all  your  acts  queens.’ — Hudson  :  I  can  hardly  assent  to 
[Walker’s  conjecture]  as  regards  the  amount  lost ;  but  there  is  evidently  some  bad 
corruption  in  the  passage,  both  sense  and  verse  being  out  of  joint ;  and  I  have  no 
doubt  that  a  word  or  two  got  lost  from  the  text  and  one  or  two  other  words  changed. 
Instead  of  ‘  what  you  are  doing,'  the  sense  clearly  requires  ‘  what  you  have  done.' 
In  this  point,  my  conjecture  is,  that  ‘  doing  ’  got  repeated  from  the  second  line  before, 
and  then  you  have  was  altered  to  ‘  you  are,’  so  as  to  accord  with  ‘  doing  ’ ,  bus  ren¬ 
dering  the  clause  incoherent  with  the  context.  With  the  changes  I  have  ventured  to 
make,  both  sense  and  verse  seem  brought  into  proper  order.  ‘  Each  your  doing 
crowns  what  you  are  doing,  in  the  present  deeds,’  is  neither  English  nor  sense,  and 
no  glozing  can  make  it  so.  [Hudson’s  text  reads  :  ‘  —move  still,  still  so,  and  own  | 
No  other  function.  Each  your  doing  is  |  So  singular  in  each  particular,  |  Crowning 
what  you  have  done  i'the  present  deed,  |  That  all  your  acts  are  queens.’] — Rolfe: 
‘  Your  manner  in  each  act,  so  unparalleled  in  each  particular,  crowns  the  act  so  that 
it  becomes  queenly.’ — Deighton  :  Each  movement  of  yours,  every  trait  of  manner, 
so  unique  of  its  kind,  so  individual  to  yourself,  in  every  part  and  portion  of  it,  gives 
a  crown  of  glory  to  whatever  you  are  doing  at  any  particular  moment,  so  that  all  your 


202 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 

1 66 


(So  fingular,  in  each  particular) 

Crownes  what  you  are  doing,  in  the  prefent  deeds, 

That  all  your  A6tes,  are  Queenes. 

Perd.  O  Doric les , 

Your  praifes  are  too  large  :  but  that  your  youth  170 

And  the  true  blood  which  peepes  fairely  through’t, 

Do  plainly  giue  you  out  an  vnflain’d  Sphepherd 

With  wifedome,  I  might  feare  (my  Doricles )  173 


167.  you  are]  you' re  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Huds. 

deeds]  deed  Spedding  ap.  Cam. 

168.  Queenes ]  queen' s  Sing.  Ktly. 

1 71.  peepes. ..through.' t]  Ff,  Knt,  Cam. 
peeps  forth... through  it  Rowe  +  .  peeps 
so. . .through.' t  Cap.  Wh.  i,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Rife,  peeps. ..through  itV ar.  ’78,  Rann, 


Mai.  Var.  ’21,  Coll,  i,  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta. 
fairly  peeps  through  it  Steev.  Var.  ’03, 
’13,  Ktly.  peeps  so. ..through  it  Coll,  ii, 
iii  (MS).  peepeth...through't  Glo.  Wh. 
ii,  Dtn. 

I72>  1 73-  Sphepherd. ..wifedome,]  Ff. 
shepherd, ...wisdom.,  Rowe,  Pope,  shep¬ 
herd ;  ...wisdom  Theob.  et  seq  (subs.). 


acts  are  queens,  sovereign  in  nature,  supreme  in  excellence.  [Whatever  difficulty 
there  is  in  this  passage  lies  in  the  phrase  ‘  in  the  present  deeds.’  It  does  not  seem  to 
have  occurred  to  any  of  the  critics  that  in  these  words  Florizel  is  referring  to  Perdita’s 
present  distribution  of  flowers  and  to  her  bearing  toward  her  guests.  Had  the  phrase 
been  ‘  at  the  present  time,’  which  is,  I  think,  its  equivalent  in  meaning,  no  one,  I  sup¬ 
pose,  would  have  deemed  the  sentence  corrupt  or  mutilated.  The  whole  sentence  may 
be  paraphrased  :  Your  way  of  doing  everything  (so  peculiarly  your  own  in  every  par¬ 
ticular)  crowns  what  you  are  at  present  doing,  so  that  all  your  acts  are  queens’.— Ed.] 
168.  are  Queenes]  Singer  :  ‘  Are  queen’s,’  i.  e.  the  acts  of  a  queen.  [A  reading, 
which,  as  Deighton  says,  is  not  an  improvement.] 

171.  peepes  fairely]  Malone:  So  Marlowe,  in  his  Hero  and  Leander 
‘  Through  whose  white  skin,  softer  than  soundest  sleep,  W’ith  damask  eyes  the  ruby 
blood  doth  peep.’ [  Third  Sestiad,  lines  39,  40.  This  is  within  the  limit  which  is  as¬ 
signed  to  Marlowe  as  his  share  of  the  Poem],  Both  Collier’s  MS  and  Capell  in¬ 
sert  so  before  *  fairly  ’ ;  the  Text.  Notes  will  show  other  devices  to  which  Editors  have 
resorted  in  order  to  impart  rhythm  to  this  line  of  prose.— R.  G.  White  is  outspoken 
in  his  confidence  that  some  addition  is  necessary,  and  Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  104)  pro¬ 
posed  so,  unaware  that  he  had  been  anticipated.  ‘  I  feel  assured,’  he  says,  ‘  that 
Shakespeare  wrote,  “which  peep  so  fairly,”  etc.  This,  it  is  true,  heightens,— or 
rather  makes  more  palpable,— the  unintentional  compliment  to  Florizel ;  but  this  is 
only  in  keeping  with  the  frank  simplicity  of  the  princely  shepherdess.  Perhaps  the 
contiguity  of  ‘/airly  ’  to  so  [/and  long  s  being  next  neighbours  in  the  printer’s  case— 
Lettsom]  misled  the  compositor.’— Staunton  :  The  rhythm  does  not  require  the  addi¬ 
tion  [of  so] ;  we  need  only  make  a  slight  transposition  and  read ‘  And  the  true 
blood  which  through  it  fairly  peeps.’  [It  should  be  noted  that  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  260) 
includes  this  phrase  :  ‘  peep*  so  >  among  his  examples  of  ‘  absorption,’  under  which 
head,  I  think,  it  undoubtedly  belongs,  and  that  so  is  really  present  in  the  line.— Ed.] 
I72>  r73-  Sphepherd  With  wisedome,]  Corson  (Introd.  p.  367):  All  modern 
editors,  so  far  as  I  know,  pervert  the  true  meaning  of  this  passage  by  changing  the 
punctuation  of  Fx ;  that  is,  by  putting  a  comma  after  ‘  shepherd  ’  and  omitting’  that 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


203 


You  woo’d  me  the  falfe  way. 

Flo .  I  thinke  you  haue  175 

As  little  skill  to  feare,  as  I  haue  purpofe 

176.  skill  ]  call  Daniel.  176.  to  feare\  in  fear  it  an. 

after  ‘  wisdom,’  thus  connecting  the  phrase  ‘  With  wisdom  ’  with  ‘  I  might  fear.’  But 
it  is  properly,  as  indicated  by  the  Folio  punctuation,  connected  with  ‘  unstain’d,’  the 
meaning  being  ‘  a  shepherd  unstain’d  with  wisdom,’  that  is,  an  unsophisticated  shep¬ 
herd,  who,  according  to  Perdita’s  meaning,  says  what  he  thinks,  frankly,  and  without 
reserve,  and  also  without  flattery.  This  construction  had  its  origin  in  the  inflected 
period  of  the  language.  For  example,  the  Anglo-Saxon  version  of  John,  i,  9, 
reads  :  ‘  Soth  Ledht  wses,  thset  onlyht  selcne  cumendne  man  on  thysne  middan-eard,’ 
that  is,  ‘  True  light  [it]  was,  that  lighteth  each  coming  man  into  this  mid-earth,’  in¬ 
stead  of  ‘  each  man  coming  into  this  mid-earth.’  [Although  this  transposition  of  the 
adjective  or  participle  is  common  enough  in  Shakespeare, — Walker  ( Cnt .  i,  160) 
gives  nearly  twenty  pages  of  examples,  and  Abbott,  §419  a,  cited  by  Corson,  gives 
also  many  examples, — yet  I  think  it  extremely  doubtful  that  there  is  such  a  transposi¬ 
tion  in  the  present  instance.  ‘ Unstained  with  wisdom’  conveys  an  idea  which  can¬ 
not  be  adopted  without  pause.  To  imply  that  the  possession  of  wisdom  leaves  a 
stain  on  the  character  is  unusual,  to  say  the  least.  To  paraphrase  it  by  ‘  sophisticated  ’ 
is  to  tone  down  a  very  strong  expression  to  a  mild  one.  Are  we  to  infer  that  had 
Florizel  given  proofs  of  wisdom  Perdita  would  have  been  afraid  of  him  ?  Such  must 
be  the  case  if  we  believe  that  while  he  was  ‘  unstained  with  wisdom  ’  she  could  trust 
him.  I  think  the  modern  editors,  following  Theobald,  are  right  in  the  punctuation 
of  the  present  passage. — Ed.] 

176.  skill  to  feare]  Warburton  :  To  have  skill  to  do  a  thing  was  a  phrase  then 
in  use  equivalent  to  our  to  have  a  reason  to  do  a  thing. — Heath  (p.  216) :  Skill  is 
generally  obtained  by  experience  and  frequent  practice.  I  apprehend  Florizel’s 
meaning  is :  ‘  I  have  given  you  so  little  occasion  for  fear,  since  my  acquaintance  with 
you,  that  you  as  little  know  how  to  begin  to  fear  me,  as  I  am  from  giving  you  any 
just  ground  for  doing  it.’ [Quoted  with  approval  by  Halliwell.] — Capell:  This  is 
a  compliment  to  his  mistress’s  innocence ;  for  the  innocent  themselves  are  disposed 
to  think  others  so,  and  unapprehensive  of  harm  to  them. — M.  Mason  (p.  135)  :  I 
cannot  approve  of  Warburton’s  explanation  of  this  passage,  or  believe  that  to  have  a 
skill  to  do  a  thing  ever  meant  to  have  reason  to  do  it;  of  which,  when  he  offered  it, 
he  ought  to  have  produced  one  example  at  least.  The  fears  of  women  on  such  oc¬ 
casions  are  generally  owing  to  their  experience ;  they  fear,  as  they  blush,  because 
they  understand ;  it  is  to  this  that  Florizel  alludes  when  he  says  that  Perdita  had 
‘  little  skill  to  fear.’  So  Juliet  says  to  Romeo :  ‘  But  trust  me,  gentleman,  I’ll  prove 
more  true  Than  those  that  have  more  cunning  to  be  strange.’ — Malone  :  ‘  You  as 
little  know  how  to  fear  that  I  am  false,  as,’  etc. — Dyce  ( Remarks ,  p.  83)  :  Warburton 
was  surely  right  in  explaining  ‘  skill  ’  reason.  The  word  with  that  meaning  is  very 
common  in  our  earliest  writers,  and  is  occasionally  found  in  those  of  Shakespeare’s 
time  :  ‘  Hence  Englands  Heires  apparant  haue  of  Wales  bin  Princes,  till  Our  Queene 
deceast  conceald  her  Heire,  I  wot  not  for  what  skill.' — Warner’s  Continuance  of 
Albion's  England,  1606,  p.  415.  [In  his  Gloss.  Dyce  added:  ‘For  in  that  desert  is 
fulle  defaute  of  watre  :  and  often  time  it  fallethe,  that  where  men  fynden  watre  at  o 
tyme  in  a  place,  it  faylethe  another  tyme.  And  for  that  skylle,  thei  make  none  habi- 


204 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


To  put  you  to’t.  But  come,  our  dance  I  pray,  177 

Your  hand  (my  Perdita :)  fo  Turtles  paire 
That  neuer  meane  to  part. 

Perd.  He  fweare  for  ’em.  180 

Pol.  This  is  the  prettied:  Low-borne  Laffe,  that  euer 
Ran  on  the  greene-ford  :  Nothing  the  do’s,  or  feemes 
But  fmackes  of  fomething  greater  then  her  felfe, 

Too  Noble  for  this  place.  jg^ 


1 80.  for  ’em]  for  them  Cap.  for  one 
Ritson,  Theob.  conj.,  Rann. 

[Music.  Dance  forming.  Cap. 

181.  prettiejl]  pettiest  Pope  i. 


182.  greene-ford]  Rowe +  ,  Cap.  Ktly. 
green-sward  Var.  ’73. 

feemes]  says  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS), 
Wh.  i.  deems  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 


taciouns  there.’  The  Voiage  and  Travaile  of  Sir  John  Maundevile,  etc.,  p.  78,  ed. 
J725  ] — Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Dyce  might  find  various  proofs  [that  ‘skill  ’  means  reason] 
in  Richardson’s  Diet.,  without  taking  the  trouble  to  search  in  Warner.  I  was  so 
confident  that  the  passage  would  be  well  understood  that  I  did  not  think  any  informa¬ 
tion  of  the  kind  necessary.  Some  notes  are  written  to  illustrate  an  author,  others  to 
illustrate  a  commentator ;  the  latter  maybe  usually  omitted. — Halliwell:  ‘Skill,’ 
reason.  This  archaic  use  of  the  word  was  not  quite  obsolete  in  Shakespeare’s  time, 
and  it  seems  most  natural  to  thus  interpret  it  in  this  passage. — R.  G.  White  :  ‘  Skill  ’ 
was  used  in  the  sense  of  cunning,  knowledge,  and  so,  of  reason-,  which  last  is  its 
meaning  here,  as  Warburton  first  pointed  out. 

178.  Turtles]  Harting  (p.  191)  ■  The  Turtle-dove  ( Columba  turtur )  has  been 
noticed  by  poets  in  all  ages  as  an  emblem  of  love  and  constancy. 

180.  lie  sweare  for  ’em]  Johnson:  I  fancy  this  half  line  is  placed  to  a  wrong 
person.  And  that  the  king  begins  his  speech  aside  ‘  Pol.  <  I’ll  swear  for  ’em,  This 
is,’  etc.— Ritson  {Remarks,  p.  70)  :  We  should  doubtless  read  thus ‘  I’ll  swear  for 
onel  *•  e-  1  wil1  answer  or  engage  for  myself.  Some  alteration  is  absolutely  necessary. 
This  seems  the  easiest,  and  the  reply  will  then  be  perfectly  becoming  her  character. 
[That  is,  ‘  becoming  to  the  character  ’  of  Ritson’s  Perdita.  Theobald  made  the  same 
conjecture  in  his  correspondence  with  Warburton ;  see  Nichols,  Illust.  ii,  364.  Any 
alteration  is  absolutely  wwnecessary.  See  Tennyson  in  Appendix,  p.  359. — Ed.] 

182.  greene-sord]  Dyce  {Few  Notes,  p.  80)  :  The  modem  editors  print  ‘  green- 
sward' ;  but  the  other  was  undoubtedly  Shakespeare’s  form  of  the  word.  Milton 
also  wrote  it  ‘  sord  ’ ;  ‘  I’  the  midst  an  altar  as  the  land-mark  stood,  Rustic,  of  grassy 
sord.’ — Par.  Lost,  xi,  433  (where  Fenton  substituted  sod;  but  Newton  and  Todd 
restored  the  old  reading).  .  .  .  Coles,  in  his  English-Latin  Diet.  (sub.  Sword),  gives : 

‘  The  green  sword,  Cespes.’ 

182.  seemes]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  MS  tells  us  to  read  says  for  ‘seems,’  and 
we  readily  believe  him.— R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  Inasmuch  as  says  was  written  saies 
m  Shakespeare’s  day,  and  ‘  nothing  she  seems  ’  has  no  acceptable  meaning  here,  the 
correction  of  Collier’s  MS  is  received  into  the  text.  [In  his  ed.  ii,  White  returned  to 
‘seems’  without  comment.]— Daniel  (p.  46):  Qy.  read:  ‘Nothing  she  does  but 
seems  Or  smacks,’  etc.  The  reading  of  Collier’s  MS  is,  however,  to  my  mind  prefer¬ 
able.  [I  can  see  no  need  of  change. — Ed.] 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


205 

185 


Cam.  He  tels  her  fomething 
That  makes  her  blood  looke  on’t :  Good  (both  the  is 
The  Queene  of  Curds  and  Creame. 

Clo.  Come  on :  ftrike  vp. 

Dorcas.  Mopfa  muft  be  your  Miftris  :  marry  Garlick 
to  mend  her  killing  with.  190 


186.  makes. ..on't]  wakes  her  blood . 
look  on't  Coll,  ii  (MS). 

looke  on't ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope  i, 
Coll,  i,  ii,  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  look  out  Theob. 
et  cet. 


189,  190.  Prose,  Ff,  Rowe  +  .  Divid¬ 
ing  lines  as  in  F,,  Han.  Cap.  et  seq. 

189.  marry]  marry,  Theob.  et  seq. 

190.  with.]  with. —  Theob.  i.  with — 
Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns,  with  !  Cam. 


186.  makes  her  blood  look  on’t]  Theobald:  I  dare  say  1  have  restored  the 
true  reading  [out]  ;  and  the  meaning  must  be  this :  the  prince  tells  her  something 
that  calls  the  blood  up  into  her  cheeks,  and  makes  her  blush.  She,  but  a  little  before, 
uses  a  like  expression  to  describe  the  prince’s  sincerity,  which  appeared  in  the  honest 
blood  rising  on  his  face  : — 4  And  the  true  blood,  which  peeps  forth  fairly  through  it.' 
— Knight  :  We  are  not  quite  sure  that  Theobald's  correction  is  necessary.  The  idea 
reminds  one  of  the  fine  line  in  Donne : — 4  Her  pure  and  eloquent  blood  Spoke  in  her 
veins,  and  such  expression  wrought,  You  might  have  almost  said  her  body  thought.’ 
— Collier  (ed.  ii,  where  his  text  reads  :  ‘  That  wakes  her  blood  :  look  on’t.’) :  It  was 
a  not  uncommon  error  for  our  old  printers  to  use  m  for  w  and  vice  versa.  Such, 
according  to  the  MS,  was  the  case  here,  4  makes  ’  having  been  inserted  for  wakes. 
Camillo  calls  the  attention  of  Polixenes  to  the  innocent  blush  Florizel  has  raised  upon 
the  cheek  of  Perdita,  and  he  beautifully  speaks  of  it  as  having  4  waked  her  blood,’ 
and  called  it  up  into  her  face.  .  .  .  Our  lection  is  a  most  charming  restoration ;  and 
the  colon  after  4  blood  ’  was  also  inserted  by  the  MS.  In  Marlowe’s  Tamburlainc, 
Pt.  II,  Act  V,  sc.  i,  the  very  same  blunder  is  committed  by  the  printer  of  the  4to,  who 
has  given  the  text,  ‘And  make  black  Jove  to  crouch  and  kneel  to  me,’  when  it  ought 
unquestionably  to  be,  ‘And  wake  black  Jove,’  etc.,  as,  indeed,  the  text  stands  in  the 
early  8vo  edition.  [Collier  deserted  this  4  charming  restoration  ’  in  his  subsequent 
edition.]— Lettsom  ( Blackwod ,  Aug.  1853,  p.  201):  Theobald’s  4  look  out  ’  is  the 
received  reading,  and  an  excellent  emendation  it  is.  But  on  the  whole  we  prefer 
Collier’s  MS,  which,  though  perhaps  not  quite  so  poetical  as  Theobald’s,  strikes  us  as 
more  natural  and  simple  when  taken  with  the  context.  On  second  thoughts,  we  are 
not  sure  that  it  is  not  more  poetic  and  dramatic  than  the  other.  At  any  rate,  we  give 
it  our  suffrage. — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  Collier’s  MS  utterly  destroys  this  vivid  and 
beautiful  figurative  expression  of  the  sudden  mounting  of  the  blood  into  a  maiden’s 
cheek  at  the  words  of  her  lover. — Dyce  ( Strictures ,  p.  84) :  To  my  thinking  Theo¬ 
bald’s  emendation  is  much  more  probable,  and  does  much  less  violence  to  the  old 
text  than  Collier’s  MS.  The  misprint  of  ‘on’t’  for  out  is  very  common  in  early 
books ;  e.  g.  4  Princes  may  pick  their  suffering  noble  on't,’  etc. — Fletcher’s  Bloody 
Brother,  IV,  i.  Also  Twelfth  Night ,  III,  iv,  222  :  4  And  laid  my  honour  too  unchary 
on't.’ — Staunton  adds  Cym.  II,  iii,  48  : — 4  Must  wear  the  print  of  his  remembrance 
on't.' 

189.  marry]  This  is  the  common  expletive.  From  the  absence  of  a  comma  after  it, 
it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Dorcas  advises  the  Clown  to  woo  and  wed  garlick, 


206 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Mop.  Now  in  good  time. 

Clo.  Not  a  word,  a  word,  we  ftand  vpon  our  manners, 
Come,  ftrike  vp. 

Heere  a  Daunce  of  Shepheards  and 
Shephearddeffes. 

Pol .  Pray  good  Shepheard,  what  faire  Swaine  is  this, 
Which  dances  with  your  daughter  ? 

Shep.  They  call  him  Doricles,  and  boafts  himfelfe 
To  haue  a  worthy  Feeding  ;  but  I  haue  it 


191 


195 


199 


192,  193.  Prose,  Pope  +  . 

193,  196.  Come. ..what]  One  line,  Cap. 
Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Sing. 

I93-  ftrike  vp.]  strike  up,  pipers 
[Dance.  Cap. 

[Musick.  Mai. 

196.  Pray]  I  pray  Han.  Pray  you 
Walker,  Ktly. 

197.  Which]  Who  Pope  + . 


198.  and  boafs]  and  he  boasts  V.oy/z  + , 
Var.  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13, 
Ktly.  he  boasts  Cap.  'a  boasts  Mai. 
conj. 

199.  Feeding]  breeding  Han.  Warb. 
Coll.  (MS). 

but... it]  I  have  it  but  Hunter, 
Sing.  Ktly.  I  but  have  it  Walker,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Coll,  iii,  Huds. 


although  it  is  not  impossible  that  such  was  the  interpretation  of  the  compositor. 
Mopsa’s  reply  is  the  exclamation,  so  frequent  in  Shakespeare,  which  adapts  itself  to 
every  varying  mood.  Here,  of  course,  it  is  that  of  intense  indignation. — Ed. 

192-196.  Not  .  .  .  Pray]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  105)  proposes  to  divide,  and  read : 
‘  Not  a  word,  a  word ;  j  We  stand  upon  our  manners. — Come,  strike  up.  |  Pol.  Pray 
you,  good,’  etc.  ‘  The  converse  error,  pray  you  for  pray l  he  adds,  ‘  is  very  common ; 
in  Beaumont  and  Fletcher  alone  it  has  vitiated  the  metre  in  some  hundreds  of  places.’ 
[Walker  failed  to  see  that  the  Clown’s  speeches  throughout  are  in  prose — a  mistake 
into  which  some  modern  editors  have  also  fallen. — Ed.] 

^99-  worthy  Feeding]  Johnson:  I  conceive  ‘feeding’  to  be  a  pasture,  and  a 
‘  worthy  feeding  ’  to  be  a  tract  of  pasturage  not  inconsiderable,  not  unworthy  of  my 
daughter’s  fortune.— Steevens  :  Dr  Johnson’s  explanation  is  just.  So  in  Drayton’s 
Mooncalf  [near  the  end]  :  ‘  Finding  the  feeding,  for  which  he  had  toil’d  To  have 
kept  safe,  by  these  vile  cattle  spoil’d.’  Again,  in  the  Sixth  [Seventh]  Song  of 
Polyolbion,  ‘  —so  much  that  do  rely  Upon  their  feedings,  flocks,  and  their  fertility.’ 

199.  but  I  haue  it]  The  Text.  Notes  show  the  changes  here  made  under  the 
cover  of  transposition.  Abbott  (§  128)  says  that  ‘  but  ’  perhaps  means  only ■  ‘that 
is,  “I  have  it  merely  on  his  own  report,  and  I  believe  it  too.”  ’ — Rolfe  :  We  may 
perhaps  explain  the  ‘  but  ’  here  by  taking  the  words  that  follow  as  an  emphatic  addi¬ 
tion  to  what  precedes :  he  boasts  that  he  has  a  good  farm  ;  but  as  I  have  his  word 
for  it,  I  believe  him,  for  he  looks  truthful.  Or  we  may  say  it  is  one  of  those  cases  in 
which  an  intermediate  thought  is  ‘  understood  ’  but  not  expressed  :  he  boasts  of  his- 
farm  ;  [a  mere  boast  you  may  say]  but  I  have  his  word  for  it,  etc.  [Instead  of  tor¬ 
turing  ‘  but  ’  would  it  not  be  simpler  to  consider  the  clause  :  ‘  boasts  himself  to  have- 
a  worthy  feeding  ’  as  an  indirect  quotation,  a  continuation,  in  fact,  of  the  common 
report  which  gives  him  the  name  Doricles  ?  ‘  They  call  him  Doricles  and  (they  say) 

boasts  himself  to  have,’  etc.  In  this  way,  the  adversative  ‘  but  ’  retains  its  ordinary 
foice :  ‘  but,  on  the  other  hand,  I  have  it  upon  his  own  report,’  etc. _ Ed.] 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


207 


Vpon  his  owne  report,  and  I  beleeue  it  :  200 

He  lookes  like  footh  :  he  fayes  he  loues  my  daughter, 

I  thinke  fo  too  ;  for  neuer  gaz’d  the  Moone 
Vpon  the  water,  as  hee’l  ftand  and  reade 
As  ’twere  my  daughters  eyes  :  and  to  be  plaine, 

I  thinke  there  is  not  halfe  a  kiffe  to  choofe  205 

Who  loues  another  beft. 

Pol.  She  dances  featly. 

Shep.  So  fhe  do’s  any  thing,  though  I  report  it 
That  fhould  be  filent  :  If  yong  Doricles 

Do  light  vpon  her,  fhe  fhall  bring  him  that  210 

Which  he  not  dreames  of.  Enter  Seruant. 

Ser.  O  Matter  :  if  you  did  but  heare  the  Pedler  at  the 
doore,  you  would  neuer  dance  againe  after  a  Tabor  and 
Pipe  :  no,  the  Bag-pipe  could  not  moue  you  :  hee  Tinges 
feuerall  Tunes,  fafter  then  you’l  tell  money  :  hee  vtters  215 
them  as  he  had  eaten  ballads,  and  all  mens  eares  grew  to 
his  Tunes.  217 


206.  Who...befl.~\  Which  loves  the 
other  best.  Han.  Who  loves  the  other 
best.  Rann.  Who  loves  the  other  more. 
M.  Mason. 


208.  So  fhe\  She  Warb. 

211.  Scene  vi.  Pope-f. 

216.  grew ]  grow  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Han. 
Huds. 


201.  sooth]  That  is,  truth  ;  of  which  Schmidt  will  give  many  examples. 

203,204.  reade  .  .  .  eyes]  Whiter  (p.  1 14) :  The  following  passages,  in  which 
the  author  was  not  led  by  his  subject  into  this  train  of  ideas,  will  perfectly  convince 
the  reader,  that  the  book  and  the  eye  of  beauty  (whatever  might  be  the  cause  of  so 
strange  an  association)  were  deeply  engrafted  on  the  imagination  -of  the  Poet : — 
‘Reason  becomes  the  marshal  to  my  will,  And  leads  me  to  your  eyes;  when  I  o’er- 
look  Love's  stories,  written  in  Love’s  richest  book.' —Mid.  N.  D.  II,  ii,  120;  ‘If  that 
the  Dauphin  there,  thy  princely  son,  Can  in  this  book  of  beauty  read,  “  I  love.”  .  .  . 
K.  Philip.  What  say’st  thou,  boy  ?  look  in  the  lady’s  face.  Lewis.  I  do,  my  lord ; 
and  in  her  eye  I  find  A  wonder,  or  a  wondrous  miracle.’ — King  fohn,  II,  ii,  484-497. 
[To  these  examples  is  added  the  present  passage.] 

206.  another  best]  Abbott  (§  88) :  An  is  apparently  here  put  for  the.  This  is, 
however,  in  accordance  with  our  common  idiom :  ‘  they  love  one  an  other,’  which 
ought  strictly  to  be  either,  ‘  they  love,  the  one  the  other,’  or  ‘  they  love,  one  other.’ 
The  latter  form  is  still  retained  in  ‘  they  love  each  other ;’  but  as  in  ‘  one  other,’  there  is 
great  ambiguity,  it  was  avoided  by  the  insertion  of  a  second  ‘  one  ’  or  ‘  an,’  thus,  ‘  they 
love  one  an-other.’  This  is  illustrated  by  Matt,  xxiv,  10  (Tyndale)  :  ‘  And  shall  be- 
traye  one  another  and  shall  hate  one  the  other;’  whereas  Wickliffe  has,  ‘  ech  other.’ 

21 1.  not  dreames  of]  For  many  examples  of  the  omission  of  do  before  not ,  see 
Abbott  (§  305).  Also  lines  456  and  528,  below. 

215.  tell]  That  is,  count;  still  in  use  as  the  title  of  an  officer  in  a  bank. 


208 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Clo.  He  could  neuer  come  better  :  hee  fhall  come  in  :  218 

I  loue  a  ballad  but  euen  too  well,  if  it  be  dolefull  matter 
merrily  fet  downe  :  or  a  very  pleafant  thing  indeede,  and  220 
fung  lamentably. 

Ser.  He  hath  fongs  for  man,  or  woman,  of  all  fizes  : 

No  Milliner  can  fo  fit  his  cnftomers  with  Gloues:  he  has 
the  prettieft  Loue-fongs  for  Maids,  fo  without  bawdrie 
(which  is  ftrange,)  with  fuch  delicate  burthens  of  Dil-  225 
do’s  and  Fadings  :  Iump-her,  and  thump-her;  and  where 

223.  cnftomers\  Fz.  Warb.  Cap.  Var.  Rann.  didle-do s 

225.  burthens ]  burdens  Johns.  Johns. 

Dildo's']  dil-do's  Theob.  Han.  226.  Fadings ]  fapings  Rowe  ii,  Pope. 

fa-dings  Theob. +  ,  Cap. 


219,  220.  dolefull  .  .  .  merrily]  Steevens:  This  seems  to  be  another  stroke 
aimed  at  the  title-page  of  Preston’s  Cambises  :  ‘A  lamentable  tragedy  mixed  full  of 
pleasant  mirth,’  etc.  [Cf.  ‘  very  tragicall  mirth.’ — Mid.  N.  D.  V,  i,  64.] 

222.  of  all  sizes]  Deighton  :  As  though  he  were  talking  of  fitting  a  person  with 
a  garment,  and  he  goes  on  immediately  to  speak  of  a  milliner  fitting  his  customers 
with  gloves. 

223.  his  customers]  Malone  :  In  the  time  of  our  author  and  long  afterward  the 
trade  of  a  milliner  was  carried  on  by  men. 

225.  Dildo’s]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.) :  A  word  of  obscure  origin  used  in  the  re¬ 
frains  of  ballads.  [It  had  also  a  coarse  meaning  which  at  times  gave  point  to  the 
refrain. — Ed.] 

226.  Fadings]  Theobald  ( Nichols ,  ii,  364)  called  attention  to  this  word  in  Beau. 
&  Fl.’s  Knight  of  the  Burning  Pestle,  III,  v :  ‘  George,  I  will  have  him  dance  fading 
— Fading  is  a  fine  jig  ’  [*.  e.  a  merry  song  or  ballad]. — Tyrwhitt  added  the  follow¬ 
ing  from  Jonson’s  Irish  Masque  :  ‘and  daunsh  a  fading  at  te  vedding,’  [p.  240,  where 
Gifford  remarks  of  ‘  fading  ’  that  ‘  this  word,  which  was  the  burden  of  a  popular  Irish 
song,  gave  the  name  to  a  dance  frequently  noticed  by  our  old  dramatists.  Both  the 
song  and  the  dance  appear  to  have  been  of  a  licentious  kind.’]  From  some  Irish 
antiquaries  to  whom  he  applied  Malone  received  the  following  information  concern¬ 
ing  this  dance ;  ‘It  is  called  Rinca  Fada,  and  means  literally  *  the  long  dance.’ 
Though  faed  is  a  reed,  the  name  of  the  dance  is  not  borrowed  from  it ;  “  fada  is  the 
adj.,  long,  and  rinca  the  subst.,  dance.”  In  Irish  the  adj.  follows  the  subst.,  differ¬ 
ing  from  the  English  construction  ;  hence  rinca  fada  ;  faedan  is  the  diminutive,  and 
means  little  reed ;  faedan  is  the  first  person  of  the  verb  to  whistle ,  either  with  the  lips 
or  with  a  reed,  i.  e.  I  whistle.  This  dance  is  still  practised  [*.  e.  in  1803]  on  re¬ 
joicing  occasions  in  many  parts  of  Ireland ;  a  king  and  queen  are  chosen  from 
amongst  the  young  persons  who  are  the  best  dancers ;  the  queen  carries  a  garland 
composed  of  two  hoops  placed  at  right  angles,  and  fastened  to  a  handle  ;  the  hoops 
are  covered  with  flowers  and  ribbands ;  you  have  seen  it,  I  dare  say,  with  the  May- 
maids.  Frequently  in  the  course  of  the  dance  the  king  and  queen  lift  up  their  joined 
hands  as  high  as  they  can,  she  still  holding  the  garland  in  the  other.  The  most  re¬ 
mote  couple  from  the  king  and  queen  first  pass  under ;  all  the  rest  of  the  line  linked 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


209 


fome  ftretch-mouth’d  Rafcall,  would  (as  it  were)  meane  227 
mifcheefe,  and  breake  a  fowle  gap  into  the  Matter,  hee 

228.  gap]  jape  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  Sing.  Wh.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

together  follow  in  succession ;  when  the  last  has  passed,  the  king  and  queen  suddenly 
face  about  and  front  their  companions  ;  this  is  often  repeated  during  the  dance,  and 
the  various  undulations  are  pretty  enough,  resembling  the  movements  of  a  serpent. 
The  dancers  on  the  first  of  May  visit  such  newly-wedded  pairs  of  a  certain  rank  as 
have  been  married  since  last  May-day  in  the  neighbourhood,  who  commonly  bestow 
on  them  a  stuffed  ball  richly  decked  with  gold  and  silver  lace  (this  I  never  heard  of 
before),  and  accompanied  with  a  present  of  money,  to  regale  themselves  after  the 
dance.  This  dance  is  practised  when  the  bonfires  are  lighted  up,  the  queen  hailing 
the  return  of  summer  in  a  popular  Irish  song,  beginning :  “  Thuga  mair  sein  en  soure 
ving” — We  lead  on  summer,— see  !  she  follows  in  our  train.’  [Quoted  by  Knight 
and  Halliwell.] — Malone  gives  a  stanza  with  the  refrain,  With  a  fading,  from  a 
song  in  Sportive  Wit,  1656,  p.  58;  and  Chappell  (p.  235)  gives  the  whole  song  and 
the  music  of  it,  and  remarks  that  ‘  With  a  fading  (or  fadding )  seems  to  be  used  as  a 
nonsense-burden,  like  Derry  down.  Hey  nonny,  nonny  no,  etc.’ — Lastly,  Bradley 
(New  Eng.  Diet.)  says  the  ‘  Etymology  is  unknown;  the  Irish  feadan,  pipe,  whistle, 
has  been  suggested ;  but  cf.  Fade,  “  To  dance  from  town  to  country  ”  (  W.  Cornw. 
Gloss.).' 

226.  Iump-her,  and  thump-her]  Collier  :  The  burdens  of  old  songs  and  bal¬ 
lads,  mentioned  in  writers  of  the  time,  and  employed  long  before  and  afterwards. 

228.  gap]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  adopts  the  word  substituted  by  his  MS,  jape,  i.  e.  a  jest. 
Lettsom  (Blackwood,  1853,  Aug.)  approved  of  it. — R.  G.  White  accepts  it  not  as  a 
substitution,  but  as  a  variant  spelling  of  ‘  gap,’  and  says  :  ‘  The  word  meant,  not  a  jest, 
as  Collier  defines  it,  but  a  coarse  and  boisterous  explosion  of  mirth,  and  was  oftener 
spelled  with  a  g  than  a  j,  though  always  pronounced  jape.  See  Arnim’s  Nest  of 
Ninnies  :  “  So  shee,  forgetting  modesty,  gapte  out  a  laughter,”  p.  32,  Shak.  Soc.  ed.’ 
— Dyce,  who  also  prints  jape,  and  defines  it  as  a  jest,  observes  ‘  Grant  White  is  quite 
mistaken  when  he  asserts  that  it  does  not  mean  a  jest;  ...  in  the  passage,  which  he 
cites  from  the  Nest  of  Ninnies,  “gapte”  is  merely  gaped.  The  verbs  to  gape  and  to 
jape  are  perfectly  distinct  words.’ — Staunton  :  A  1  foul  gap  ’  means  a  gross  paren¬ 
thesis.  See  Puttenham’s  Arte  of  Poesie,  Lib.  iii,  cxiii,  under  Parenthesis  or  the 
Insertour  [where,  after  giving  the  example  of  a  parenthesis  extending  beyond  three 
lines,  the  author  remarks :  ‘  This  insertion  is  very  long  and  vtterly  impertinent  to  the 
principall  matter,  and  makes  a  great  gappe  in  the  tale,’  etc.,  p.  1S1,  ed.  Arber. 
R.  G.  White,  in  his  Second  Edition,  abandoned  the  interpretation  given  in  his  First, 
and  merely  notes  that  1  jape  is  equivalent  to  a  coarse  jest.’  A  ‘  foul  jape  ’  is  a  ‘  coarse 
jest  ’ ;  but  jape  of  itself  is  merely  a  jest ;  and  when  White  adds  that,  ‘  the  word  had 
a  very  indecent  sense  ’  he  asserts  what  is  only  half  true,  and,  moreover,  true  of  the 
verb,  not,  I  think,  of  the  noun.  In  Elyot’s  Governour  (ii,  440,  ed.  Croft)  we  find : 

‘  beinge  in  this  wyse  fournysshed,  translatynge  iapes  and  thynges  to  mater  serious  and 
true,  he,’  etc.,  whereon  there  is  the  following  note  by  the  excellent  editor :  <  In  the 
author’s  [*’.  e.  Elyot’s]  Dictionary  we  find  the  Latin  verb  alludere  translated,  “  to 
doo  a  thynge  in  iape,  to  speake  merily  or  consent ;  somtyme  it  sygnifieth  to  speake 
some  thynge  which  secretly  hath  some  other  understandyng.”  The  Prompt.  Parv. 
gives  “  Iape,  nuga,  frivolum,  scurrilitas,  Iaper,  nugax,  nugaculus.  Iapyn  (or  tryflon) 

14 


210 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


makes  the  maid  to  anfwere,  Whoop ,  doe  me  no  harme good 

man  :  put’s  him  off,  flights  him,  with  Whoop ,  doe  mee  no  230 

harme  good  man. 

Pol.  This  is  a  braue  fellow. 

Clo.  Beleeee  mee,  thou  talked:  of  an  admirable  con¬ 
ceited  fellow,  has  he  any  vnbraided  Wares  ?  234 

233-  Beleeee~\  Ft.  234.  vnbraided ]  embroided  Coll,  ii, 

233>  234-  admirable  conceited~\  Hy-  iii  (MS),  Huds.  embroider’d  Kinnear. 
phened  by  all  edd.  after  Theob.  except  Wares  /]  Warres  :  F  . 

Sing.  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 


trupho,  illudo,  ludifico,  deludo.”  While  Palsgrave  has  “  Jape,  a  trifyll —truffe,  s.  f.” 
and  “  I  jape,  I  try  fie,  Je  truffe,  or  je  truffle,  and  je  me  bourde,  prim.  conj.  I  dyd  but 
jape  with  hym,  and  he  toke  it  in  good  emest ;  je  tie  me  fys  que  truffer,  or  je  tie  me 

fis  que  truffer,  or  je  ne  me  pis  que  bourder  a  luy,et  il  le  print  a  bon  esciant." _ 

L  Esclaireissment,  pp.  233,  589.  It  was  also  used  in  a  coarse  sense  which  Palsgrave 
renders  into  [a]  French  equivalent.  We  find  both  verb  and  substantive  constantly  in 
Chaucer.  I  find  two  difficulties  in  accepting  jape :  first,  it  is  too  plausible.  It  is  to 
be  always  borne  in  mind  that  of  two  readings  the  less  obvious  is  to  be  preferred ; 
*  gaP  ’  is  certainly  less  obvious  than  jape.  Moreover,  White’s  assertion  is  doubtful : 
that  jape  was  oftener  spelt  with  a  g  than  a  j.  This  has  not  been  my  observation, 
and  if  the  ‘  copy  ’  were  dictated  to  the  compositors,  as  is  probable,  the  two  words 
could  not  have  been  confounded.  Secondly,  the  phrase  ‘  to  break  a  jest  into  the 
matter  ’  is  of  doubtful  propriety.  It  is  certainly  unusual.  The  same  does  not  hold 
good  of  the  phrase  ‘  to  break  a  gap  into  the  matter.’  Wherefore,  on  the  whole,  I 
prefer  the  reading  of  the  Folio  :  « gap.’ — Ed.] 

229.  Whoop,  doe  me,  etc.]  A  Bibliography  of  this  old  song  is  given  by  Chap¬ 
pell  on  pp.  208,  774,  together  with  the  music.  A  song  with  this  burden  is  to  be 
found  in  Fry’s  Ancient  Poetry,  ‘but,’  adds  Chappell,  ‘it  would  not  be  desirable  for 
republication.’  Indeed,  the  humour,  in  the  whole  of  this  speech  by  the  Clown, 
would  be  relished  by  an  Elizabethan  audience,  to  whom  the  praises  bestowed  by  the 
Clown  on  the  decency  of  the  ballads,  would  be  at  once  recognised  as  one  of  the 
jokes. — Ed. 

232.  This  .  .  .  fellow]  Walker  (  Vers.  86) :  I  think  this  is  a  short  line,  as 
Polixenes  speaks  in  verse  throughout  this  scene  [consequently  ‘  This  is  ’  should  be 
printed  This’]. 

234.  vnbraided]  Johnson  :  Surely  we  must  read  braided,  for  such  are  all  the 
wares  mentioned  in  the  answer.  Steevens  :  I  believe  by  ‘  unbraided  wares  ’  the 
Clown  means,  has  he  anything  besides  laces  which  are  braided,  and  are  the  principal 
commodity  sold  by  ballad-singing  pedlars.  Yes,  replies  the  servant,  ‘  he  has  ribands,’ 
etc.,  which  are  things  not  braided,  but  woven.  The  drift  of  the  Clown’s  question  is 
either  to  know  whether  Autolycus  has  anything  better  than  is  commonly  sold  by  such 
vagrants  ;  anything  worthy  to  be  presented  to  his  mistress ;  or,  as  probably,  by  inquir¬ 
ing  for  something  which  pedlars  usually  have  not,  to  escape  laying  out  his  money  at 
all.  The  following  passage  in  Anything  for  a  quiet  Life,  however,  leads  me  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  there  is  here  some  allusion  which  I  cannot  explain :  ‘  She  says  you  vent 
ware  that  is  not  warrantable,  braided  ware,  and  that  you  give  not  London  measure  ’ 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


2 1 1 


Ser.  Hee  hath  Ribbons  of  all  the  colours  i’th  Raine-  235 
bow  ;  Points,  more  then  all  the  Lawyers  in  Bohemia ,  can 
learnedly  handle,  though  they  come  to  him  by  th’groffe: 

Inckles,  Caddyffes,  Cambrickes,  Lawnes  :  why  he  fings 
em  ouer,  as  they  were  Gods,  or  Goddeffes  :  you  would  239 

237-  tRgroffe ]  Ff,  Wh.  i.  the  gross  Han.  Cap.  Dyce,  Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  them 
Rowe  et  cet.  Theob.  ii  et  cet. 

239.  em]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  i,  239.  or]  and  Pope  ii,  Theob.  Warb. 

Johns,  on  Ktly  (misprint  ?). 

[Ill,  ii]. — Tollet  :  ‘Unbraided  wares’  may  be  wares  of  the  best  manufacture. 
‘  Braid  ’  signifies  deceitful  in  All's  Well,  IV,  ii,  73.  ‘  Braided  ’  in  Bailey’s  Diet. 

means  faded,  or  having  lost  its  colour ;  and  why  then  may  not  ‘  unbraided  ’  import 
whatever  is  undamaged,  or  what  is  of  the  better  sort  ? — Malone  :  The  Clown  is  per¬ 
haps  inquiring  not  for  something  better  than  common,  but  for  smooth  and  plain  goods. 
Has  he  any  plain  wares,  not  twisted  into  braids  ?  Ribands,  cambricks,  and  lawns, 
all  answer  this  description. — Mason  (p.  136) :  Probably  it  means  ware  not  ornamented 
with  braid. — Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  Embroided,  such  is  the  alteration  of  the  MS,  putting, 
we  think,  an  end  to  the  question. — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  conjectures  embroided,  which, 
he  says,  has  *  some  support  from  Collier’s  MS.  The  reply  of  the  Servant  suits  this, 
and  the  other  does  not.’ — Singer  :  That  is  undamaged  wares,  true  and  good.  So 
Marston,  Scourge  of  Villainie,  Sat.  v :  ‘  Tuscus  is  trade-falne.  .  .  .  For  now  he  makes 
no  count  of  perjuries,  .  .  .  Glased  his  braided  ware,  cogs,  sweares,  and  lies.’  And  in 
An  lliade  of  Metamorphosis,  1600:  ‘  Bookes  of  this  nature,  being  once  perused,  Are 
then  cast  by,  and  as  brayed  ware  refused.’ — Staunton  :  ‘  Unbraided,’  that  is,  un¬ 
spoiled,  unfaded,  sterling  goods — Mackay  ( Gloss.)  :  ‘  Braid  ’  originally  signified  in 
Keltic,  braid,  a  thief,  a  false  man ;  bradag,  a  thievish  woman,  a  false  woman.  Either 
false  or  dishonest  explains  the  use  of  the  word  by  Shakespeare ;  and  the  Clown’s  query 
signifies  ‘has  he  any  wares  that  are  genuine,  or  unfalsified?’  [It  is  possible  that  all 
these  definitions  may  be  correct.— Murray  (N.  E.  D .)  gives  as  the  definition  of 
‘Braided  wares :  goods  that  have  changed  colour,  tarnished,  faded.  Obsolete.'  If  it 
were  a  matter  of  any  moment,  we  might  consider  it  unfortunate  that  the  Servant  does 
not  give  an  answer  which  would  be  a  direct  response  to  any  of  these  definitions. — Ed.] 
236.  Points]  Malone  :  These  points  were  laces  with  metal  tags  to  them.  Aiguil- 
lettes,  Fr.  [Cotgrave  :  ‘ Aiguilletter .  To  trusse,  or  tye,  poynts.’  Of  course,  the  double 
meaning :  laces  and  points  of  an  argument,  is  manifest.] 

238.  Inckles]  Anon.  (ap.  Halliwell)  :  Inkle  is  a  kind  of  broad  linen  tape  of  an 
inferior  description.  Its  use  may  be  gathered  from  the  Accounts  of  the  Corporation 
of  Norwich,  1587-8,  where  are  put  down  the  expenses  for  soldiers’  coats,  ‘and  for 
whight  yncle  to  laye  upon  the  same  coats.’  Inckle,  or  beggars’  inckle,  is  a  kind  of 
coarse  tape  used  by  cooks  to  secure  meat  previous  to  being  spitted. 

238.  Caddysses]  Murray  [New  Eng.  Diet.):  Here  two  words  are  apparently 
mixed  up :  1  (in  the  sense  of  cotton  wool,  floss  silk,  or  the  like).  Properly  cadas,  ca- 
dace,  Old  French  cadaz,  cadas,  cf.  Cotgrave ;  cadarce,  ‘  the  tow  or  coarsest  part  of 
silke,  whereof  sleaue  is  made;’  cf.  Irish  cadas  =  cadan,  cotton;  2.  Fr.  cadis  (15th  c. 
in  Littrfi),  ‘sorte  de  serge  de  laine,  de  bas  pris.’  Of  both  the  ulterior  history  is  un¬ 
known.  [The  present  example  Murray  gives  as]  short  for  caddis  ribbon :  A  worsted 
tape  or  binding,  used  for  garters,  etc. 


212 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


thinke  a  Smocke  were  a  fhee-Angell,  he  fo  chauntes  to  240 
the  fleeue-hand,  and  the  worke  about  the  fquare  on’t. 

Clo.  Pre’thee  bring  him  in,  and  let  him  approach  Tin¬ 
ging. 

Perd.  Forewarne  him,  that  he  vfe  no  fcurrilous  words 
in’s  tunes.  245 

Clow .  You  haue  of  thefe  Pedlers,  that  haue  more  in 

241.  Jleeue-hand ]  sleeve-band  Han.  245.  in’s]  in  his  Cap.  Var.  Rann, 

Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Rann,  Coll,  ii  (MS).  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

242.  Pre’thee]  Prethee  Ff.  [Exit  Servant.  Cap. 

239.  as  they  were]  As  one  of  the  two  instances  in  this  play  of  the  blind  fidelity 
with  which,  in  times  past,  edition  after  edition  followed  its  predecessor,  it  is  worth 
noting  that  Dr  Johnson  printed  this  ‘  as  ’  with  an  apostrophe,  ’as,  undoubtedly  by  ac¬ 
cident  ;  the  ape  strophe  can  have  no  meaning  that  I  can  discern.  This  typographical 
oversight  was  faithfully  copied  by  the  Variorums  of  1773,  1778,  1785,  1793,  1803, 
1813,  1821,  and  by  Rann  in  1787.  The  two  exceptions  between  1765  and  1821  are 
Malone’s  ed.  in  I79°>  an(l  the  First  American  Edition,  printed  in  Philadelphia  in 

1 795-  For  the  second  example,  see  V,  i,  82. — Ed. 

241.  sleeue-hand]  Peck  (p.  241 )  :  What,  in  the  name  of  modesty,  is  the  ‘  sleeve- 
hand  ’  of  a  smock  ?  Every  shirt  or  shift,  it  is  well  known,  hath  two  sleeves  for  the 
hands  and  arms  to  go  thro’.  But  this  gives  no  sense  to  the  passage.  ‘  Sleeve-hand  ’ 
then,  I  make  no  doubt,  is  a  mistake  of  the  transcriber  or  printer  for  Silesia  or  sleasie 
Holland.  ‘  Sleasie  holland,’  as  Mr  Blount  observes,  ‘  common  people  take  to  be  all 
h  oil  and  cloth  which  is  sleight,  or  ill-wrought.  Whereas,’  saith  he,  ‘  that  only  is  prop¬ 
erly  Siesta  or  Silesia  linnen,  which  is  made  in,  &  comes  from  Silesia  in  Germany.’ 
This  easie  emendation  makes  sense  &  humor  of  the  passage,  &  the  meaning  is :  ‘  You 
would  think  he  imagines  everything  which  wears  a  shift  (tho’  the  shift  be  never  so 

thred-bare,  &  the  wearer  never  so  great  a  dowdy)  to  be  a  perfect  angel.' _ Tollet  : 

The  old  reading  is  right  or  we  must  alter  some  passages  in  other  authors.  Thus  in 
Leland’s  Collectanea,  1770,  iv,  323:  <A  surcoat  [of  crimson  velvet]  furred  with 
mynever  pure,  the  coller,  skirts  and  sleeve-hands  garnished  with  ribbons  of  gold.’  So 
Cotgrave: *  1  Poignet  de  la  chemise.  The  wrist-band,  or  gathering  at  the  sleeue-hand, 
of  a  shirt.’  Again,  in  Leland’s  Collectanea,  iv,  293,  King  James’s  ‘  shurt  was  broded 
with  thred  of  gold,’  and  on  p.  341  the  word  ‘  sleeve-hand  ’  occurs,  and  seems  to  sig¬ 
nify  the  cuffs  of  a  surcoat,  as  here  it  may  mean  the  cuffs  of  a  smock.  I  conceive  that 
the  ‘work  about  the  square  on’t’  signifies  the  work  or  embroidery  about  the  bosom 
part  of  a  shift,  which  might  then  have  been  of  a  square  form,  or  might  have  a  square 
tucker,  as  Anne  Bolen  and  Jane  Seymour  have  in  Houbraken’s  Portraits.  So  in 
Fairfax  s  Tasso,  xii,  st.  64 :  ‘  Between  her  breasts  the  cruel  weapon  rives,  Her  curious 
square,  embossed  with  swelling  gold.’ — Steevens  :  In  a  poem  called  ‘  The  Paynting 
of  a  Curtizan,’  in  John  Grange’s  Garden,  1577,  we  find:  ‘Their  smockes  are  all 
bewrought  about  the  necke  and  hande.'— Malone:  So  likewise  in  Holland’s  Sue¬ 
tonius,  1606,  p.  19:  ‘who  used  to  goe  in  his  senatour’s  purple  studded  robe,  trimmed 
with  a  jagge  or  frindge  at  the  sleeve-hand.' 

246.  You  haue  of  these  Pedlers]  If  there  be  any  Section  in  Abbott  dealing 
with  Partitive  Genitives  like  the  present :  ‘  You  have  some  of  these  pedlers,’  it  has 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


213 


them,  then  youl’d  thinke  (Sifter.)  247 

Perd.  I,  good  brother,  or  go  about  to  thinke. 

Enter  Autolicus  Jinging. 

Lawne  as  white  as  driuen  Snow ,  250 

Cypreffe  blacke  as  ere  was  Crow , 

247.  them]  ’em  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  251.  Cypreffe]  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Ktly,  Cam. 
Johns.  Var.  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Knt.  Cyprus  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 


escaped  me.  Cf.  Ham.  Ill,  ii,  37 :  ‘  there  be  of  them  that  will  themselves  laugh,’ 
where  W.  A.  Wright  refers  to  Levit.  iv,  16:  ‘  And  the  priest  that  is  anointed  shall 
bring  of  the  bullock’s  blood,’  etc. ;  and,  in  his  Bible  Word-book ,  to  Bacon,  Essay 
xxxiii :  ‘  Send  oft  of  them,  over  to  the  country,’  etc. — Ed. 

250.  Ward  (i,  437)  compares  this  Song  with  one  by  Friar  Tuck,  in  The  Downfall 
of  Robert  Earl  of  Huntington ,  acted  in  1598  [Hazlitt’s  Dodsley,  viii,  161]  : — *  What 
lack  ye  ?  What  lack  ye  ?  |  What  is  it  you  will  buy  ?  |  Any  points,  pins,  or  laces,  | 
Any  laces,  points,  or  pins  ?  |  Fine  gloves,  fine  glasses,  |  Any  busks  or  masks  ?  |  Or  any 
other  pretty  things  ?’  |  etc. 

251.  Cypresse]  W.  A.  Wright  (Note  on  ‘a  cypress,  not  a  bosom  Hideth  my 
heart.' — Twelfth  N.  Ill,  i,  119)  :  Cypress  is  a  fine  transparent  stuff  now  called  crape. 
Compare  Milton’s  Penseroso,  35 :  ‘  Sable  stole  of  cypress  lawn.’  Palsgrave  (Les- 
clarcissement,  etc.)  gives :  ‘  Cypres  for  a  woman’s  necke — crespe ;’  and  Cotgrave  : 
‘  Crespe  :  m.  Cipres ;  also,  Cobweb  Lawne.’  In  Jonson’s  Every  Man  in  his  Humour. 
I,  iii,  the  edition  of  1616  reads  :  ‘  And  he  .  .  .  this  man  !  to  conceale  such  reall  orna¬ 
ments  as  these,  and  shaddow  their  glorie,  as  a  Millaners  wife  do’s  her  wrought  stom¬ 
acher,  with  a  smokie  lawne,  or  a  black  cypresse  ?’  The  etymology  of  the  wrord  has 
been  considered  doubtful.  Skinner  ( Etymol .  Angl.)  regards  it  as  a  corruption  of  the 
French  crespe,  but  suggests  that  it  may  be  derived  from  the  island  of  Cyprus,  wThere  it 
was  first  manufactured.  The  latter  derivation  is  the  more  probable.  There  are 
many  instances  in  which  articles  of  manufacture  are  named  from  the  places  where 
they  were  made,  or  at  which  they  were  commonly  sold.  For  example,  arras  was  so 
called  from  Arras,  baudekyn  from  Baldacco  or  Bagdad,  calico  from  Calicut,  cambric 
from  Cambray,  cashmere  from  Cashmere,  damask  from  Damascus,  dimity  from 
Damietta,  dornick  from  Tournay,  dowlas  from  Dourlans,  lockeram  from  Locrenan, 
muslin  from  Mosul.  The  probability  that  cypress  (or  sipers,  as  it  is  also  spelt)  has  a 
similar  origin,  is  increased  by  finding  that  the  island  of  Cyprus  is  associated  with  cer¬ 
tain  manufactures.  In  the  Antient  Kalendars  and  Inventories  of  the  Treasury  of  the 
Exchequer,  edited  by  Sir  Francis  Palgrave  (iii,  358),  among  the  goods  and  chattels 
belonging  to  Richard  II.,  and  found  in  the  Castle  at  Haverford,  are  enumerated : 
‘  Prim’ement  xxv.  draps  d’or  de  div’ses  suytes  dount  iiii.  de  Cipre  les  autres  de  Lukes.’ 
Lukes  is  here  Lucca  (Fr.  Lucques ),  and  Cipre  is  Cyprus.  Again,  in  a  list  of  draperies 
sold  at  Norwich  in  44  and  45  Elizabeth  (quoted  by  Mr  Gomme  in  Notes  and  Qu. 
5th  Ser.  x,  226,  from  the  Appendix  to  the  Thirty-eighth  Report  of  the  Deputy  Keeper 
of  the  Public  Records,  p.  444),  we  find  ‘  fustyans  of  Naples  .  .  .  Paris  clothes  .  .  . 
sattins  of  Cipres,  Spanish  sattins.’  Further,  in  the  Nomenclator  of  Hadrianus  Junius, 
translated  by  Higins  (ed.  Fleming,  1585,  p.  157),  we  find,  ‘  Vestis  subserica,  tra- 
moserica  .  .  .  De  satin  de  Cypres.  A  garment  of  cypers  satten,  or  of  silke  grograine.’ 


214 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 

252 


Gloues  as  fweete  as  Damaske  Rofes , 

Maskes  for  faces ,  and  for  nofes  : 

Bugle-bracelet ,  Necke-lace  Amber ,  254 

254-  Bugle-bracelet]  Bugle -bracelets  254.  Necke-lace]  Neck  lace  F4. 

F4,  Rowe+,  Var.  ’73. 

If  therefore  there  were  special  fabrics  known  as  ‘cloth  of  gold  of  Cypres  ’  and  ‘satin 
of  Cyprus,’  it  is  evident  that  these  were  so  called,  either  because  Cyprus  was  the  place 
of  their  manufacture,  or,  which  is  equally  probable,  because  they  were  brought  into 
Europe  from  the  East  through  Cyprus.  In  Hall’s  account  f  Chronicle,  Hen.  VIII., 
fol.  83a)  of  a  masque  at  the  entertainment  given  to  Henry  the  Eighth  by  Francis,  it 
is  said  that  three  of  the  performers  had  ‘on  their  hedes  bonettes  of  Turkay  fashyon, 
of  cloth  of  gold  of  Tyssue,  and  clothe  of  syluer  rolled  in  Cypres  kercheffes  after  the 
Panyns  fashyon,’  which  points  to  an  Eastern  origin  for  the  use  of  cypress.  From  de¬ 
noting  the  material  only,  the  word  ‘  cypress  ’  came  to  signify  a  particular  kind  of 
kerchief  or  veil  worn  by  ladies,  as  in  the  present  passage  [in  Twelfth  jV.].  So  in 
Florio  s  Italian  Diet. :  ‘  Velaregli,  shadowes,  vailes,  Launes,  Scarfes,  Sipres,  or 
Bonegraces  that  women  vse  to  weare  one  their  faces  or  foreheads  to  keepe  them 
from  the  Sunne.’  And  the  pedlar  in  John  Heywood’s  play  of  The  Four  P's  has  in 
his  pack  (Dodsley’s  Old  Eng.  Plays,  ed.  Hazlitt,  i,  350)  :  ‘  Sipers,  swathbands,  rib¬ 
bons,  and  sleeve  laces.’  Mr  Wheatley,  in  his  edition  of  Jonson’s  Every  Man  in  his 
Humour  (p.  140)  conjectures  that  the  name  Cypress  is  derived  from  ‘  the  plant 
Cyperus  textilis,  which  is  still  used  for  the  making  of  ropes  and  matting.’  One  of 
the  English  names  of  this  plant  was  ‘  cypress.’  Gerarde  in  his  Herbal  (1597)  says, 

‘  Cyperus  longus  is  called  ...  in  English  Cypresse  and  Galingale.’  There  are,  how- 
ever,  great  difficulties  in  the  way  of  such  an  etymology,  which  Mr  Wheatley  was 
driven  to  suggest  by  the  want  of  evidence  in  favour  of  the  derivation  from  Cypress. 
[See  also  Wheatley’s  note  in  N  &=  Qu.  V,  x,  245.] 

252.  Gloues]  T.  Warton  :  The  introduction  of  perfumed  gloves  is  thus  men¬ 
tioned  in  Howes’  edition  of  Stowe’s  Chronicle :  ‘  Milloners  or  haberdashers  had  not 
then  any  gloves  imbroydered,  or  trimmed  with  gold  or  silke  .  .  .  neither  could  they 
make  any  costly  wash  or  perfume  untill  about  the  fourteenth  or  fifteenth  yeere  of  the 
queene  [Elizabeth],  the  right  honourable  Edward  de  Vere,  Earle  of  Oxford,  came 
from  Italy,  and  brought  with  him  gloves,  sweete  bagges,  a  perfumed  leather  jerkin, 
and  other  pleasant  things ;  and  that  yeere  the  queene  had  a  paire  of  perfumed  gloves 
trimmed  only  with  foure  tuftes  or  roses  of  cullered  silke.  The  queene  tooke  such 
pleasure  in  those  gloves,  that  she  was  pictured  with  those  gloves  upon  her  handes, 
and  for  many  yeeres  after  it  was  called  the  Earle  of  Oxforde’s  perfume,’  p.  868,  ed. 
1614. — Halliwell:  In  Andrew  Boorde’s  Dyetary  [1542,  p.  249,  ed.  E.  E.  T.]  we 
find:  ‘vse  to  were  gloues  made  of  goote-skynnes,  perfumed  with  amber-degreece.’ 

253.  noses]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  ‘  Masks’  to  protect  the  nose  have  been  worn 
by  a  few  people  in  this  country  within  the  memory  of  people  now  living. 

254.  bracelet]  I  can  see  no  reason  why  the  plural  of  F4  should  not  have  been 
adopted  by  modern  editors,  since  1773. — Ed. 

254.  Amber]  Peck  (p.  206) :  There  are  several  sorts  of  amber,  as  1.  raw  ambre, 

1.  e.  just  as  it  grows  before  made  transparent  by  the  fat  of  a  sucking  pig.  2.  red. 
3-  white.  4.  black,  the  worst  sort ;  usually  mingled  with  aloes,  labdanum,  storax^ 
&  such  like  aromatic  simples  for  pomander  chains.  5.  yellow,  the  ordinary  ambre  de 


ACT  IV,  SC.  IV.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


215 


Perfume  for  a  Ladies  Chamber :  255 

Golden  Quoifcs ,  and  Stomachers 
For  my  Lads ,  to  gine  their  deers  : 

Pins ,  and  poaking-Jlickes  of  Jleele. 

What  Maids  lacke  from  head  to  heele : 

Come  buy  of  me ,  cometcome  buy ,  come  buy ,  260 

Buy  Lads ,  or  elf e  your  Laffes  cry  :  Come  buy. 


257.  to  giue]  eo  give  F4> 

258.  poaking-ftickes]  Poting  sticks 
(bis)  Wilson’s  Cheereful  Ayres. 

260.  come:]  come  buy ;  Ktly. 


261.  Come  buy.]  Separate  line,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Cam.  Wh. 
ii,  Huds. 


pater-nostre’s,  or  bead  amber.  Shakespeare  brings  in  Autolicus  crying,  ‘  necklace 
amber.’  6.  Ambergris,  amber-greece,  or  grey  amber  (the  best  sort)  used  in  per¬ 
fumes.  It  is  known  to  be  good,  if,  when  pricking  it  with  a  pin,  it  emit  a  moisture 
like  oil.  I  am  obliged,  to  an  unknown  person  of  the  fair  sex,  for  the  following  un¬ 
common  remarks :  ‘  Grey  ambre  is  the  ambre  our  author  [Milton]  speaks  of,  &  melts 
like  butter.  It  was  formerly  a  main  ingredient  in  every  concert  for  a  banquet ;  viz. 
to  fume  the  meat  with,  &  that  whether  boiled,  roasted,  or  baked.  Laid  often  on  top 
of  a  baked  pudding.  Which  last  I  have  eat  of  at  an  old  courtiers  table.  And  I 
remember,  in  an  old  chronicle,  there  is  much  complaint  of  the  nobilities  being  made 
sick  at  Cardinal  Wolsey’s  banquets,  with  rich  scented  cates  &  dishes  most  costly 
dressed  with  ambergris.  I  also  recollect  I  once  saw  a  little  book  writ  by  a  gentle¬ 
woman  of  Q.  Elizabeth’s  court,  where  amber  gris  is  mentioned  as  the  haut-gout  of 
that  age.’  So  far  this  curious  lady.  [The  foregoing  note  is  on  Milton’s  Par.  Reg. 
ii,  344,  where  Satan  tempts  Jesus  in  the  wilderness  with  ‘  a  table  richly  spread  ’  where 
from  choicest  viands  ‘  gris-amber  steamed.’]— T.  Warton  :  Milton  alludes  to  the 
fragrance  of  amber.  See  Sam.  Agon.  720 :  ‘  An  amber  scent  of  odorous  perfume, 
Her  Harbinger.’ 

255.  Chamber]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  :  The  old  and  analogically  correct  pronun¬ 
ciation  of  this  word,  which  makes  it  a  perfect  rhyme  to  ‘  amber,’  survived  till  of  late 
years  among  educated  people  in  New  England. 

258.  poaking-stickes]  Steevens  :  These  ‘poking-sticks’  were  heated  in  the 
fire  and  made  use  of  to  adjust  the  plaits  of  ruffs.  Thus,  in  Middleton’s  Blurt,  Mas¬ 
ter-Constable ,  1602,  [III,  iii]  :  ‘Your  ruff  must  be  in  print  [i.  e.  in  perfect  style]; 
and  for  that  purpose,  get  poking-sticks  with  fair  long  handles,  lest  they  scorch  your 
lily  sweating  hands.’  Again,  in  Stubbes,  Second  part  of  the  Anatomic  of  Abuses 
[1583,  p.  35.  ed.  New  Sh.  Soc.']  :  ‘  They  [tooles  to  set  ruffes]  be  made  of  yron  and 
Steele,  and  some  of  brasse  kept  as  bright  as  siluer.  .  .  .  The  fashion  whereafter  they 
be  made,  I  cannot  resemble  to  anything  so  well  as  to  a  squirt  or  squibbe,  which  little 
children  use  to  squirt  out  water  withall ;  and  when  they  come  to  starching,  and  setting 
of  their  ruffes  then  must  this  instrument  be  heated  in  the  fire,  the  better  to  stiffen  the 
ruffe.  .  .  .  And  if  you  would  know  the  name  of  this  goodly  toole,  forsooth  the  deuill 
hath  giuen  it  to  name  a  putter,  or  else  a  putting  sticke,  as  I  heare  say.’  Stowe  informs 
us  that  ‘  about  the  sixteenth  yeare  of  the  queene  [Elizabeth]  began  the  making  of 
steele  poking-sticks,  and  untill  that  time  all  lawndresses  used  setting  stickes  made  of 
wood  or  bone.’ — Deighton  :  They  answer  to  the  ‘  goffering-irons  ’  of  modern  fashion. 


2l6 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Clo.  If  I  were  not  in  loue  with  Mopfa ,  thou  fhouldft 
take  no  money  of  me,  but  being  enthrall’d  as  I  am,  it  will 
alfo  be  the  bondage  of  certaine  Ribbons  and  Gloues. 

Mop.  I  was  promis’d  them  againft  the  Feaft,but  they 
come  not  too  late  now. 

Dor.  He  hath  promis’d  you  more  rhen  that,  or  there 
be  lyars. 

Mop.  He  hath  paid  you  all  he  promis’d  you:  ’May  be 
he  has  paid  you  more,  which  will  fhame  you  to  giue  him 
againe. 

Clo.  Is  there  no  manners  left  among  maids?  Will  they 
weare  their  plackets,  where  they  fhould  bear  their  faces  ? 
Is  there  not  milking-time  ?  When  you  are  going  to  bed? 
Or  kill-hole?  To  whittle  of  these  fecrets,  but  you  mutt 
be  tittle-tatling  before  all  our  guetts  ?  ’Tis  well  they  are 
whifpring:  clamor  your  tongues,  and  not  a  word  more. 


262 


265 


270 


275 

277 


267.  rhen]  Ff. 

269.  ’ May]  may  Cap. 

273.  bear ]  wear  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns.  Var.  ’73. 

274.  milking-time  ? ...bed .?]  milking- 
-time,...bed,  Rowe  ii  et  seq. 

275-  kill- hole  ?]  Ff.  kill-hole,  Rowe 


ii  +  ,  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Wh.  i.  killn-hole, 
Johns,  kiln-hole,  Mai.  et  cet. 

275.  whijlle  of]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt. 
whisper  off  Coll.  (MS),  whistle  off  Han. 
et  cet. 

277.  clamor]  Fa.  clamour  F  F  . 
charm  Han.  Wh.  Coll,  ii  (MS),  R3ffe. 
clammer  Huds.  shame  o'  Perring. 


269.  ’May  be]  Note  the  careful  apostrophe,  indicating  that  there  is  an  abbrevi¬ 
ation.  See  II,  i,  18. 


273.  plackets]  Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  Whether  or  not  <  placket  ’  had  originally  an  in¬ 
delicate  meaning  is  more  than  I  can  determine.  It  has  been  very  variously  explained 
a  petticoat,  an  under-petticoat,  a  pocket  attached  to  a  petticoat,  the  slit  or  opening 
in  a  petticoat,  and  a  stomacher;  and  it  certainly  was  occasionally  used  to  signify  a 
female,  as  petticoat  is  now.— Chappell  (p.  518),  in  a  note  on  the  song  ‘  Joan’s  Placket 
is  torn,  says,  ‘  the  word  is  not  altogether  obsolete,  since  the  opening  in  the  petticoats 
of  the  present  day  is  still  called  “  the  placket  hole  ”  in  contradistinction  to  the  pocket 
hole.’  [A  fuller  note  is  given  at  Lear,  III,  iv,  94,  and  a  thorough  discussion  of  the 
unsavory  meanings  of  the  word  may  be  found  in  Grant  White’s  Studies  in  Shake¬ 
speare,  1886,  p.  342-350,  whereof  the  sum  is  to  be  found  in  Halliwell's  Archaic  Diet. 
Readers  of  the  Elizabethan  drama  are  familiar  enough  with  the  proper  and  improper 
meanings  of  placket.  It  is  quite  sufficient  to  comprehend  that  the  Clown  asks  in 
effect :  Will  you  wear  as  an  outer  garment  that  which  should  be  an  inner  one  ?— Ed.] 
275.  kill-hole]  Harris:  Kiln-hole  is  pronounced  ‘kill-hole,’  in  the  midland 
counties,  and  generally  means  the  fire  place  used  in  making  malt ;  and  is  still  a  noted 
gossipping  place. 

277.  clamor]  Warburton  :  The  phrase  is  taken  from  ringing.  When  bells  are 
at  the  height,  in  order  to  cease  them,  the  repetition  of  the  strokes  becomes  much 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


217 


[277.  clamor  your  tongues,  and  not  a  word  more.] 

quicker  than  before;  this  is  called  clamouring  them.  [Adopted  by  Capell.] — 
Malone:  In  a  note  on  Othello,  Dr  Johnson  says  that  ‘to  cla?n  a  bell  is  to  cover  the 
clapper  with  felt,  which  drowns  the  blow,  and  hinders  the  sound  (qy.  hinders  the  blow 
and  drowns  the  sound  ?].  If  this  be  so,  it  affords  an  easy  interpretation  of  the  passage 
before  us.  Croft  (p.  11) :  If  for  ‘clamour,’  clam  was  read,  and  indeed  it  signifies 
to  cover  a  bell  with  felt,  as  Johnson  says,  the  difficulty  would  vanish ;  ‘  clamour  ’  [is] 
the  same  as  clam,  when  applied  to  the  ringing  of  bells,  as  in  tuning,  if  they  do  not 
strike  clear  of  one  another;  and  when  they  ring  a  wedding  peal,  it  is  stiled  clamming 
them.  Douce  (i,  360)  :  The  Clown  evidently  wishes  to  keep  the  damsels’  tongues 
from  wagging.  Now  to  clam,  clem,  or  cleam  are  provincial  words,  signifying  to  glue 
together  or  fasten  with  glue,  and  metonymically,  to  starve  by  contraction.  We  still 
use  clammy  for  sticking  together.  All  the  Northern  languages  have  an  equivalent 
term. — Gifford  (note  on  Bartholomew  Fair,  II,  i,  p.  405  :  ‘  He  is  the  man  must 
charm  you  ’)  :  That  is,  silence  you.  In  this  sense  the  word  occurs  in  all  the  writers 
of  Jonson  s  time.  By  an  evident  misprint  ‘  clamour  your  tongues  ’  is  given  for  charm 
(silence)  them,  in  The  Winter's  Tale ;  and  the  painful  endeavours  of  the  commen¬ 
tators  to  explain  the  simple  nonsense  of  the  text  by  contradictory  absurdities  might 
claim  our  pity,  if  their  unfounded  assertions  did  not  provoke  our  contempt.  [Gifford 
should  have  known  that  he  had  been  anticipated  by  Hanmer.] — Nares  :  An  expres¬ 
sion  taken  from  bell-ringing ;  it  is  now  contracted  to  clam,  and  in  that  form  is  com¬ 
mon  among  ringers.  The  bells  are  said  to  be  clamm'd,  when,  after  a  course  of 
rounds  or  changes,  they  are  all  pulled  off  at  once,  and  give  a  general  crash  or  clam, 
by  which  the  peal  is  concluded.  This  is  also  called  firing ,  and  is  frequently  prac¬ 
tised  on  rejoicing  days.  As  this  clam  is  succeeded  by  silence,  it  exactly  suits  [the 
present  passage],  Warburton  conjectured  rightly  that  the  word  had  reference  to  bell¬ 
ringing,  but  mistook  the  application.  [Nares  misapprehends  Warburton,  whose  note 
is  carelessly  written.  Warburton  means  that  a  rapid  succession  of  quick  blows  is 
followed  by  a  sudden  silence,  which  is  exactly  the  explanation  of  ‘  clamour  ’  given  by 
Nares.]  Gifford  pronounces  ‘  clamour  ’  a  mere  misprint  for  charm.  But  such  a  mis¬ 
take  seems  very  improbable,  both  because  the  words  are  unlike,  and  because  charm 
would  occur  more  easily  to  a  compositor  than  ‘  clamour.’ — Hunter  (i,  424) :  The 
same  phrase  is  found  in  John  Taylor  (  Works,  1630).  It  is  in  that  strange  mish-mash 
of  words  and  sentences,  Sir  Gregory  Nonsense  his  news  from  no  place  :  ‘  He  thus 
began ;  Cease  friendly  cutting  throats,  Clamour  the  promulgation  of  your  tongues, 
And  yield  to  Demagorgon’s  policy,’  etc.— James  Cornish  (N.  &  Qu.  1852,  voL  vi| 
p.  312)  .  I  believe  ‘  clamour  ’  is  a  misprint  for  chommer.  In  Cotgrave  ‘  chommer’  is 
to  cease  from  work,  and  that  is  exactly  the  sense  required  in  the  present  passage, 

‘  Hold  your  tongues.’— W.  R.  Arrowsmith  (N.  &  Qu.  1853,  vol.  vii,  p.  567) :  Most 
judiciously  does  Nares  reject  Gifford’s  corruption  of  this  word  into  c harm,  nor  will 
the  suffrage  of  the  ‘  clever  ’  old  commentator  [*.  e.  Collier’s  MS]  one  jot  contribute 
to  dispel  their  diffidence  of  this  change,  whom  the  severe  discipline  of  many  years’ 
study,  and  the  daily  access  of  accumulating  knowledge,  have  schooled  into  a  whole¬ 
some  sense  of  their  extreme  fallibility  in  such  matters.  Without  adding  any  com¬ 
ment,  I  now  quote,  for  the  inspection  of  learned  and  unlearned,  the  two  ensuing 
extracts :  ‘  For  Critias  manaced  and  thretened  hym,  that  onelesse  he  chaumbreed  his 
tongue  in  season,  ther  should  ere  log  bee  one  oxe  the  fewer  for  hym.’ — Apopthegmis  of 
Erasmus,  trans.  by  Nicolas  Vdall,  1542,  the  First  Booke,  p.  10.  ‘From  no  sorte  of 


2l8  the  WINTERS  TALE  [act  iv,  sc.  iv. 

Mop.  I  haue  done  ;  Come  you  ptomis’d  me  a  tawdry-  278 
lace,  and  a  paire  of  fweet  Gloues . 

278.  ptomis'd~\  Ft. 


menne  in  tbe  worlde  did  he  refrein  or  chaumbre  the  tauntyng  of  his  tongue.’ — Id. 
p.  76. — Keightley  {Exp.  205)  :  Charm  in  the  sense  of  ‘silence  your  tongue’  is 
used  only  by  characters  of  the  educated  class.  ...  I  think  that,  except  in  orthog¬ 
raphy,  the  text  is  right.  The  real  word  was  probably  clammer  or  clemmer,  the  same 
as  the  sinple  dam  or  clem,  to  squeeze  or  press,  and  the  phrase  answers  to  Hold  your 
tongues. — R.  G.  White  finds  it  impossible  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  ‘clamor’  is 
a  misprint  for  charm. — Collier’s  MS  agrees  with  Hanmer  in  reading  charm. — 
Dyce  in  his  Gloss,  thinks  that  the  ‘  attempts  to  explain  this  by  referring  it  to  bell¬ 
ringing  ought  to  have  ceased  long  ago  ’ ;  in  his  editions  he  expresses  no  opinion,  but 
merely  cites  Gifford’s  note  and  quotes  Hunter  and  Arrowsmith. — Staunton  infers 
from  Hunter’s  quotation  that  the  phrase  was  a  familiar  one. — Halliwell  quotes  in 
full  Warburton,  Malone,  Steevens,  Nares,  Douce,  Waldron,  and  Singer,  but  expresses 
no  opinion. — Delius  quotes  Hunter’s  extract  from  Taylor;  the  fustian  phrases  evi¬ 
dently  puzzled  him ;  he  remarks,  thereupon,  that  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  is  clearer 
than  the  explanation.  Were  it  not  one  of  the  objects  of  this  edition  to  give  some¬ 
what  of  a  history  of  Shakespearian  criticism,  it  would  have  been  more  direct,  and 
certainly  far  more  easy,  to  give  at  once  the  following  latest  and  final  conclusion, 
wherein  the  aid  contributed  by  the  foregoing  commentators  may  be  detected:]  — 
Murray  {New  Eng.  Did.)  :  Clamour.  Also  clamber  (evidently  related  to  Clam 
[when  it  bears  the  meaning  both  of  sounding  bells  together,  and  of  putting  an  end  to 
din,  of  silencing],  of  which  it  may  be  a  frequentative  derivative  (cf.  stutter, patter), 
and  so  better  spelt  clammer.  The  actual  spelling  shows  association  with  [  Clamour, 
to  raise  an  outcry,  etc.],  and  actual  relation  to  that  is,  of  course,  also  possible.  Iden¬ 
tity  with  Ger.  klammern,  or  with  clamber,  seems  hardly  admissible,  though  asso¬ 
ciation  with  the  latter  is  found  by  a  correspondent  skilled  in  campanology,  who  says, 

‘  Clambering  describes  the  way  in  which  the  sounds  of  the  bells  clamber  as  it  were 
one  on  the  top  of  another  when  they  get  into  confusion  ;  in  Yorksh.  it  is  called 
jumbling.  1.  B ell-ringing. [The  reader  is  referred  to  the  meanings  of  Clam  just 
mentioned. ]Todd  says,  ‘  A  term  in  ringing,  according  to  Warburton,  which  other 
commentators  .  .  .  imagine  to  be  merely  his  own  opinion.  It  is,  however,  prob¬ 
able.  To  increase  the  strokes  of  the  clapper  on  the  bell,  in  falling  it.’  [Warbur- 
ton’s  note  given  above  here  follows]  :  c.  1800,  W.  Jones,  Key  to  the  Art  of  Ringing, 
4  A  true  compass  makes  the  ringing  pleasant  and  harmonious  .  .  .  the  want  of  it 
produces  those  clamberings  and  firings  (as  it  is  called)  that  destroy  all  music,  and  is 
very  disgusting  to  every  judicious  ear.  2.  To  stop  from  noise,  to  silence.  [Clam  is 
again  referred  to,  when  it  means  ‘  to  put  an  end  to  din  ;  to  silence,  to  hush,  as  in  N. 
Fairfax,  Bulk.  &=  Selv.  1674,  Ep.  Ded.,  ‘  It  .  .  .  answers  the  noise  of  Talking  by  the 
stilness  of  Doing,  as  the  Italians  clam  rowt  and  tattle  into  nodding  and  beckning.’ 
1  hen  is  quoted  Warburton’s  supposition  that  the  clamouring  of  bells  is  immediately 
followed  by  silence,  next  the  present  passage  from  The  Wint.  Tale  is  given,  and 
lastly  Hunter’s  quotation  from  Taylor.] 

278,  279.  tawdry-lace]  Steevens  :  It  is  thus  described  in  Skinner’s  Etymologicon 
by  Skinner’s  friend,  Dr  Henshawe :  ‘Tawdry  lace,  (i.  e.)  Astrigmenta  Fimbria;  seu 
t  asciolse  emtae  nundinis  fano  Sanctse  Etheldredce  celebratis,  ut  recth  monet  Doct.  Th. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


219 

280 


Clo.  Haue  I  not  told  thee  how  I  was  cozen’d  by  the 
way,  and  loft  all  my  money. 

Aut.  And  indeed  Sir,  there  are  Cozeners  abroad,  ther- 
fore  it  behooues  men  to  be  wary. 

Clo .  Feare  not  thou  man,  thou  (halt  lofe  nothing  here 

Aut .  I  hope  fo  fir, for  I  haue  about  me  many  parcels  285 
of  charge. 

Clo.  What  haft  heere  ?  Ballads  ? 

Mop.  Pray  now  buy  fome  :  I  loue  a  ballet  in  print,  a 
life,  for  then  we  are  fure  they  are  true. 

Aut.  Here’s  one,  to  a  very  dolefull  tune,  how  a  Vfu-  290 
rers  wife  was  brought  to  bed  of  twenty  money  baggs  at 


281.  money. money  ?  F{. 

288.  ballet ]  Ballad 
288,  289.  a  life~\  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Dyce. 
or  a  life  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Cap.  Var.  ’73.  a'- 

lifeV&r.  ’7 8,  ’85,  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var. 


Knt,  Sta.  Ktly.  o' -life  Coll.  Wh.  Cam. 

290.  a  Vfurers~\  an  usurer's  Johns. 
Var.  Rann. 

291.  of  twenty ]  with  twenty  F3F4, 
Rowe  + ,  Var.  Rann,  Mai. 


HI — Nares  :  ‘  Tawdry  ’  is  a  vulgar  corruption  of  Saint  Audrey,  or  Auldrey,  meaning 
Saint  Ethelreda.  It  implies  that  the  things  so  called  had  been  bought  at  the  fair  of 
Saint  Audrey,  where  gay  toys  of  all  sorts  were  sold.  This  Fair  was  held  in  the  Isle 
of  Ely  on  the  day  of  the  Saint,  the  17th  of  October.  An  old  English  historian  makes 
Saint  Audrey  die  of  a.  swelling  in  her  throat,  which  she  considered  as  a  particular 
judgement  for  having  been  in  her  youth  much  addicted  to  wearing  fine  necklaces. 
When  dying  she  said,  as  he  tells  us,  ‘  Memini — cum  adhuc  juvencula  essem,  collum 
meum  monilibus  et  auro  ad  vanam  ostentationem  onerari  solitum.  Quare  plurimum 
debeo  divinae  providentiae,  quod  mea  superbia  tarn  levi  pcena  defungatur,  nec  ad  ma- 
jora  tormenta  reserver.’  The  same  author  particularly  describes  the  tawdry  necklace  : 
‘  Solent  Angliae  nostrae  mulieres  torquem  quendam,  ex  tenui  et  subtili  serica  confec- 
tum,  collo  gestare ;  quam  Ethelreda;  torquem  appellamus  ( tawdry  lace),  forsan  in  ejus 
quod  diximus  memoriam.’ — Nich.  Harpsfield,  Hist.  Eccl.  Anglicana,  Sac.  Sept.  p. 
36. — Chambers’s  Book  of  Days  (October  17) :  At  the  Fair  of  St  Audry,  at  Ely,  in 
former  times,  toys  of  all  sorts  were  sold,  and  a  description  of  cheap  necklaces,  which 
under  the  denomination  of  tawdry  laces,  long  enjoyed  great  celebrity. — Skeat  :  We 
are  quite  sure  that  Tawdry  is  a  corruption  of  St.  Audry,  and  we  are  equally  sure 
(as  any  one  living  near  Ely  must  be)  that  Audry  is  a  corruption  of  Etheldrida,  the 
famous  saint  who  founded  Ely  Cathedral. 

284.  Feare  not,  etc.]  It  is  possible  that  Autolycus,  under  the  pretence  of  looking 
for  cozeners,  casts  furtive  glances  about  him  to  be  sure  of  his  company.  If  we  were 
not  in  ‘  stage-land  ’  we  might  wonder  that  Autolycus  did  not  recognise  Prince  Flor- 
izel  quite  as  easily  as  Polixenes  recognised  him. — El). 

288,  289.  a  life]  Abbott  (§  24) :  There  is  some  difficulty  in  this  ‘  a  life.’  It 
might  be  considered  a  kind  of  oath,  ‘on  my  life.’  Nares  explains  it  as  my  life,  but 
the  passages  which  he  quotes  could  be  equally  well  explained  on  the  supposition  that 
a  is  a  preposition. 


220 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


a  burthen,  and  how  the  long’d  to  eate  Adders  heads,  and  292 
Toads  carbonado’d. 

Mop.  Is  it  true,  thinke  you  ? 

Aut.  Very  true,  and  but  a  moneth  old.  295 

Dor.  Bleffe  me  from  marrying  a  Vfurer. 

Aut.  Here’s  the  Midwiues  name  to’t  :  one  Mift.  Tale- 
Porter ,  and  flue  or  fix  honeft  Wiues,  that  were  prefent. 

Why  fhould  I  carry  lyes  abroad  ? 

Mop •  ’Pray  you  now  buy  it.  300 

Clo.  Come-on,  lay  it  by  :  and  let’s  firft  fee  moe  Bal¬ 
lads  :  Wee’l  buy  the  other  rhings  anon. 

Aut.  Here’s  another  ballad  of  a  Fifh,  that  appeared 
vpon  the  coafl,  on  wenfday  the  fourefcore  of  April,  fortie  304 


292.  burthen ]  burden  Johns,  birth 
Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

Adders ]  Addars  F4< 

295.  moneth]  month  F  . 

296.  a  Vfurer]  an  usurer  Johns. 

297.  Midwiues]  Midwife's  Rowe. 
Mi/l.]  Mijlris  Ff. 

298.  Wiues]  wives'  Var.  ’78,  ’85, 


Rann,  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.  Ktly. 

301.  moe ]  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Cam.  Wh.  li. 
more  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 

302.  rhinos']  Ft. 

303.  ballad  of  ]  ballad,  of  Theob. 
ballad,  Of  Cap. 

304.  wenfday]  Wednesday  F3F4_ 
we'nsday  Cap. 


298.  Wiues]  Cambridge  Editors  :  We  have  retained  wives  in  this  passage  be¬ 
cause  Steevens’s  reading  wives'  is  too  strictly  grammatical  to  accord  with  the  reckless 
volubility  of  the  charlatan.  To  be  consistent  Steevens  ought  to  have  pointed  wit¬ 
nesses'  for  witnesses  in  line  31 1.  [However  reckless  the  volubility  of  Autolycus,. 
unless  the  ear  can  detect  an  apostrophe,  he  will  speak  grammatically  whether  he  say 
wives'  or  wives. — Ed.] 

301.  moe]  See  I,  ii.  10. 

303.  ballad]  Steevens  :  Perhaps  in  later  times  prose  has  obtained  a  triumph  over 
poetry,  though  in  one  of  its  meanest  departments ;  for  all  dying  speeches,  confessions,, 
narratives  of  murders,  executions,  etc.,  seem  anciently  to  have  been  written  in  verse. 
Whoever  was  hanged  or  burnt,  a  merry,  or  a  lamentable  ballad  (for  both  epithets  are 
occasionally  bestowed  on  these  compositions)  was  immediately  entered  on  the  books 
of  the  Company  of  Stationers.  Thus,  in  a  subsequent  scene  of  this  play,  ‘  Such  a 
deal  of  wonder  is  broken  out  within  this  hour,  that  ballad-makers  cannot  be  able  to 
express  it  ’[ — V,  ii,  27]. 

303.  of  a  Fish]  Malone:  In  1604  was  entered  on  the  Stationers’  Registers: 

The  most  true  and  strange  report  of  A  monstruous  fishe  that  appeared  in  the  forme 
of  A  woman  from  the  wast  vpward  Seene  in  the  Sea  ’[—III,  258,  ed.  Arber],  To- 
this  it  is  highly  probable  that  Shakespeare  alludes.  [The  date  of  this  ballad  is  1604. 
Malone  places  the  date  of  The  Winter's  Tale  in  161 1 ;  for  seven  years  did  Shakespeare 
carry  in  his  breast  the  memory  of  this  ‘  monstruous  ’  fish.  It  is  not  alone  the  wran¬ 
gling  of  the  Shakespearian  editors  among  themselves  which  has  brought  reproach  on 
them.  Halliwell  devotes  five  folio  pages  and  a  full-page  illustration  to  these  ballads- 
on  fishes  and  on  monstrosities. — Ed.] 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


221 


thoufand  fadom  aboue  water,  &  fung  this  ballad  againft  305 
the  hard  hearts  of  maids  :  it  was  thought  the  was  a  Wo¬ 
man,  and  was  turn’d  into  a  cold  fifh,  for  fhe  wold  not  ex¬ 
change  flefh  with  one  that  lou’d  her  :  The  Ballad  is  very 
pittifull,  and  as  true. 

Dor.  Is  it  true  too,  thinke  you.  310 

Antol.  Fiue  Iuftices  hands  at  it,  and  witneffes  more 
then  my  packe  will  hold. 

Clo.  Lay  it  by  too  ;  another. 

Aut.  This  is  a  merry  ballad,  but  a  very  pretty  one. 

Mop.  Let’s  haue  fome  merry  ones.  315 

Aut.  Why  this  is  a  paffing  merry  one,  and  goes  to  the 
tune  of  two  maids  wooing  a  man  :  there’s  fcarfe  a  Maide 
weftward  but  fhe  fings  it:  ’tis  in  requeft,  I  can  tell  you. 

Mop.  We  can  both  fing  it  :  if  thou’lt  beare  a  part,  thou 
fhalt  heare,  ’tis  in  three  parts.  320 

Dor.  We  had  the  tune  on’t,a  month  agoe. 

Aut.  I  can  beare  my  part,  you  muft  know  ’tis  my  oc¬ 
cupation  :  Haue  at  it  with  you. 

Song  Get  you  hence ,  for  I  muji  goe 

Aut.  Where  it  fits  not  you  to  know.  325 


305.  fadom ]  fathom  Johns.  Var.  ’73 
et  seq. 

307.  cold\  cod  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

310.  you.']  you?  Rowe. 

321.  month ]  F2F4.  monetk  F3< 


324.  Song ]  Separate  line,  F  .  Om. 
Theob.  Warb. 

324,  325.  Given  to  Aut.  Rowe. 

325.  Where  it]  Where  F4,  Rowe  i. 
Where,  it  Cap.  Whither  Coll,  ii  (MS). 


304.  the  fourescore]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  106) :  Second  Maiden's  Tragedy,  II,  i, 
‘  joy  Able  to  make  a  latter  spring  in  me,  In  this  my  fourscore  summer,’  etc.  First 
Part  of  Jeronimo,  I,  i,  Dodsley,  ed.  1825,  vol.  iii,  p.  54:  ‘in  Rome  They  call  the 
fifty  year  the  year  of  jubilee,’  etc.  Jonson,  as  reported  by  Drummond,  thought  ‘  that 
Quintilian’s  six,  seven,  and  eight  books  were  not  only  to  be  read,  but  altogether  di¬ 
gested.’  Chapman,  II.  ii,  Taylor,  vol.  i,  p.  58:  ‘us  then,  to  whom  the  thrice  three 
year  Hath  fill’d,’  etc. 

317.  two  maids,  etc.]  I  can  find  no  reference  to  this  tune  in  Chappell,  and  the 
earliest  composition  mentioned  by  Roffe  (p.  104)  and  by  the  New  Sh.  Soc.  (p.  74)  is 
one  by  Dr  Boyce,  1759. 

325.  Where  it]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  says  that  for  these  two  words  his  MS  substitutes 
Whither.  ‘That  the  emendation  is  right,’  he  adds,  ‘the  echoes  of  “whither”  three 
times  over,  besides  the  repetition  in  the  last  line,  seem  to  establish.’  [In  his  Third 
Edition  Collier  judiciously  discarded  this  needless  emendation  from  his  text  and 
omitted  all  mention  of  it  in  his  notes.] 


222 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  IV,  sc.  iv. 


Dor. 

Whether  ? 

Mop 

0  whether  ? 

Dor. 

Whether  ? 

Mop. 

It  becomes  thy  oath  full  well , 

Thou  to  me  thy  fecrets  tell. 

Dor: 

Me  too  :  Le  me  go  thether  : 

Mop 

Or  thou  goefl  to  thl  Grange ,  or  Mill , 

Dor: 

If  to  either  thou  doji  ill , 

Aut: 

Neither. 

Dor: 

What  neither  ? 

Aut: 

Neither  : 

Dor: 

Thou  hafl  fworne  my  Loue  to  be , 

Mop. 

Thou  hafl  fworne  it  more  to  mee. 

Then  whether  goefl}  Say  whether  ? 

Clo.  Wee’l 

haue  this  fong  out  anon  by  our  felues 

Father,  and  the  Gent,  are  in  fad  talke,  &  wee’ll  not  trouble 
them  :  Come  bring  away  thy  pack  after  me,  Wenches  lie 
buy  for  you  both:  Pedler  let’s  haue  the  firft  choice;folow 
me  girles.  Aut  And  you  fhall  pay  well  for  ’em. 


326 


330 


335 


340 


344 


326,  327,  328,  339.  Whether]  Whither 
F4  et  seq. 

326,  327,  328.  One  line,  Cap.  et  seq. 
(except  Knt,  Coll.  Wh.  i). 

331-  Le*]  Fx. 

thether]  thither  F3F4. 

334>  33S>  336-  One  line.  Cap.  et  seq. 
(except  Knt,  Coll.  Wh.  i). 


341.  Gent.']  Gentlemen  Rowe  et  seq. 
343-  foltrw]  fellow  Fa. 

344.  girles.]  girls.  [Exit  with  Dor. 
and  Mop.  Dyce. 

’em.]  'em  [aside]  Johns,  et  seq. 
(except  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  Cam.  Wh.  ii).  'em 
[singing]  Sta.  'em.  [Follows  singing] 
Cam.  Wh.  ii. 


326.  Whether]  The  compositors  of  the  Folio  made  but  little  distinction  in  pro¬ 
nunciation  between  ‘  whether  ’  and  ‘  whither,’  or  rather,  out  of  the  forty-three  times 
where  the  latter  occurs  (according  to  Bartlett’s  Concordance)  they  have  spelt  it 
‘whether’  thirty-one  times.— Ed. 

332.  Grange]  Hunter  (ii,  345;  note  on  ‘Mariana  in  the  moated  grange’): 
ranges  were  the  chief  farm-houses  of  wealthy  proprietors.  The  religious  houses 
had  granges  on  most  of  their  estates.  The  officer  who  resided  in  them  was  called 
he  Grangtarius.  He  superintended  the  farm,  and  at  the  grange  the  produce  was 

!a,d“P-  V  ;  Th£y  were  well-bu*  houses,  often  of  considerable  extent  and 

height,  and  being  placed  in  a  central  position  to  a  large  estate,  they  must  often  have 
been,  as  Shakespeare’s  grange,  solitary,  while  the  windows  being  small  (as  thev 

were  in  all  the  edifices  of  that  age),  they  would  be  gloomy  also;  fit  scene  for  the 
moaning  Mariana. 

341-  sad]  That  is,  earnest,  serious. 

S.43’  344-  folow  me  girles]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  We  may  mention  as  a  piece  of 
ancient  stage-management,  that  the  MS  informs  us  that  the  practice  was  for  the 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iv.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  223 

Song.  Will  you  buy  any  Tape ,  or  Lace  for  your  Crpc  ?  345 

My  dainty  Ducke ,  my  deere-a  ? 

Any  Silke ,  any  Tlired ,  any  Toyes  for  your  head 
Of  the  news’ t , and  fins’  t ,  fins’  t  weare-a. 

Come  to  the  Pc  die  r ,  Money’s  a  medler , 

That  doth  vtter  all  mens  ware-a.  Exit  350 

Seruant.  Mayfter,  there  is  three  Carters,  three  Shep. 
herds,  three  Neatrherds,  three  Swine-herds  f  haue  made 
themfelues  all  men  of  haire,  they  cal  themfelues  Saltiers,  353 


345.  Song.~\  Separate  line,  F4. 
345-35°-  Nine  lines,  Johns  et  seq. 

345.  buy]  by  Pope  i. 

Crpe]  Fj. 

346.  deere-a]  dear-a  Theob. 

347.  Any. ..any. ..any]  And. ..and... 
any  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Var.  ’73. 

348.  weare-a]  ware-a  Rowe,  Pope. 

350.  Exit]  Exit  Clown,  Aut.  Dor.  and 

Mop.  Rowe. 


351.  Scene  vii.  Pope  +  . 

[Enter  a  Servant.  Rowe.  Re¬ 
enter...  Dyce. 

Mayfler]  Majler  Ff. 

there  w]  there  are  Rowe  -f ,  Var. 

Rann. 

Carters, \  goatherds  Theob.  Han. 
Cap.  Rann,  Huds. 

352.  three  Swine-herds ]  and  three 
swineherds  Rowe  +  . 


Clown,  Dorcas,  and  Mopsa  here  to  go  out,  and  for  Autolycus  to  follow  them  as  soon 
as  he  had  sung,  or,  rather,  while  he  was  singing  ‘  Will  you  buy,’  etc. :  exit  after  them 
is  there  placed  in  the  margin. 

346.  Ducke]  Skeat  :  A  pet,  a  darling;  directly  derived  from  E.  Friesic  dok, 
dokke ,  a  doll;  cognate  with  Dan.  dukke,  a  doll,  puppet;  cognate  with  Swed.  docka, 
a  doll,  a  baby;  cognate  with  Old  High  German  tocha,  Mid.  High  Ger.  tocke,  a  doll, 
a  term  of  endearment  to  a  girl.  Of  uncertain  origin.  Probably  introduced  from  the 
Netherlands ;  cf.  note  to  Piers  Plowman,  C,  vii,  367.  This  would  at  once  account 
for  the  form  doxy :  for  the  base  dok-  would,  in  Dutch,  inevitably  receive  the  very 
common  double  diminutive  suffix  -et-je,  giving  dok-et-je,  which  would  be  pronounced 
doxy  by  an  English  mouth. 

350.  vtter]  Skeat  :  To  put  forth,  to  circulate.  The  Mid.  Eng.  verb  outen  is  to 
put  out,  to  ‘  out  with  ’  as  we  say,  and  ‘  utter  ’  is  a  regular  frequentative  form  of  it, 
meaning  ‘  to  keep  on  putting  out.’  Directly  derived  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  tit,  out. 

351.  carters]  Theobald:  In  two  speeches  after  this,  these  are  called  four  threes 
of  herdsmen.  But  could  the  carters  properly  be  called  herdsmen  ?  At  least  they 
have  not  the  final  syllable,  herd,  in  their  names ;  which,  I  believe,  Shakespeare 
intended  all  the  four  threes  should  have.  I  therefore  guess  he  wrote,  goat-herds. 
And  so,  I  think,  we  take  in  the  four  species  of  cattle  usually  tended  by  herdsmen. 
[Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  106)  approves  of  this  emendation.  But  is  it  not  likely  that 
Polixenes  (1.  362)  speaks  loosely,  his  ear  having  caught  a  succession  of  ‘herds’? 
—Ed.] 

353.  men  of  haire]  Warburton  :  That  is,  nimble,  that  leap  as  if  they  rebounded. 
The  phrase  is  taken  from  tennis-balls,  which  were  stuffed  with  hair.  So  in  Henry  V: 
III,  vii,  14,  ‘  He  bounds  from  the  earth,  as  if  his  entrails  were  hairs  ’  [i.  e.  as  if  he,  the 
horsp,  were  stuffed  like  a  ball]. — Johnson  :  ‘  Men  of  hair  ’  are  hairy  men,  or  satyrs. 


224 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


and  they  haue  a  Dance,  which  the  Wenches  fay  is  a  gal- 
ly-maufrey  of  Gambols,  becaufe  they  are  not  in’t  :  but  355 


they  themfelues  are  o’th’minde 


A  dance  of  satyrs  was  no  unusual  entertainment  in  the  Middle  Ages.  At  a  great 
festival  celebrated  in  France,  the  king  and  some  of  the  nobles  personated  satyrs 
dressed  in  close  habits,  tufted  or  shagged  all  over,  to  imitate  hair.  They  began  a 
wild  dance,  and  in  the  tumult  of  their  merriment  one  of  them  went  too  near  a  candle, 
and  set  fire  to  his  satyr’s  garb,  the  flame  ran  instantly  over  the  loose  tufts,  and  spread 
itself  to  the  dress  of  those  that  were  next  him ;  a  great  number  of  the  dancers  were 
cruelly  scorched,  being  neither  able  to  throw  off  their  coats  nor  extinguish  them.  The 
king  had  set  himself  in  the  lap  of  the  Duchess  of  Burgundy,  who  threw  her  robe 
over  him  and  saved  him. — Steevens  :  The  curious  reader,  who  wishes  for  more 
exact  information  relative  to  the  foregoing  occurrence  in  1392,  may  consult  the 
translation  of  Froissart  by  John  Bourchier,  1525,  ii,  cap.  cxcii.  [Knight,  Halliwell, 
and  Staunton  reprint  the  account  in  full.  But  I  fail  to  see  in  what  way  it  illustrates 
the  present  passage.  Knight  and  Halliwell  also  print  a  long  extract,  first  given  by 
Reed  in  the  Variorum,  equally  irrelevant,  from  Sir  James  Melvill’s  Memoirs  which 
sets  forth  sundry  uncouth  antics  by  noblemen  at  the  Court  of  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots. 
As  to  the  meaning  of  ‘  men  of  hair  ’ — considering  who  it  is  that  speaks,  and  the  pro¬ 
ficiency  in  jumping  of  those  that  are  spoken  of,  I  incline  to  think  that  Warburton’s 
interpretation  is  correct. — Ed.] 

353.  Saltiers]  Malone  :  He  means  Satyrs.  Their  dress  was  perhaps  made  of 
goat’s  skin. — Collier:  The  true  explanation  may  be  saultiers,  i.  e.  vaulters;  the 
servant  says  afterwards,  that  the  worst  one  of  the  threes  ‘  jumps  twelve  foot  and  a  half 
by  the  squire.’  The  stage-direction,  in  the  old  copies,  after  they  enter  is,  ‘  Here  a 
dance  of  twelve  satyrs,’  and  perhaps  ‘  saltiers  ’  is  only  the  servant’s  blunder. — Douce 
( 1,  361)  gives  a  song  for  four  voices  called  ‘  The  Satyres  daunce  ’  from  Ravenscroft’s 
old  collection. — Halliwell  :  ‘  Saltiers,’  or  saultiers,  meant  the  vaulters  or  somer- 
sault  throwers. — Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  106)  :  I  suppose  the  word  was  pronounced 
sautiers ;  whence  the  play  on  satyrs.  A  similar  pun  occurs  in  Middleton’s  Michael¬ 
mas  Term,  I,  i,  Dyce,  i,  424 :  ‘  — Andrew  Gruel  ?  Rearage.  No.  Andrew  Lethe. 
Salewood.  Lethe  ?  Rearage.  Has  [H’has]  forgot  his  father’s  name,  Poor  Walter 
[i.  e.  Water]  Gruel,  that  begot  him,  fed  him,  And  brought  him  up.’  So  too  the 
ambiguous  prophecy  in  2  Henry  VI :  IV,  i.  In  the  dedication  to  Middleton’s  Father 
Hubbard’s  Tale,  Dyce,  v,  251,  there  is  a  pun  on  ‘  poetry  ’  (then  frequently  pronounced 
potry)  and  poultry.  Timon  of  Athens,  III,  v, — ‘  He  is  a  man,  setting  his  fate  aside, 
Of  comely  virtues.’  Palpably  wrong ;  read,  as  some  of  the  critics  have  suggested, 
fatdt.  Perhaps  the  printer  was  deceived  by  the  then  ordinary  pronunciation  of 
fault,  which  was  not  obsolete  even  in  the  time  of  Pope ;  e.  g.  Essay  on  Criticism, 
1.  169:  ‘I  know  there  are,  to  whose  presumptuous  thoughts  These  freer  beauties, 
ev’n  in  them  seem  faults ;’  line  422 :  ‘  Before  his  sacred  name  flies  every  fault,  And 
each  exalted  stanza  teems  with  thought;’  and  which  still  flourishes  in  Ireland,  teste 
Miss  Edgeworth.  .  .  .  Henry  V :  V,  ii,  the  Folio  has:  ‘If  I  could  winne  a  Lady  at 
Leap-frogge,  or  by  vaulting  into  my  saddle  with  my  Armour  on  my  backe,’  etc.  A 
spelling  of  similar  origin. 

354,  355.  gally-maufrey]  Cotgrave  :  Hochepot :  m.  A  hotch  pot,  or  Gallimaufrey ; 
a  confused  mingle  mangle  of  diuers  things  iumbled,  or  put  together. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


225 


for  fome,  that  know  little  but  bowling)  it  will  pleafe 
plentifully. 

Shep.  Away  :  Wee’l  none  on’t  ;  heere  has  beene  too 
much  homely  foolery  already.  I  know  (Sir)  wee  wea- 
rie  you. 

Pol.  You  wearie  thofe  that  refrelh  vs  :  pray  let’s  fee 
thefe  foure-threes  of  Heardfmen. 

Ser.  One  three  of  them,  by  their  owne  report  (Sir,) 
hath  danc’d  before  the  King  :  and  not  the  worft  of  the 
three,  but  iumpes  twelue  foote  and  a  halfe  by  th’fquire. 

Shep.  Leaue  your  prating,  fince  thefe  good  men  are 
pleaf’d,  let  them  come  in  :  but  quickly  now. 

Ser.  Why,  they  flay  at  doore  Sir. 

Heere  a  Dance  of  twelue  Satyr es. 

Pol.  O  Father,  you’l  know  more  of  that  heereafter: 


357 


360 


365 


370 


363.  foure-threes']  four  threes  Han. 
Cap.  et  seq. 

366.  a  halfe~\  half  F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 
fquire~\  square  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 
Var.  Rann. 

369.  Ser.  Why,...  Sir. Om.  Rowe  +  . 
[Exit.  Cap. 

370.  Heere,  etc.]  After  line  371,  Han. 
Enter  twelve  Rusticks,  presenting  Satyrs. 


Company  seat  themselves.  Dance,  and 
Exeunt  Rusticks.  Cap. 

371.  Given  to  Flo.  Han. 

37x»  373-  0...much.~\  Aside,  Johns,  et 
seq.  (generally). 

371.  heereafter  .•]  hereafter. —  [rising 
from  beside  Shep.]  Cap.  hereafter.  [To 
Shep.]  Ktly. 


357.  bowling]  Johnson  :  This  is  here,  I  believe,  a  term  for  a  dance  of  smooth 
motion,  without  great  exertion  of  agility. — M.  Mason  (p.  136) :  The  allusion  is  not 
to  a  smooth  dance,  as  Johnson  supposes,  but  to  the  smoothness  of  a  bowling-green. 

366.  squire]  Cambridge  Editors  :  We  have  adopted  the  spelling  squier  here,  as 
in  Love's  Labour's  Lost ,  V,  ii,  474,  because  the  word  in  this  sense  is  now  obsolete, 
and  because  this  spelling  comes  nearest  to  esquierre  from  which  it  is  derived.  [Cot- 
grave  :  Esquierre  :  f.  A  Rule  or  Squire ;  an  Instrument  vsed  by  Masons,  Carpenters, 
Ioyners,  etc.;  also,  an  Instrument  wherewith  Surueyors  measure  land.] 

369.  at  doore]  An  absorption  of  the  definite  article  in  the  t  of  ‘  at  ’ ;  not  exactly 
an  omission,  as  Abbott  (§  90)  supposes.  See  II,  i,  18. 

369.  Sir]  Keightley  {Exp.  205):  The  Folio  places  ‘Sir’  at  the  end  of  the 
speech ;  but  the  metre  requires  the  transposition :  ‘  Why,  Sir,  they  stay  at  door,’ 
which  also  makes  the  reply  run  more  naturally.  I  neglected  to  make  it  in  my  Edition. 
[It  is  difficult  to  see  why  there  should  be  a  regard  for  the  metre  in  this  short  speech 
when  all  the  rest  that  the  servant  speaks  is  prose. — Ed.] 

371.  heereafter]  Warburton  :  This  is  replied  by  the  king  in  answer  to  the 
Shepherd’s  saying,  ‘since  these  good  men  are  pleased.’ — Ritson  {Remarks,  71): 
This  is  very  unlikely.  The  dance  which  has  intervened  would  take  up  too  much 
time  to  preserve  any  connection  between  the  two  speeches.  The  line  spoken  by  the 
king  seems  to  be  in  reply  to  some  unexpressed  question  from  the  old  Shepherd. 

IS 


226 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Is  it  not  too  farre  gone  ?’Tis  time  to  part  them,  3 72 

He’s  fimple,  and  tels  much.  How  now(faire  fhepheard) 

Your  heart  is  full  of  fomething,  that  do’s  take 

Your  minde  from  feafting.  Sooth,  when  I  was  yong,  375 

And  handed  loue,  as  you  do  ;  I  was  wont 

To  load  my  Shee  with  knackes  :  I  would  haue  ranfackt 

The  Pedlers  filken  Treafury,  and  haue  powr’d  it 

To  her  acceptance  :  you  haue  let  hirii  go, 

And  nothing  marted  with  him.  If  your  Laffe  380 

Interpretation  fhould  abufe,  and  call  this 

Your  lacke  of  loue,  or  bounty,  you  were  ftraited 

For  a  reply  at  leaft,  if  you  make  a  care 

Of  happie  holding  her. 

Flo.  Old  Sir,  I  know  385 

She  prizes  not  fuch  trifles  as  thefe  are  : 

The  gifts  the  lookes  from  me,  are  packt  and  lockt 
Vp  in  my  heart,  which  I  haue  giuen  already, 

But  not  deliuer’d.  O  heare  me  breath  my  life  389 


372>373-  Is. ..muck']  Aside,  Cap.  [To 
Cam.]  Cam.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

374.  do's]  doth  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns. 
Var.  Rann. 

376.  handed]  handled  Coll,  iii  (MS), 
Wh.  i. 

do,-]  do,  Rowe. 

383.  reply  at  leajl,]  reply,  at  least, 


Theob.  Warb.  et  seq.  (generally),  re¬ 
ply  ;  at  least,  Wh.  reply,  at  least  Dyce, 
Cam. 

383.  a  care]  care  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Cap.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Walker. 

389.  breath]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  breathe 
Pope  et  cet. 

life ]  love  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 


373.  tels  much]  The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  The  king  has  been  cross-questioning 
the  old  Shepherd  as  he  proposed,  and  with  the  success  he  anticipated. 

376.  handed]  Warburton  (N  &•  Qu.  VIII,  iii,  203):  ‘And  hended  love,’  etc. 
Warburton’s  MS  note  adds,  ‘  dallied  with  my  mistress.’ — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  A 
manifest  misprint  [for  handled]  strangely  left  uncorrected  hitherto,  except  in  Collier’s 
MS.  [Collier  did  not  adopt  this  change  until  he  edited  his  Third  Edition ;  White 
deserted  it  in  his  Second.]— The  Cowden-Clarkes:  ‘Handed’  is  peculiarly  used 
here;  it  means,  ‘held  familiarity  with  love,’  and  also  implies  ‘held  my  love  by  the 
hand ;’  showing  that  Florizel  has  kept  Perdita's  hand  in  his  ever  since  he  took  it 
when  they  were  about  to  dance  wdth  one  another,  and  he  said,  *  Your  hand,  my 
Perdita.’ 

380.  marted]  Skeat  :  A  contracted  form  of  market,  as  in  Ham.  I,  i,  74. 

382.  straited]  Steevens  :  That  is,  put  to  difficulties. 

383.  reply  at  least,]  The  punctuation  is  here  decidedly  wrong ;  the  comma,  or 
better  still,  a  semi-colon,  as  White  has  it,  should  follow  ‘  reply.’ 

383.  a  care]  I  think  Theobald  is  right  in  reading  care.  See  V,  i,  282 :  ‘I  am 
friend  to  them,’  etc. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


227 


Before  this  ancient  Sir,  whom  (it  fhould  feeme)  390 

Hath  fometime  lou’d  :  I  take  thy  hand,  this  hand, 

As  foft  as  Doues-downe,  and  as  white  as  it, 

Or  Ethyopians  tooth,  or  the  fan’d  fnow,  that’s  bolted 
By  th’Northerne  blafts,  twice  ore. 

Pol .  What  followes  this  ?  395 

How  prettily  th’yong  Swaine  feemes  to  wafh 
The  hand,  was  faire  before  ?  I  haue  put  youout,  397 


390.  whom]  who  Ff  et  seq.  393,  394.  or  the. ..ore]  As  mnemonic, 

393.  Or  .../now,']  Separate  line,  Ff  Warb. 
et  seq.  (except  Var.  ’21,  Coll.  Dyce,  394.  blafts]  blajl  Ff,  Rowe-t- . 

Cam.  Wh.  ii).  396,  397.  How. ..before  ?]  Aside,  Ktly. 

397.  I  haue]  I've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

390.  it  would  seeme]  Of  the  two,  Camillo  had  been  less  able  than  Polixenes  to 
conceal  his  admiration  of  Perdita ;  he  it  was  who  said  that  if  he  were  of  her  flock 
he  would  live  by  gazing;  and  when  Polixenes  could  no  longer  restrain  his  wonder, 
and  exclaimed  to  Camillo  that  Perdita  was  the  prettiest  low-born  lass  that  ever  ran  on 
the  green-sward,  Camillo  rejoined  that  she  was  the  Queen  of  curds  and  cream.  The 
lover’s  eyes  have  detected  an  old  man’s  adoration. — Ed. 

392.  Doues-downe]  Walker  (  Vers.  235)  thinks  that  this  should  be  pronounced 
as  one  worjl  with  the  accent  on  the  first  syllable ;  wherein  we  hear  the  enthusiast  for 
metre.  ‘  Dove’s  down  ’  is  a  spondee,  with  the  lover’s  voice  lingering  on  each 
syllable  as  though  caressing  with  his  voice  the  hand  which  he  was  stroking  so  gently 
with  his  own. — Ed. 

393,  394.  When  these  two  lines  are  divided  as  in  the  Ff,  and  as  in  the  majority  of 
modern  texts,  tney  have,  so  Walker  says  ( Crit.  iii,  108),  ‘  an  anti-Shakespearian  flow.’ 

‘  The  true  arrangement,’  he  goes  on  to  say,  ‘  is  preserved  in  the  Folio.  The  words 
“  Wha'  follows  this  ?”  which  at  present  (less  after  Shakespeare’s  manner,  I  think) 
constitute  a  short  line  of  four  syllables,  will  be  the  complement  of  “  By  the  Northern,” 
etc.  I  would  also  place  a  semi-colon  after  “tooth,”  as  the  additional  foot  requires 
more  of  a  pause  than  is  implied  in  a  comma.’  Dyce,  in  both  his  Second  and  Third 
Editions,  judiciously  reads  lEtkiop's  tooth.’  For  my  part  I  should  like  to  overlook 
altogether  this  reference  to  a  tooth,  mainly  for  a  woman’s  reason,  and  incidentally 
because  Ethiopians  have  ceased  now-a-days  to  be  the  classic  curiosities  that  they 
were  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  and  the  mental  pictures  of  ‘  minstrels  ’  with  corked  faces 
which  the  simile  now  evokes  are  not  cheerful.  Not  that  it  should  be  erased  from 
the  text,  but  omitted  merely  in  reading.  The  ear  cannot  detect  the  loss;  the  lines 
are  smooth  without  it. — Ed. 

393.  fan’d  snow]  The  same  simile  of  ‘  fann’d  snow  ’  is  used  in  Mid.  N.  D.  Ill, 
ii,  146,  except  that  there  the  wind  is  Eastern  instead  of  Northern. 

394.  ore.]  After  this  word  I  think  there  should  be  no  punctuation,  except  a  dash, 
to  indicate  a  long  pause.  The  sentence  is  unfinished.  Polixenes  tells  us  the  reason. 
All  the  world  had  vanished  for  Florizel  at  the  touch  of  that  flower-soft  hand. — Ed. 

397.  was  faire]  For  examples  of  the  omission  of  the  relative,  see  line  561  of  this 
scene:  ‘  I  haue  a  Vessell  rides  fast  by;’  line  31  of  the  next:  ‘one  oi  those  would 
have  him  wed  againe;’  Abbott  (§  244);  and  Shakespeare  passim. 


228 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  ivt 

398 


But  to  your  proteftation  :  Let  me  heare 
What  you  profeffe. 

Flo.  Do,  and  be  witneffe  too’t. 

Pol.  And  this  my  neighbour  too  ? 

Flo.  And  he,  and  more 
Then  he,  and  men  :  the  earth,  the  heauens,  and  all  ; 
That  were  I  crown’d  the  molt  Imperiall  Monarch 
The  reof  molt  worthy  :  were  I  the  fayrelt  youth 
That  euer  made  eye  fwerue,  had  force  and  knowledge 
More  then  was  euer  mans,  I  would  not  prize  them 
Without  her  Loue  ;  for  her,  employ  them  all , 
Commend  them,  and  condemne  them  to  her  feruice, 
Or  to  their  owne  perdition. 

Pol.  Fairely  offer’d. 

Cam.  This  fhewes  a  found  affection. 

Shep.  But  my  daughter, 

Say  you  the  like  to  him. 

Per.  I  cannot  fpeake 

So  well,  (nothing  fo  well)  no,  nor  meane  better 
By  th’patterne  of  mine  owne  thoughts,  I  cut  out 
The  puritie  of  his . 

Shep.  Take  hands,  a  bargaine  ; 

And  friends  vnknowne,  you  lhall  beare  witneffe  to’t  : 


400 


405 


410 


415 


420 


401,  41 1.  Pol.]  Plo.  Fa. 

403.  the  heauens]  and  heavens  F^, 
Rowe  + . 

406.  forcc~\  sense  Coll,  iii  (MS). 


414.  him.']  him  ?  Rowe  et  seq. 

416.  better]  better ,  F3F4.  better. 

Rowe  +  .  better  ;  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.). 
418.  puritie]  parity  Sing.  conj. 


401.  And  .  .  .  too?]  I  think  that  Polixenes  in  his  secret  soul  sympathised  with 
his  boy’s  adoration  of  Perdita,  and  hoped  that  this  protestation  would  be  one,  which 
by  referring  to  Florizel’s  tie  to  his  father,  should  be  heard  by  him  alone.  And  it  was 
this  consciousness  that  had  he  been  in  his  boy’s  place  he  would  have  been  as  stead¬ 
fast  to  his  love  as  his  boy  is,  which  lent  an  exaggeration  to  his  anger  when  he  revealed 
himself. — Ed. 

406.  force]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  In  the  MS  sense  is  put  for  ‘  force.’  It  is  not  unlikely 
that  the  printer  blundered  between  the  long/ and  /;  but  we  do  not  here  feel  authorised 
co  disturb  the  old  text. 

416.  nothing]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  222)  lays  the  accent  on  the  final  syllable;  see 
II,  ii,  31. 

417.  patterne  .  .  .  cutout]  A  woman’s  simile ;  just  as  Imogen  exclaims  :  ‘  Poor 
.1  am  stale,  a  garment  out  of  fashion ;  And,  for  I  am  richer  than  to  hang  by  the  walls, 
I  must  be  ripp’d — to  pieces  with  me  !’ — Cym.  Ill,  iv,  53. — Ed. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


229 


I  giue  my  daughter  to  him,  and  will  make 
Her  Portion,  equall  his. 

Flo.  0,  that  mu  ft  bee. 

I’th  Vertue  of  your  daughter  :  One  being  dead, 

I  fhall  haue  more  then  you  can  dreame  of  yet, 

Enough  then  for  your  wonder  :  but  come-on, 

Contra6l  vs  fore  thefe  Witneffes. 

Shep.  Come,  your  hand  : 

And  daughter,  yours. 

Pol.  Soft  Swaine  a-while,  befeech  you, 

Haue  you  a  Father  ? 

Flo.  I  haue  :  but  what  of  him  ? 

Pol.  Knowes  he  of  this  ? 

Flo.  He  neither  do’s,  nor  fhall. 

Pol.  Me-thinkes  a  Father, 

Is  at  the  Nuptiall  of  his  fonne,  a  gueft 

That  beft  becomes  the  Table  :  Pray  you  once  more 

Is  not  your  Father  growne  incapeable 

Of  reafonable  affayres  ?  Is  he  not  ftupid 

With  Age,  and  altring  Rheumes?  Can  he  fpeake  ?  heare  ? 

Know  man,  from  man  ?  Difpute  his  owne  eftate  ? 


421 


425 


430 


435 


440 


425.  yet,]  yet ;  Cap.  et  seq. 

426.  your]  you  F  . 
come-on ]  come  on  Rowe. 

430.  Soft]  Soft  F3F4. 

a-while,  befeech  you,]  a-while  : 
befeech  yoti,  Ff,  Rower .  a  while, 


beseech  you;  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.). 

440.  altring]  aching  Gould. 

441.  Difpute]  Dispose  Coll,  iii  (MS). 
dispense  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

441-443-  Difpute. ..againe  ..he  did] 
manage. ..in pain. ..he's  bid  Gould. 


425.  yet]  Staunton:  ‘Yet’  was  frequently  used  in  the  sense  of  now, — a  mean¬ 
ing,  in  the  present  passage,  indispensable  to  the  antithesis  [in  ‘  Enough  then’]. 

427.  Witnesses]  Walker  (  Vers.  244)  gives  this  as  an  example,  among  many 
others,  of  the  plural  termination  added  to  nouns  ending  in  s,  while  the  metre  shows 
that  it  is  not  pronounced. 

433_435-  Of  these  three  hemistiches,  the  last,  ‘  Me-thinkes  a  Father  ’  is  usually 
printed  as  the  fragmentary  line;  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  109),  on  the  other  hand,  prefers 
to  consider  ‘  knowes  he  of  this  ?’  as  the  fragment,  and  that  one  rhythmical  line  is  made 
of  the  other  two ;  all  which  is  merely  printing  for  the  eye. — Ed. 

436.  Nuptiall]  See  line  59  above. 

440.  altring  Rheumes]  ‘  In  these  olde  folke  kinde  heate  is  quenched,  the  virtue 
of  gouemance  and  ruling  fayleth,  and  humour  is  dissolved  and  wasted.’ — Batman 
vppon  Bartholome,  p.  71.  This  shows,  I  think,  that  the  phrase  does  not  mean,  as  it 
has  been  interpreted,  the  ‘  Rheumes  ’  which  alter  the  man,  but  the  Rheumes  which 
are  themselves  altered.  ‘  Altring  ’  is  passive,  not  active. — Ed. 

441.  Dispute]  Johnson:  Perhaps  for  ‘dispute’  we  might  read  compute-,  but 


230 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[ACT  IV,  sc.  iv. 


Lies  he  not  bed-rid  ?  And  againe,  do’s  nothing 
But  what  he  did,  being  childifh  ? 

Flo.  No  good  Sir  : 

He  has  his  health,  and  ampler  ftrength  indeede 
Then  molt  haue  of  his  age. 

Pol.  By  my  white  beard, 

You  offer  him  (if  this  be  fo)  a  wrong 
Something  vnfilliall  :  Reafon  my  fonne 

449.  my\  the  Anon.  ap.  Cam.  Dyce  ii  conj. 


‘  dispute  his  estate  ’  may  be  the  same  with  ‘  talk  over  his  affairs.’ — Steevens:  The 
same  phrase  occurs  again  in  Rom.  Jul.  Ill,  iii,  63 :  ‘  Let  me  dispute  with  thee  of 
thy  estate.’ — Collier  (ed.  ii) :  ‘Dispose,'  says  the  MS,  but  we  leave  the  passage 
unaltered.  Here  we  may  readily  imagine  that  he  was  recording  the  variation  intro¬ 
duced  by  some  particular  actor  of  his  day,  but  ‘  dispose  his  own  estate  ’  may  be  right. 
—White  (ed.  i)  :  If  ‘  estate  ’  here  meant  property,  Collier’s  MS  emendation  would 
have  a  claim  to  be  received  into  the  text.— Dyce  :  That  is,  can  he  reason  upon  his 
own  affairs. 

442.  bed-rid]  Skeat  (s.  v.  Bedridden) :  That  is,  confined  to  one’s  bed.  Derived 
from  A.  S.  bedrida,  beddrida,  glossed  by  clinicus  (Bosworth)  ;  derived  from  A.  S. 
bed,  a  bed,  and  ridda,  a  knight,  a  rider ;  thus  the  sense  is  a  bed-rider,  a  sarcastic  term 
for  a  disabled  man.  Prof.  Earle  in  his  Philology  of  the  Eng.  Tongue,  p.  23,  suggests 
that  bedrida  means  ‘  bewitched,’  and  is  the  participle  of  bedrian,  to  bewitch,  a  verb  for 
which  he  gives  authority.  But  it  is  not  shown  how  the  participle  took  this  shape,  nor 
can  we  thus  account  for  the  spelling  beddrida.  Besides  which,  there  is  a  term  of 
similar  import,  spelt  bedderedig  in  the  Bremen  Worterbuch,  i,  65,  which  can  only  be 
explained  with  reference  to  the  Low  G.  bedde,  a  bed.  Again,  an  Old  High  Ger. 
pettiriso,  Mid.  High  Ger.  betterise,  modern  Ger.  bettrise,  is  given  in  Grimm’s  Ger. 
Diet,  i,  1738,  which  can  likewise  only  be  referred  to  G.  bett,  a  bed.  In  short,  the 
suggestion  can  hardly  be  accepted,  but  it  seemed  best  not  to  pass  it  over.  If  there  be 
any  doubt  about  the  termination,  there  can  be  none  about  the  first  syllable.  I  may 
add  that  we  find  also  Mid.  Eng.  bedlawer  for  ‘  one  who  lies  in  bed,’  which  is  said,  in 
the  Prompt.  Parv.  p.  28,  to  be  a  synonym  for  bedridden. 

449.  Something]  For  examples  of  this  adverbial  use,  like  somewhat,  see  Abbott 

(§  68). 

449.  Reason  my  sonne]  R.  G.  White  (Sk.'s  Scholar,  296)  quotes  this  passage 
thus  :  ‘  Reason,  my  son,  Should,’  and  observes  :  ‘  This  punctuation,  which  is  univer¬ 
sally  followed,  seems  to  me  to  be  wrong.  It  makes  Polixenes  say,  “  My  son,  Reason 
should  choose  himself  a  wife.”  In  his  subsequent  edition,  White  paraphrases  :  ‘  it  is 
reasonable  that  my  son  should,  etc.  and  repeats  virtually  the  same  assertion  as  to  what 
the  ‘  punctuation  ’  had  been  ‘  hitherto.’  [So  far  is  this  punctuation,  given  by  White, 
from  being  the  punctuation  ‘  universally  followed,’  that,  out  of  the  thirty  or  forty  edi¬ 
tions  collated  in  these  Textual  Notes,  but  one  solitary  edition  has  it :  Knight’s,  and 
even  in  this  case  it  was  corrected  in  Knight’s  Second  Edition.  Where  the  editors  do 
not  follow  the  Folio,  they  follow  Theobald,  who,  for  the  very  purpose  of  avoiding  the 
Interpretation  given  by  White,  places  a  comma  after  <  Reason  ’  only,  indicating  that  it 


442 

445 

449 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


231 


Should  choofe  himfelfe  a  wife,  but  as  good  reafon  450 

The  Father  ( all  whofe  ioy  is  nothing  elfe 
But  faire  pofterity)  fhould  hold  fome  counfaile 
In  fuch  a  bufineffe. 

Flo.  I  yeeld  all  this  ; 

But  for  fome  other  reafons  (my  graue  Sir)  455 

Which  ’tis  not  fit  you  know,  I  not  acquaint 
My  Father  of  this  bufineffe. 


Pol. 

Let  him  know’t. 

Flo. 

He  fhall  not. 

Pol. 

Prethee  let  him. 

460 

Flo 

No,  he  muft  not. 

Shep.  Let  him  (my  fonne)  he  fhall  not  need  to  greeue 
At  knowing  of  thy  choice. 

Flo.  Come,  come,  he  muft  not  : 

Marke  our  Contra£t.  465 

Pol.  Marke  your  diuorce  (yong  fir) 

Whom  fonne  I  dare  not  call  :  Thou  art  too  bafe 
To  be  acknowledge.  Thou  a  Scepters  heire, 

That  thus  affe£ls  a  fheepe-hooke  ?  Thou,  old  Traitor,  469 

466.  [Discovering  himself.  Rowe.  469.  affefis]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cam.  Rife. 

468.  acknowledge .]  F,.  affect' st  Pope  et  cet. 


stands  for  the  phrase  :  ‘  There  is  reason,’  that,  or  ‘  Reason  it  is,’  that. — Ed.] — Dyce: 
Since  we  have  '■the  father’  just  after,  qy.  ‘reason  the  son,’  etc.  ?  [A  just  emendation, 
which  would  avoid  the  interpretation  of  which  White  complained.  Dyce,  however, 
was  anticipated  by  ‘  Anon.’  recorded  in  the  Cam.  Edition. — Ed.] — Rolfe  refers  to  a 
similar  ellipsis  in  King  John,  V,  ii,  130 :  ‘and  reason  too  he  should.’ 

455.  my  graue  Sir]  We  have  here  the  reflex  of  the  father’s  earnest  tones. — Ed. 

456.  not  acquaint]  See  line  211,  above;  ‘  He  not  dreames  of.’ 

465.  Contract]  For  a  list  of  words  wherein  the  accent  is  nearer  the  end  than  with 
us,  see  Abbott,  §  490.  Thus  ‘  opportune  ’  line  560,  below. 

468.  acknowledge]  This  is  one  of  the  very  many  examples  collected  by  Walker 
( Crit .  ii,  61)  of  the  confusion  of  final  d  and  final  e.  It  was  due  to  the  frequency  of 
this  confusion  that  Walker  accepted  as  the  true  reading  ‘  What  lady  should  her  lord  ’ 
(instead  of  ‘  What  lady  she  her  lord,’  I,  ii,  54).  If,  in  the  MS  from  which  the  Folio 
was  printed,  should  were  written,  as  Collier  suggests,  in  a  contracted  form  :  s/A,  then, 
Walker  asserts,  the  error  will  come  under  the  present  head,  of  the  confusion  of  final 
d  and  final  e,  and  we  have  sh<l  printed  she. 

469.  affedts]  Walker  [Crit.  ii,  128) :  Qucere,  in  cases  where  st  would  produce 
extreme  harshness,  and  where  at  the  same  time  the  old  copies  have  s,  whether  we 
ought  not  to  write  the  latter?  [I  think  we  ought  by  all  means  to  retam  the  less  harsh 
sound,  and  read,  e.  g.  ‘  That  thou  .  .  .  Revisits  thus  the  glimpses  of  the  moon,’  Ham.  I, 


232 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


I  am  lorry,  that  by  hanging  thee,  I  can 
but  fhorten  thy  life  one  weeke.  And  thou,  frelh  peece 
Of  excellent  Witchcraft,  whom  of  force  muft  know 
The  royall  Foole  thou  coap’ft  with. 

Shep.  Oh  my  heart. 

470.  I  am]  /’ m  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

47°>  471-  I  am. ..but]  One  line,  Theob. 

Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Mai. 

Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

472.  whom]  who  Ff. 


iv,  53 ;  ‘  Thou  hotly  lusts,’  etc.,  Lear ,  IV,  vi,  160 ;  ‘  Honest  Iago,  that  lookes  dead  with 
grieving,’  Oth.  II,  ii,  201 ;  Every  day  thou  dafts  me,’  etc. — Id.  IV,  ii,  206. _ Ed.] 

47°,  471.  I  can  but]  Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  109)  apparently  overlooked  the  division 
of  this  line  in  the  Folio,  and  accepting,  with  many  of  the  modern  editors,  Theobald’s 
division  (see  Text.  Notes),  remarked,  ‘“Can  but”  at  the  end  of  a  line  is,  I  think 
more  in  the  manner  of  Lord  Byron’s  Cain  than  of  a  play  of  Shakespeare’s.  It  is 
a  different  case  from  that  of  and,  shall,  with,  and  other  words,  with  which  he  fre¬ 
quently  closes  a  line ;  although  even  these  seem  so  inconsistent  with  Shakespeare’s 
usual  felicity  of  rhythm,  that  I  am  led  to  suspect  some  difference  of  accentuation 
between  old  and  modern  English,  by  which  this  apparent  blemish  would  be  removed,’ 

471.  one  weeke]  Hunter  (i,  424) :  There  are  occasional  out-breakings  like  this 
in  Shakespeare  for  which  we  know  not  how  to  account.  Thus  Hamlet’s  reason  for 
his  not  executing  his  purpose  on  the  king  when  the  king  is  at  prayer,  because  by 
taking  him  off  at  such  a  moment  his  soul  would  go  to  heaven,  is  of  the  same  nature. 
It  would  have  suited  the  circumstances  of  the  case  dramatically  had  Polixenes 
stopped  with  dooming  the  Shepherd  to  death,  and  have  had  more  moral  propriety. 
But,  in  fact,  the  whole  speech  of  the  king  grates  so  harshly  on  the  ear  that  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  it  ought  not  to  have  been  introduced  at  all  in  a  scene  to  which  it  is  so  exquisitely 
incongruous.  That  Polixenes  should  be  sorry,  displeased,  on  account  of  his  son’s 
choice  is  natural,  but  the  steps  which  he  meant  to  take  in  consequence  should  have 
been  discovered  in  some  other  scene,  and  not  have  so  broken  in  upon  and  disturbed 
the  beautiful  harmony  of  the  present. 

471-  shorten]  I  think  we  should  here  read  short  for  the  sake  of  rhythm. 
Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  1 13)  says  that  the  ‘longer  and  shorter  forms  of  these  verbs  [such 
as  To  black,  like,  weak ,  ope,  dead,  etc.]  were  used  in  a  great  measure  indiscriminately, 
so  that  they  might  easily  supplant  one  another  in  printing.’  It  is  strange  that  he  over¬ 
looked  the  present  instance, -so  strange,  indeed,  that  I  think  that  I,  in  turn  must 
have  overlooked  his  emendation,  especially  as  he  gives  many  instances  of  the  verb  to 
short. — Ed. 

473-  Foole]  See  Text.  Notes  for  a  remarkable  misprint,  uncorrected  in  Knight’s 
three  editions. 

474-  Theobald  ( Nichols ,  ii,  364) :  As  the  king  is,  both  in  the  preceding  and  sub¬ 
sequent  speeches,  rating  Perdita,  I  think  verily  this  little  distressful  exclamation  ought 
to  be  placed  to  her.  Besides,  from  what  follows,  it  should  seem  that  the  old  Shepherd 
was  perfectly  thunderstruck,  or  struck  all  of  a  heap,  as  the  vulgar  say,  which  Camillo 
perceiving,  says  to  him  :  ‘  how  now,  father  ?  speake  ere  thou  dyest.’ 


473-  Toole]  food  Knt  i,  ii,  iii. 

coap'Jl  with.]  Ff,  Rowe,  cop'dst 
with  ;  Cap.  coap' st  with —  Pope  et  cet. 
(subs.). 


470 


474 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


233 


Pol.  lie  haue  thy  beauty  fcratcht  with  briers  &  made  475 
More  homely  then  thy  ftate.  For  thee  (fond  boy) 

If  I  may  euer  know  thou  doft  but  figh, 

That  thou  no  more  fhalt  neuer  fee  this  knacke  (as  neuer 
I  meane  thou  fhalt)  wee’l  barre  thee  from  fucceffion, 

Not  hold  thee  of  our  blood,  no  not  our  Kin,  480 

Farre  then  Deucalion  off :  (marke  thou  my  words) 

Follow  vs  to  the  Court.  Thou  Churle,  for  this  time 
(Though  full  of  our  difpleafure)  yet  we  free  thee 
From  the  dead  blow  of  it.  And  you  Enchantment, 

Worthy  enough  a  Heardfman  :  yea  him  too,  485 

That  makes  himfelfe  (but  for  our  Honor  therein) 

Vnworthy  thee.  If  euer  henceforth,  thou  487 


476.  fond]  found  F  . 

478.  J, halt  neuer ]  shall  Rowe  -|- ,  Cap. 
Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Cam. 
Wh.  ii. 

481.  Farre  then ]  Farre  than  F2F3, 
Rann.  Less  than  Han.  Far'  than 
Warb.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Far  as  Johns. 


conj.,  Cap.  Far’r  than  Wh.  Farther 
than  Heath.  Far  than  F  ,  Rowe  et  cet. 

484.  you]  your  F3F4>  thou  Anon.  ap. 
Cam. 

487.  thee.  If]  thee;  if  Rowe  + . 
thee, — if  Cap.  et  seq. 


478.  shalt  neuer]  Staunton  :  This  ‘  never  ’  appears  to  have  crept  in  by  the 
inadvertence  of  the  compositor,  whose  eye  caught  it  from  the  end  of  the  line. — 
Cambridge  Editors  :  We  have  followed  Rowe  in  ejecting  the  first  ‘  never  ’  from  the 
line,  for  these  reasons  :  I.  The  misprint  is  of  a  very  common  sort.  The  printer’s  eye 
caught  the  word  at  the  end  of  the  line.  2.  The  metre  is  improved  by  the  change. 
The  line  was  made  doubly  inharmonious  by  the  repetition  of  ‘never.’  3.  The  sense 
is  improved.  Polixenes  would  rather  make  light  of  his  son’s  sighs  than  dwell  so 
emphatically  upon  their  cause.  [Unquestionably. — Ed.] 

481.  Farre  then]  Johnson:  I  think  we  should  read  far  as.  We  will  not  hold 
thee  of  our  kin  even  so  far  off  as  Deucalion,  the  common  ancestor  of  all. — Tyrwhitt  : 
The  old  reading  ‘  farre,’  i.  e.  further,  is  the  true  one.  The  Mid.  Eng.  comparative  of 
fer  was  ferrer.  This  in  the  time  of  Chaucer  was  softened  into  ferre. — Walker 
( Crit .  i,  189,  Art.  xxx. — Far  and  near  used  as  comparatives) :  Quasi  farrer,  furrer  ? 
In  Chaucer  we  have  ferre,  further :  House  of  Fame,  Bk  ii,  line  92,  ‘  But  er  I  bere  the 
much  ferre,  I  wol  the  tel  what  I  am.’  [See  As  You  Like  It,  I,  iii,  115,  of  this  ed.] 

484.  dead]  The  Cambridge  Editors  record  the  excellent  emendation  dread  by  an 
Anonymous  critic. 

485-487.  yea  him  .  .  .  thee]  Deighton:  Yea,  worthy  too  of  him  who  (if  the 
honour  of  my  family  were  not  concerned)  shows  himself  unworthy  of  you.  [In  N. 
&  Qu.  (VIII,  iv,  443)  C.  B.  Mount  asks  ‘  in  what  possible  sense  was  Florizel making 
himself  unworthy  of  Perdita  ?  He  meant  no  ill ;  in  fact,  his  purpose  of  marriage  was 
the  very  thing  that  drove  his  father  furious,  and  if  he  had  made  himself  unworthy,  how 
could  “our  honour”  therein  diminish  or  affect  the  unworthiness.’  The  answer  was 
given,  fitly,  I  think,  in  the  main,  by  H.  C.  Hart  (N.  6°  Qu.  VIII,  v,  64),  who  says 
that  Florizel’s  ‘  present  course  of  unfilial  conduct  shows  him  to  be  unworthy  of  Per- 


234 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Thefe  rurall  Latches,  to  his  entrance  open, 

Or  hope  his  body  more,  with  thy  embraces, 

I  will  deuife  a  death,  as  cruell  for  thee 

As  thou  art  tender  to’t.  Exit. 

Perd.  Euen  heere  vndone  : 

I  was  not  much  a-fear’d  :  for  once,  or  twice 
I  was  about  to  fpeake,  and  tell  him  plainely, 

The  felfe-fame  Sun,  that  fhines  vpon  his  Court, 

Hides  not  his  vifage  from  our  Cottage,  but 
Lookes  on  alike.  Wilt  pleafe  you  (Sir)  be  gone  ? 


4  88 
490 


495 

497 


489.  hope]  hoope  Pope,  hoop  Johns, 
et  seq. 

491.  to’/]  to  it  Rowe-f,  Var.  Mai. 
Scene  viii.  Pope  +  . 

492.  heere  undone:]  here,  undone, 
Johns,  here  undone  !  Cap.  et  seq. 

493-497;  499-501  >  506-510.  As 
mnemonic  lines,  Warb. 


493-  a- fear'd]  afraid  Rowe+. 

afeard  Cap.  et  seq. 

495.  his  Court]  this  court  Theob.  ii. 
497.  on]  on  all  Mai.  conj.,  Hunter, 
Sing,  on  it  Ktly.  on's  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 
Huds. 

Wilt]  Wiltt  Han.  Cap.  (Errata), 
Var.  ’03  et  seq. 

gone  ?]  gone  ?  [To  Flo.]  Rowe. 


dita  except  for  our  honour  centred  on  him.’  It  was  this  deceit,  practised  on  a 
father,  which  rankled  in  the  breast  of  Polixenes,  and  which  makes  Florizel  (worthy 
of  Perdita  as  he  is  in  all  other  respects  ‘  but  for  our  Honor  therein,’  i.  e.  but  for  his 
royal  blood)  unworthy  of  her.  Is  there  not  here  an  echo  of  Brabantio’s  parting 
words  to  Othello ?  ‘  Look  to  her,  Moor,  have  a  quick  eye  to  see;  She  has  deceived 

her  father,  and  may  thee.’  This  is  the  interpretation  of  the  text  as  we  have  it  here  in 
the  Folio ;  but  Capell  and  all  subsequent  editors,  by  substituting  for  the  period  after 
‘ thee’’  in  line  487,  a  comma  and  a  dash,  remove  ‘  him  ’  in  line  4S5  from  the  same 
construction  with  ‘  Herdsman,’  and  make  it  an  accusative  of  specification.  Much 
can  be  urged  in  favour  of  this  punctuation ;  it  removes  the  awkwardness  of  making 
Polixenes  say  in  one  breath  that  Florizel  was  worthy  and  unworthy  of  Perdita.— Ed.1 

492-  vndone  :]  Staunton  :  The  accepted  punctuation  [Capell’s]  ought  not  to  be 
lightly  tampered  with;  yet  some  readers  may  possibly  think  with  us  that  the  passage 
would  be  more  in  harmony  with  the  high-born  spirit  by  which  Perdita  is  unconsciously 
sustained  in  this  terrible  moment,  if  it  were  read  :  ‘  Even  here  undone,  I  was  not 
much  afear’d,’  etc.  [Staunton,  of  course,  did  not  know  that  he  had  been  anticipated 
by  Johnson  (see  Text.  Notes),  whose  good  reading  has  not,  I  think,  been  anywhere 
noticed  or  recorded. — Ed.] 

493-  a-fear’d]  Warburton  :  The  character  is  here  finely  sustained.  To  have 
made  her  quite  astonished  at  the  king’s  discovery  of  himself  had  not  become  her 
birth ;  and  to  have  given  her  presence  of  mind  to  have  made  the  reply  to  the  kino-, 
had  not  become  her  education. 

496.  Hides  not,  etc.]  Malone  refers  to  two  parallel  passages  in  Elizabethan 
literature,  which  shows,  it  is  to  be  feared,  that  he  was  better  acquainted  with  that 
literature  than  with  his  New  Testament.  Douce  refers  to  Matthew  v  45 

497-  Lookes  on  alike]  Malone  (1790) :  I  suspect  that  a  word  was’ omitted  at 
he  press,  and  that  the  poet  wrote,  either—*  Looks  on  both  alike,’  or  <  Looks  on  all 


ACT  iv,  sc.  iv.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  235 

I  told  you  what  would  come  of  this  :  Befeech  you  498 

Of  your  owne  date  take  care  :  This  dreame  of  mine 
Being  now  awake,  lie  Queene  it  no  inch  farther,  500 

But  milke  my  Ewes,  and  weepe. 

Cam.  Why  how  now  Father, 

Speake  ere  thou  dyeft. 

Shep.  I  cannot  fpealce,  nor  thinke, 

Nor  dare  to  know,  that  which  I  know  :  O  Sir,  5°5 

You  haue  vndone  a  man  of  fourefcore  three, 

That  thought  to  fill  his  graue  in  quiet  :  yea, 

To  dye  vpon  the  bed  my  father  dy’de, 

To  lye  clofe  by  his  honed  bones  ;  but  now 

Some  Hangman  mud  put  on  my  fhrowd,  and  lay  me  510 


498.  of  this ]  o' this  Wh.  i. 

499.  This  ...mine]  front  this  my  dream 
Han.  as  for  this  dream  of  mine, —  Cap. 
conj.  this  dream  of  mine —  Johns,  et 
seq.  (subs.). 


500.  farther ]  further  Steev.  Var. 
Dyce,  Huds. 

505.  Sir,]  Sir,  [To  Flo.]  Rowe. 

508.  dy'de]  died  on  Ktly. 


alike.’  Malone  (1821) :  To  look  upon  without  any  substantive  annexed,  though  now 
unusual,  appears  to  have  been  legitimate  in  Shakespeare’s  time.  So,  in  Tro.  6°  Cres. 
•  He  is  my  prize  ;  I  will  not  look  ttpon  ’  [V,  vi,  10]  ;  again,  in  j  Henry  VI:  ‘  Why 
stand  we  .  .  .  here  .  .  .  And  look  upon,  as  if  the  tragedy  were  play’d  in  jest,’  etc. 
[II,  iii,  25]. — Steevens  :  To  ‘  look  upon,'  in  more  modern  phrase,  is  to  look  on,  i.  e. 
be  a  mere  idle  spectator.  In  this  sense  it  is  employed  in  the  two  preceding  instances. 
— Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  Qy.  ‘  Looks  on's  alike  ?  .  .  .  Here  Mr  Lettsom  (who  proposes  a  very 
bold  alteration)  observes :  ‘  Malone’s  note  on  this  passage  is  nothing  to  the  purpose. 
.  .  .  Steevens’s  note  is,  in  fact,  a  quiet  correction  of  Malone’s.’  It  seems,  indeed, 
plain  enough  that  the  present  passage  is  not  akin  to  the  two  passages  cited  above  by 
Malone,  nor  to  the  passage,  V,  iii,  126  of  this  play:  ‘Strike  all  that  look  upon  wdth 
marvel.’  [It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Dyce  was  aware  that  in  his  conjecture  of 
on's  he  was  anticipated  by  Anon,  in  the  Cam.  Ed. ;  any  more  than  it  is  to  be  sup¬ 
posed  that  Hunter  (i,  425)  was  aware  that  he  had  been  anticipated  by  Malone  in 
his  obvious  emendation  of  ‘  on  all  alike,’  which  Singer  adopted,  without  acknow¬ 
ledgement,  more  suo.  I  cannot  find  that  Lettsom’s  ‘  very  bold  alteration  ’  is  any¬ 
where  recorded. — Ed.] 

497.  Wilt  please  you,  etc.]  Coleridge  (p.  256) :  O  how  more  than  exquisite  is 
this  whole  speech  !  And  that  profound  nature  of  noble  pride  and  grief  venting  them¬ 
selves  in  a  momentary  peevishness  of  resentment  toward  Florizel.  [  Temerarious  as 
it  is  to  criticise  one  word  of  Coleridge,  I  must  nevertheless  confess  that  I  can  see  no 
trace  of  peevishness  here.  Perdita  was  heart-broken :  she  knew  that  Florizel  must  go, 
and  the  sooner  the  parting  was  over  the  better. — Ed.] 

508.  vpon  the  bed  my  father  dy’de,]  For  the  omission  of  the  preposition,  see 
Abbott,  §  394,  and  Shakespeare  passim. 


236 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Where  no  Prieft  fhouels-in  duft.  Oh  curfed  wretch, 
That  knew’ft  this  was  the  Prince,  and  wouldft  aduenture 
To  mingle  faith  with  him.  Vndone,  vndone  : 

If  I  might  dye  within  this  houre,  I  haue  liu’d 

To  die  when  I  defire.  Exit. 

Flo.  Why  looke  you  fo  vpon  me  ? 

I  am  but  forry,  not  affear’d  :  delaid, 

But  nothing  altred  :  What  I  was,  I  am  : 

More  Training  on,  for  plucking  backe  ;  not  following 
My  leafh  vnwillingly. 

Cam.  Gracious  my  Lord, 

You  know  my  Fathers  temper  :  at  this  time 
He  will  allow  no  fpeech  :  (which  I  do  gheffe 


5i  1 


515 


520 


523 


5ii -fhouels-in]  Ff,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 
Knt,  Dyce.  shovels  in  Rowe  et  cet. 

dujl.~\  dust.  [To  Perd.]  Rowe. 
513.  kitn.~\  him!  Dyce. 

515.  Scene  ix.  Pope  +  . 


516.  vpon  me]  Om.  Steev.  conj. 

517.  appear'd]  afraid  Rowe  +  .  af 
feard  or  afeard  Cap.  et  seq. 

522.  my]  your  Ff,  Rowe  et  seq. 


5 1 1.  Where  no  Priest,  etc.]  Grey  (i,  268) :  Meaning  that  he  should  be  buried 
under  the  gallows,  without  the  burial  service.  In  the  Greek  Church  the  putting  earth 
upon  the  body  was  thought  absolutely  necessary,  and  the  priest  enjoyned  to  do  it  in 
the  form  of  a  cross ;  and  in  the  Popish  office,  before  the  Reformation,  the  priest,  or 
person  officiating,  was  ordered  to  put  earth  upon  the  body  of  the  deceased  in  the 
form  of  a  cross,  with  other  ceremonies.  And  by  the  Rubric  in  the  first  Liturgy  of 
Edward  the  Sixth,  1549  (to  which  Shakespeare  probably  alludes),  there  was  the  fol¬ 
lowing  direction  :  ‘  And  then  the  priest  casting  earth  upon  the  corps,  shall  say :  «  I 
commend  thy  soul,”  etc.  In  the  Review  of  the  Liturgy  in  1552,  it  was  altered,  and 
ordered  by  the  Rubric:  ‘That  the  earth  should  be  cast  upon  the  body  by  some 
standing  by,’  etc.,  and  has  so  continued  in  all  our  Common  Prayer  Books  to  this  day. 

51 1.  shouels-in]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  114):  Pronounce  shools-in.  Shoo!,  if  I 
mistake  not,  is  still  the  pronunciation  in  Scotland  and  in  the  North  of  England. 
[Jamieson  ( Scottish  Diet.  Suppl.)  gives  :  *  Shoo!,  A  shovel  ’  and  ‘  To  shoal  on  metaph 
to  cover,  as  in  a  grave.’  As  an  example  of  To  shool  out,  to  throw  out  with  violence  ’ 
he  quotes  from  Sir  Walter,  The  Antiquary,  ii,  259:  ‘  Look  you,  you  base  old  person, 

1  you  do  put  another  jest  upon  me,  I  will  cleave  your  skull-piece  with  this  shovels.’ 
— Hout,  tout,  Maister  Dusterdivel,  I  hae  nae  lived  sae  lang  in  the  warld  neither  to 
be  shoold  out  o’t  that  gate.’ — Ed.] 

514-  If  I  might  dye,  etc.]  Steevens:  So  in  Macb.  II,  iii,  96:  ‘Had  I  but  died 
an  hour  before  this  chance,  I  had  lived  a  blessed  time.’ 

519-  not  following,  etc.]  That  is,  not  following  the  leash  at  all,  not  even  unwill- 
mgly. 

522.  my]  This  is  one  of  a  large  number  of  examples  given  by  Walker  (Crit  i 
276-334)  of  the  ‘substitution  of  words.’  Another  example  occurs  in  line  560  below  •’ 

‘  her  neede  ’  for  ‘  our  needed  ’ 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


237 


You  do  not  purpofe  to  him:)  and  as  hardly 

Will  he  endure  your  fight,  as  yet  I  feare  ;  525 

Then  till  the  fury  of  his  Highneffe  fettle 

Come  not  before  him. 

Flo.  I  not  purpofe  it  : 

I  thinke  Camillo. 

Cam.  Euen  he,  my  Lord.  53° 

Per.  How  often  haue  I  told  you  ’twould  be  thus? 

How  often  faid  my  dignity  would  laft 
But  till  ’twer  knowne  ? 

Flo.  It  cannot  faile,  but  by 

The  violation  of  my  faith,  and  then  535 

Let  Nature  crufh  the  fides  o’th  earth  together, 

And  marre  the  feeds  within.  Lift  vp  thy  lookes  : 

From  my  fucceffion  wipe  me  (Father)  I 
Am  heyre  to  my  affection. 

Cam.  Be  aduis’d.  54° 

Flo.  I  am  :  and  by  my  fancie,  if  my  Reafon 
Will  thereto  be  obedient  :  I  haue  reafon  :  542 

525.  fight,  as  yef\  sight  as  yet,  Han.  Rowe,  think,  Camillo —  Theob.  think, 

Johns,  et  seq.  Camillo  ?  Johns. 

529.  thinke  Camillo.]  think,  Camillo  534-  faile\  fall  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

538.  From  my~\  From  thy  Cap.  Rann. 

526.  his  Highnesse]  Delius:  It  is  not  merely  the  royal  title,  but  the  majesty  of 
Polixenes  which  has  received  offence  by  the  love-making  of  Florizel.  [As  Deighton 
says,  ‘  it  is  his  highness  not  His  Highness.’  Capell  was  the  earliest  to  show  an  appre¬ 
ciation  of  this  meaning  by  discarding  the  capital  H  of  the  Folio  and  of  all  the  editors 
preceding  him ;  since  his  edition,  Keightley’s  is  the  only  one  which  returns  to  the 
old  spelling:  ‘his  Highness.’ — Ed.] 

528.  not  purpose]  See  line  21 1,  above. 

531,  532.  How  often]  The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  The  repetition  of  this  earnest 
reminder  to  the  prince  of  her  having  always  striven  to  show  him  how  unlikely  it  was 
that  his  purpose  should  prosper,  marks  the  noble  indignation  of  Perdita  at  the  king’s 
charge  that  she  has  sought  to  win  Florizel,  and  is  in  strict  harmony  with  her  royal 
nature.  It  is  from  this  imputation  that  she  is  most  solicitous  to  free  herself;  it  is  this 
which  most  keenly  wounds  her;  and  she  remains  quietly  downcast,  with  a  majesty 
of  silent  reserve  worthy  of  Hermione’s  daughter. 

537.  marre  the  seeds]  Cf.  Mach.  IV,  i,  59 :  ‘  though  the  treasure  Of  nature’s 
germens  tumble  all  together  ’  ;  and  Lear,  III,  ii,  8 :  ‘  Crack  nature’s  moulds,  all  ger- 
mens  spill  at  once.’ 

541.  fancie]  That  is,  love.  See  four  stages  suggested  by  Arber,  of  the  use  of  this 
word,  from  the  Elizabethan  love  to  the  present  like,  in  As  You  Like  Lt,  II,  iv,  32,  of 
this  edition. 


238 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 

543 


If  not,  my  fences  better  pleas’d  with  madneffe, 

Do  bid  it  welcome. 

Cam .  This  is  defperate  (fir.) 

Flo.  So  call  it  :  but  it  do’s  fulfill  my  vow: 

I  needs  mull  thinke  it  honefty.  Camillo , 

Not  for  Bohemia ,  nor  the  pompe  that  may 
Be  thereat  gleaned  :  for  all  the  Sun  fees,  or 
The  clofe  earth  wombes,  or  the  profound  feas,  hides 
In  vnknowne  fadomes,  will  I  breake  my  oath 
To  this  my  faire  belou’d  :  Therefore,  I  pray  you, 

As  you  haue  euer  bin  my  Fathers  honour’d  friend, 
When  he  fhall  miffe  me,  as  (in  faith  I  meane  not 
To  fee  him  any  more)  caft  your  good  counfailes 
Vpon  his  pafsion  :  Let  my  felfe,  and  Fortune 
Tug  for  the  time  to  come.  This  you  may  know, 
And  fo  deliuer,  I  am  put  to  Sea 
With  her,  who  heere  I  cannot  hold  on  fhore: 

And  moft  opportune  to  her  neede,  I  haue 


545 


550 


555 


560 


543.  pleas'd  with  madneffe]  ( pleas'd 
with  madneffe')  Ff. 

549.  thereat ]  thereout  Han. 
gleaned  ]  glean'd  Pope. 

all  the ]  all  that  the  Ff,  Rowe. 

550.  feas,  hides ]  seas  hide  Ff,  Rowe+, 
Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Wh.  i,  Dyce  i, 
Cam.  ii.  sea  hides  Cap.  et  cet. 

551-  fadomes]  fathoms  Johns. 

553-  As. ..euer]  As. ..e'er  Mai.  Steev. 


Var.  ’73,  ’78.  As  you've  e'er  Dyce  ii,  iii_ 
553-  bin]  been  F3F4. 

honour'd]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe+, 
Cap.  Var.  Rann. 

554.  as  (in]  (as  in  Rowe  et  seq 
(subs.). 

559-  who]  Dyce.  whom  Ff  et  cet. 
560.  her  neede]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Kntr 
Coll.  i.  the  need  Cap.  our  need  Theob. 
et  cet. 


544*  bid  it]  That  is,  madness ,  unreason. 

546.  but  it  do’s]  Staunton  :  As  is  understood  :  ‘  but  as  it  does  fulfil  my  vow  I 

must,’  etc.  [I  prefer  the  tone  of  calm  assurance,  free  from  any  limitation. _ Ed.] 

550.  wombes]  For  a  list  of  verbs  formed  front  nouns,  see  Abbott,  §  290  We 
have  ‘  climate  ’  as  a  verb  in  V,  i,  208. 

^550-  hides]  See  Abbott  (§  333)  also  for  examples  of  the  third  person  plural 


r  JS,3>  AS  y°U  haUC  CUer  tin]  WALKER  (O*.  i,  81)  :  Write,  ‘  As  y'have  e'er  been. 
[Malone  in  1790  printed  e'er,  which  was  continued  in  every  subsequent  edition  down 
to  and  including  the  Var.  of  1813.  Walker  may  tell  us  to  write  ‘y’have,’  but  he 
could  have  hardly  expected  us  so  to  pronounce  it. — Ed.] 

560.  opportune]  See  ‘  contract  ’  line  465,  above. 

560.  her]  See  ‘my,’  line  522,  above.  Boswell  would  fain  have  it  that  ‘“her 
adherent5  ^  W  °f  ^  ^  VeSSel;’  berein  Knight  is  Ns  Solitary 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


239 

561 


A  Veffell  rides  faft  by,  but  not  prepar’d 
For  this  defigne.  What  courfe  I  meane  to  hold 
Shall  nothing  benefit  your  knowledge,  nor 
Concerne  me  the  reporting. 

Cam.  O  my  Lord, 

I  would  your  fpirit  were  eafier  for  aduice, 

Or  ftronger  for  your  neede. 

Flo.  Hearke  Perdita, 
lie  heare  you  by  and  by. 

Cam.  Hee’s  irremoueable, 

Refolu’d  for  flight :  Now  were  I  happy  if 
His  going,  I  could  frame  to  ferue  my  turne, 
Saue  him  from  danger,  do  him  loue  and  honor, 
Purchafe  the  fight  againe  of  deere  Sicillia, 

And  that  vnhappy  King,  my  Matter,  whom 
I  fo  much  thirfl.  to  fee. 

Flo.  Now  good  Camillo, 

I  am  fo  fraught  with  curious  bufineffe,  that 
I  leaue  out  ceremony. 


565 


570 


575 


579 


568.  [drawing  her  aside.  Cap.  et  seq. 
(subs.). 

569.  [To  Cam.  Theob. 

570.  irremoueable]  immoveable  Anon, 
ap.  Cam. 

571.  Refolu'd ]  Refold’d  F=. 


576.  [Aside.  Rowe  +  . 

578.  curious ]  serious  Coll,  iii  (MS), 
Huds.  anxious  Gould. 

579.  [Going.  Mai.  et  seq.  (except 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Cam.  Wh.  ii). 


561.  Vessell  rides]  See  ‘  was  faire,’  line  397,  above. 

568,  569.  Hearke  Perdita,  etc.]  The  Text.  Notes  show  the  interpretation  which 
modem  editors,  following  Capell  and  Theobald,  have  put  on  these  lines.  The 
Cowden-Clarkes  :  By  Florizel’s  taking  Perdita  aside,  we  are  made  to  perceive  how 
he  sees  that  she  stands  silently, — as  it  were  irresponsively  and  unassentingly  by, — 
while  he  speaks  to  Camillo ;  and  how  he  hastens  to  confer  with  her,  and  convince 
her  of  his  unswerved  faith,  and  persuade  her  to  his  views;  moreover,  it  affords  oppor¬ 
tunity  for  Camillo’s  soliloquy,  which  tells  the  audience  his  plan. 

570.  irremoueable]  Staunton:  ‘  Irremoveable  ’  is  here  employed  adverbially: 
‘  He’s  irremoveably  resolved,’  etc.  So  in  III,  ii,  202  :  ‘  And  damnable  ungrateful.’ 
[Consequently,  Staunton  puts  no  comma  after  ‘  irremoveable.’] 

578.  curious]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  MS  substitutes  serious  for  ‘curious,’  and 
although  we  apprehend  that  the  former  is  the  true  and  more  applicable  word,  we  are 
hardly  so  confident  of  it  as  to  warrant  the  insertion  of  serious  in  our  text. — R.  G. 
White  (ed.  i)  :  Serious  is  a  very  plausible  suggestion ;  but  ‘  curious  ’  was  used  in 
Shakespeare’s  day  with  great  latitude  of  meaning,  and  sometimes  in  the  sense  of 
requiring  of  or  taking  care,  solicitous ;  and  therefore  it  is  not  safe  to  make  any  change 
in  the  text. 


240 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 

580 


Cam.  Sir,  I  thinke 

You  haue  heard  of  my  poore  feruices,  i’th  loue 
That  I  haue  borne  your  Father  ? 

Flo.  Very  nobly 

Haue  you  deferu’d  :  It  is  my  Fathers  Muficke 
To  fpeake  your  deeds  :  not  little  of  his  care 
To  haue  them  recompenc’d,  as  thought  on. 

Cam.  Well  (my  Lord) 

If  you  may  pleafe  to  thinke  I  loue  the  King, 

And  through  him,  what’s  neereft  to  him,  which  is 
Your  gracious  felfe  ;  embrace  but  my  dire6lion, 

If  your  more  ponderous  and  fetled  proieft 
May  fuffer  alteration.  On  mine  honor, 
lie  point  you  where  you  fhall  haue  fuch  receiuing 
As  fhall  become  your  Highneffe,  where  you  may 
Enioy  your  Miftris  ;  from  the  whom,  I  fee 
There’s  no  difiunftion  to  be  made,  but  by 


585 


590 


595 


581.  You  haue]  You've  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

589.  through  him,  what's ]  Ff,  Rowe  + , 
Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Sta. 
thorough  him,  what's  Theob.  i.  through 
him,  what  is  Han.  et  cet. 


589.  neerejl]  nearest  Walker,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Huds. 

S9°-  /Aft  /]  self,  Rowe. 

592.  alteration.  On]  alteration  :  On 
Ff,  Rowe,  alteration,  on  Pope  et  seq. 
(subs.). 


579-  ceremony]  Cambridge  Editors:  We  think  Malone’s  stage-direction 
‘  going  ’  [see  Text.  Notes]  was  inserted  under  a  mistaken  view  of  Florizel’s  mean¬ 
ing.  He  apologises  to  Camillo  for  talking  apart  with  Perdita  in  his  presence.  At 
the  commencement  of  this  whispered  conversation  he  said  to  Camillo,  ‘  I’ll  hear 
you  by  and  by,’  and  at  the  close  of  it  he  turns  again  to  him  with  *  Now  eood 
Camillo,’  etc. 

581.  seruices]  From  what  Camillo  foretells  about  the  reception  of  Florizel  by 
Leontes,  it  is  evident  that  Florizel  knew  of  the  special  service  which  Camillo  had 
rendered  in  aiding  the  escape  of  Leontes  from  Sicily. 

588.  If  you  may  please]  Walker  ( Crit .  i,  206):  Here  si  tibi  placeat  is  the 
more  suitable  meaning.-ABBOTT  (§  309) :  ‘  May  ’  is  here  used  as  a  modest  way  of 
stating  what  ought  to  be  well  known. — Deighton :  Here  ‘may’  is  extremely 
deferential. 

589.  neerest]  This  is  one  of  the  superlatives,  which  Walker  cites  (  Vers.  169, 
and  see  I,  ii,  109),  wherein  the  <r  is  suppressed,  neer'st.  But  Walker’s  text  was,  I  am 
sure,  the  Var.  of  1821,  wherein  ‘  what’s  ’  of  the  Folio  is  printed  what  is.  Hence,  a 
contraction  which  would  render  the  Var.  text  rhythmical  would  render  the  Folio  text 
unrhythmical. 

595-  from  the  whom]  See  ‘  the  which,’  II,  i,  154,  or  see  Abbott,  §  270,  where 
other  examples  are  given. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


241 


(As  heauens  forefend)  your  ruine  :  Marry  her,  597 

And  with  my  beft  endeuours,  in  your  abfence, 

Your  difcontenting  Father,  ftriue  to  qualifie 
And  bring  him  vp  to  liking.  600 

Flo'  How  Camillo 
May  this  (almoft  a  miracle)  be  done  ? 

That  I  may  call  thee  fomething  more  then  man, 

And  after  that  truft  to  thee. 

Cam.  Haue  you  thought  on  605 

A  place  whereto  you’l  go  ? 

Flo.  Not  any  yet  : 

But  as  th’vnthought-on  accident  is  guiltie 

To  what  we  wildely  do,  fo  we  profeffe  609 


598.  your]  youe  F2. 

abfence]  absence,  I'll  Daniel  ap. 

Cam. 

599.  difcontenting]  discontented 

Rowe  + . 

Jlriue]  I'll  strive  Rowe  ii  +  , 


Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Rann.  I  will  strive 
Han.  Var.  ’73. 

599,  600.  to  qualifie... liking]  One 
line,  Han.  Var.  ’73. 

600.  him  vp]  Om.  Rowe. 

604.  thee.]  thee  ?  F4,  Rowe  +  . 

609.  To]  Of  Rowe  + .  Towards  Han. 


598.  with  my  best  endeuours,  etc.]  Down  to  1790  all  editors  followed  Rowe’s 
Second  Ed.  and  completed,  as  they  thought,  the  meaning  of  the  Folio,  by  reading 
‘  I'll  strive  ’  in  the  next  line.  In  that  year  Malone  restored  the  text  of  the  Folio, 
and  revealed  its  meaning  by  enclosing  in  a  parenthesis  the  words :  ‘  (with  my  best 
endeavours  in  your  absence)’ ;  he  has  been  followed  therein  substantially  by  every  sub¬ 
sequent  editor.  His  note  is  as  follows :  ‘  And  where  you  may,  by  letters,  entreaties, 
etc.  endeavour  to  soften  your  incensed  father,  and  reconcile  him  to  the  match ;  to 
effect  which,  my  best  services  shall  not  be  wanting  during  your  absence.  “  Discon¬ 
tenting”  is  in  our  author’s  language  the  same  as  discontented.' — Halliwell  quotes 
from  The  Play  of  Stuck  ley,  1605  [line  2050,  ed.  Simpson]  :  ‘  Friend  Vernon,  leave 
such  discontenting  speech ;  Your  melancholy  overflows  your  spleen,’  etc. — Abbott 
(§  372)  says  that  ‘  discontenting  ’  may  perhaps  be  explained  by  the  use  of  the  verb 
‘  content  you’ ;  ‘  I  discontent  (me)’  meaning  ‘ 1  am  discontented.’  [We  have  ‘  losing’ 
for  ‘  being  lost  ’  in  V,  ii,  79. — Ed.] 

608.  vnthought-on  accident]  M.  Mason  (p.  137) :  That  is,  the  unsuspected 
discovery  made  by  Polixenes.  [This  may  be  so,  but  the  whole  phrase  is  none  the 
less  a  general  truth. — Ed.] 

608,  609.  guiltie  To]  Malone:  Cf.  Com.  of  Err.  Ill,  ii,  168:  ‘But,  lest  myself 
be  guilty  to  self-wrong,’  etc. — Abbott  (§  188) :  In  this  difficult  passage  ‘  guilty  ’  seems 
used  for  responsible,  and  chance  is  said  to  be  ‘responsible  to'  rashness  (personified). 
(Or  is  ‘  to  ’  as  to,  i.  e.  as  regards  ?)  [The  passage  from  the  Com.  of  Err.  is  not  pre¬ 
cisely  parallel ;  it  means  :  ‘  lest  I  be  guilty  to  the  extent  of  wronging  myself,  I’ll  stop 
my  ears,’  etc.  I  prefer  the  solution  involved  in  Abbott’s  query,  and  to  take  ‘to’  as 
equivalent  to  as  to. — Ed.] 

16 


242 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 

610 


Our  felues  to  be  the  flaues  of  chance,  and  flyes 
Of  euery  winde  that  blowes. 

Cam ,  Then  lift  to  me  : 

This  followes,  if  you  will  not  change  your  purpofe 
But  vndergo  this  flight;  make  for  Sicillia, 

And  there  prefent  your  felfe,  and  your  fayre  Princeffe,  615 

(For  fo  I  fee  fhe  muft  be)  Tore  Leontes ; 

She  fhall  be  habited,  as  it  becomes 

The  partner  of  your  Bed.  Me  thinkes  I  fee 

Leontes  opening  his  free  Armes,and  weeping 

His  Welcomes  forthrasks  thee  there  Sonne  forgiueneffe,  620 

As  Twere  i’th’Fathers  perfon:  kiffes  the  hands 

Of  your  frefh  Princeffe ;  ore  and  ore  diuides  him, 

’Twixt  his  vnkindneffe,  and  his  Kindneffe  :  th’one 
He  chides  to  Hell,  and  bids  the  other  grow 
Fafter  then  Thought,  or  Time.  625 

Flo.  Worthy  Camillo , 

What  colour  for  my  Vifitation,  fhall  I 

Hold  vp  before  him  ?  628 


610.  chance]  chances  Rowe  i. 

620.  asks]  ash  Long  MS  ap.  Cam. 
thee  there ]  thee  the  FjF^  there 

the  Ritson.  thee,  the  Rowe  et  seq.  (subs.). 

621.  kiffes \  kiss  Long  MS  ap.  Cam. 


622.  diuides]  divide  Long  MS  ap. 
Cam. 

623.  vnkindneffe ]  unkindenfs  F  . 
623.  th’one']  Ff,  Rowe+,  Coll.  Dyce, 

Wh.  the  one  Cap.  et  cet. 


610.  chance]  Johnson  :  As  chance  has  driven  me  to  these  extremities,  so  I  com¬ 
mit  myself  to  chance,  to  be  conducted  through  them. 

616.  must  be)  ’fore  Leontes]  Another  instance  of  careful  printing.  The  apos¬ 
trophe  marks,  as  it  should  and  does  mark  in  modern  editions,  the  omission,  it  cannot 
be  called  the  absorption  of  be- ;  which  is  not  here  the  ordinary  omission  authorised 

by  poetic  license,  but  is  due  to  the  ‘  be  ’  immediately  preceding  it.  See  II,  i,  18. _ Ed 

620.  thee  there  Sonne]  See  Text.  Notes  for  the  correction  of  this  error. 

623.  th  one]  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  91)  observes  that  ‘  euphony  or  correct  pronunciation 
here  requires  the  pronunciation  un.’  [The  pronunciation  own  is,  I  think,  to  be  pre¬ 
ferred;  that  is,  as  it  is  preserved  in  alone  and  atone. — Ed.] 

625.  Faster]  Schmidt  ( Trans,  p.  284) :  According  to  an  illogical  conception, 
which  is  not  infrequent  in  Shakespeare,  <  faster  ’  is  to  be  here  taken  first  in  the  sense 
of  firmer,  and  then  in  the  sense  of  quicker.  [This  assertion  is  virtually  repeated  by 
Dr  Schmidt  in  his  Lexicon,  where  he  gives  <  faster  ’  in  this  passage  as  an  instance  of 
a  word  used  in  different  significations.  Comment  is  needless.  Of  all  elements  utterly 
lacking  stability,  ‘  thought  ’  and  ‘time  ’  are  almost  the  archtypes. _ Ed.] 

627.  What  colour,  etc.]  Deighton  :  There  may  be  an  idea  of  a  ship  hoisting  its 
colours  as  a  signal. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


243 


Cam.  Sent  by  the  King  your  Father 
To  greet  him,  and  to  giue  him  comforts.  Sir,  630 

The  manner  of  your  bearing  towards  him,  with 
What  you  (as  from  your  Father)  fhall  deliuer, 

Things  knowne  betwixt  vs  three,  lie  write  you  downe, 

The  which  fhall  point  you  forth  at  euery  fitting 

What  you  muff  fay:  that  he  fhall  not  perceiue,  635 

But  that  you  haue  your  Fathers  Bofome  there, 

And  fpeake  his  very  Heart. 

Flo.  I  am  bound  to  you  : 

There  is  fome  fappe  in  this. 

Cam.  A  Courfe  more  promifing,  640 

Then  a  wild  dedication  of  your  felues 
To  vnpath’d  Waters,  vndrearrfd  Shores;  moft  certaine, 

To  Miferies  enough  :  no  hope  to  helpe  you, 

But  as  you  fhake  off  one,  to  take  another  : 

Nothing  fo  certaine,  as  your  Anchors,  who  645 

Doe  their  beft  office,  if  they  can  but  flay  you, 

Where  you’le  be  loth  to  be  :  befides  you  know, 

Profperitie’s  the  very  bond  of  Loue, 

Whofe  frefb  complexion,  and  whofe  heart  together 

Affli£lion  alters.  650 


630.  comforts ]  comfort  Anon.  ap.  634.  fitting']  fitting  Theob.  Cap.  sift- 

Cam.  Huds.  ing  Thirlby. 

644.  another  .•]  another  Han. 


633.  betwixt]  Murray  ( N  E.  D.)  gives  examples  which  show  that  ‘betwixt’ 
was  used  in  reference  to  more  than  two,  and  that  in  early  use  it  was  equivalent  to 
among. 

634.  The  which]  See  ‘the  which,’  II,  i,  154. 

634.  sitting]  Theobald:  ‘Every  sitting’  methinks  gives  a  very  poor  idea. 
Every  fitting ,  as  I  have  ventured  to  correct  the  text,  means,  every  convenient  oppor¬ 
tunity  ;  every  juncture,  when  it  is  fit  to  speak  of  such  or  such  a  point. — Warburton  : 
‘  Sitting  ’  is  very  expressive  and  means,  at  every  audience  you  shall  have  of  the  king 
and  council.  The  council-days  being,  in  our  author’s  time,  called  in  common  speech 
the  sittings. 

642.  vndream’d]  Warburton  (N.  &•  Qu.  VIII,  iii,  203)  in  a  MS  marginal  note 
conjectures  ‘  undeem'd,  i.  e.  untried.’ 

644.  take  another]  Steevens  :  So,  in  Cym.  I,  v,  54 :  ‘  to  shift  nis  being  Is  to 
exchange  one  misery  for  another.’ 

645.  who]  For  other  examples  of  reference  by  ‘  who  ’  to  irrational  antecedents,  see 
Abbott,  §  264,  and  Shakespeare  passim. 


244 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  IV,  SC.  iv. 

651 


Perd.  One  of  thefe  is  true  : 

I  thinke  Affli<5tion  may  fubdue  the  Cheeke, 

But  not  take-in  the  Mind. 

Cam.  Yea  ?  fay  you  fo  ? 

There  fhall  not,  at  your  Fathers  Houfe,  thefe  feuen  yeeres  655 
Be  borne  another  fuch. 

Flo.  My  good  Camillo , 

She’s  as  forward,  of  her  Breeding,  as 

She  is  i’th’  reare  ’  our  Birth.  6  So 


653.  take-in]  F2F3,  Cap.  Var.  ’73. 
take  in  F^  et  cet. 

654.  Yea  /]  Yea,  Rowe. 

655.  who ]  which  Han. 

658.  She’s]  Ff,  Rowe,  Sing.  Wh.  i. 
She  is  Pope  et  cet. 

658,  659.  She’s... She  is]  One  line, 
Spence  (N.  &  Qu.  VII,  ix,  24). 

659.  She  is  i’th ’  reare  '  our  Birth]  Ff 
{rear  F+),  Dyce.  She  is  i'th ’  rear  o'  her 
birth  Rowe  i,  Cam.  ii.  She  is  i’  th.'  rear 


o'  our  birth  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb. 
Coll,  ii,  Cam.  i.  Rife.  I'  th.'  rear  of 
birth  Han.  Cap.  Rann,  Steev.  Var.  ’03, 
’13,  Coll.  (MS).  She  is  i'  th.’  rear  of 
birth  Johns.  Var.  ’73,  ’78,  ’85,  Mai. 
She  is  i  ’  the  rear  our  birth  Var.  ’21, 
Coll,  i,  iii,  Hal.  Del.  Dtn.  She  is  i’  the 
rear  of  our  birth  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly, 
Hunter.  She  V  th'  rear  f  our  birth 
Wh.  /’  the  rear  our  birth  Huds.  She 
is,  I  fear,  of  our  birth  Bulloch. 


65i~6S3-  One  of  these  .  .  .  Mind]  Mrs  Jameson  (i,  236) :  Perdita  has  another 
characteristic,  which  lends  to  the  poetical  delicacy  of  the  delineation  a  certain  strength 
and  moral  elevation,  which  is  peculiarly  striking.  It  is  that  sense  of  truth  and  recti¬ 
tude,  that  upright  simplicity  of  mind,  which  disdains  all  crooked  and  indirect  means, 
-which  would  not  stoop  for  an  instant  to  dissemblance,  and  is  mingled  with  a  noble 
confidence  in  her  love  and  in  her  lover.  In  this  spirit  is  her  answer  to  Camillo. 

655,  656.  There  .  .  .  such]  Schmidt  (in  the  Notes  to  his  Translation)  ridicules 
Tieck’s  translation  of  these  lines :  ‘  Es  wird  wol  deines  Vaters  Haus  nicht  wieder  in 
sieben  Jahren  solch  ein  Kind  gebaren.’  ‘  As  if,’  says  Schmidt,  ‘  at  the  end  of  seven 
years  the  likelihood  would  be  greater  !  ‘  Seven  years,’  he  goes  on  to  say,  ‘  in  Shake¬ 

speare,  means  an  indefinite,  considerable  time  [which  is  just. — Ed.]  ,  of  which  fact, 
forsooth,  our  interpreters  and  glossarists  know  nothing,’  [which  is  doubtful.  There¬ 
upon  Dr  Schmidt  thus  translates :  <  Viel  Wasser  fliesst  vom  Berg,  eh’  Eurem  Hause 
Ein  zweites  Kind,’  etc.] 

659.  i'thTeare  ’  our  Birth]  Note  the  careful  apostrophe  before  ‘  ’our,’  i.  e.  <  of 
cur.’  See  II,  i,  18.— Lettsom  (ap.  Dyce,  ii)  :  Read  ‘  as  I’th’  rear  o'  her  birth.  The 
second  ‘  She  is  is,  I  think,  a  mere  double  of  the  first,  as  Hanmer  saw,  if  indeed  it  is 
not  a  correction  out  of  its  proper  place.  The  Folio  has  ‘  She’s  ’  in  the  line  before, 
and  for  this  probably  *  She  is'  was  intended  to  be  substituted.  The  preposition  ‘of’ 
in  both  these  lines  means  in  respect  of— Abbott  (§  202)  inclines  to  think  that  here 
is  a  case  where  a  prepositional  phrase,  as  in  the  rear  of  is  condensed  into  a  preposition  ; 
<thus:  She  is  in  the  rear  our  birth.’— Deighton  :  Even  if  the  preposition  ‘of’  be 
emitted  altogether,  the  ellipsis,  though  somewhat  harsh,  is  intelligible :  She  is  as  for¬ 
ward  in  respect  to  education  and  manners,  as  she  is  backward  in  respect  to  birth  com¬ 
pared  to  me.  The  antithesis  between  ‘  birth  ’  and  ‘  breeding,’  between  ‘  forward  ’  and 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


245 

660 


Cam.  I  cannot  fay/tis  pitty 
She  lacks  Inftruftions,  for  fhe  feemes  a  Miftreffe 
To  moft  that  teach. 

Perd.  Your  pardon  Sir,  for  this, 

He  blufh  you  Thanks. 

Flo.  My  prettieft  Perdita.  665, 

But  O,  the  Thornes  we  ftand  vpon:  ( Camillo ) 

Preferuer  of  my  Father,  now  of  me, 

The  Medicine  of  our  Houfe  :  how  fhall  we  doe  ? 

We  are  not  furnifh’d  like  Bohemia’s  Sonne, 

Nor  lhall  appeare  in  Sicilia.  670 

Cam.  My  Lord, 

Feare  none  of  this  :  I  thinke  you  know  my  fortunes 
Doe  all  lye  there  :  it  fhall  be  fo  my  care, 

To  haue  you  royally  appointed,  as  if  674 


663,  664.  Sir,  for  this ,  II e]  Sir,  for 
this.  lie  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  Sir;  for 
this  I'll  Han.  Rann,  Coll.  Ktly,  Cam. 
Huds.  Sir,  for  this  ;  I' ll  Theob.  et  cet. 
(subs.). 

665.  Perdita.]  Perdita —  Rowe  +  . 

666.  vpon  .•]  upon,  F^.  upon.  Rowe. 
upon  !  Pope. 


668.  Medicine ]  med'cin  Cap.  (Er¬ 
rata).  ntedicin  Var.  ’78,  Rann,  Mai.. 
Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13. 

670.  Sicilia.]  Dyce,  Wh.  Col.  ii,  iii,, 
Sta.  Cam.  Huds.  Sicily.  Ff.  Sicilia — 
Var.  ’21,  Knt,  Coll,  i,  Ktly.  Sicily — 
Rowe  et  cet. 


« rear  ’  shows  that  there  cannot  be  much  corruption  in  the  text,  though  the  Globe 
editors  obelize  the  line. 

668.  Medicine]  Capell  (p.  178):  ‘  Medecin'  in  the  sense  of  physician,  being 
unknown  to  those  printers,  they  have  spelt  it  medecine. — Theobald  ( Nichols ,  ii,  365)  % 
I  read  medecin,  Fr.  doctor.  [The  Cam.  Ed.  gives  this  emendation  to  Theobald,  who 
undoubtedly  made  it  earlier  than  Capell;  but  Capell’s  note  was  the  first  to  be  printed; 
in  fact,  Theobald  himself  never  printed  his  conjecture  at  all.] 

670.  Sicilia]  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  84)  :  Here  all  the  modern  editors  (in  opposition  to 
the  old  copies)  put  a  break  at  the  end  of  the  speech,  as  if  it  were  unfinished.  But 
this  sense  is  complete :  *  Nor  shall  appear  [like  Bohemia’s  son]  in  Sicilia.’ — Collier 
(eds.  ii  and  iii,  reading  appear' t) :  That  is,  ‘  Nor  shall  appear  « like  Bohemia’s  son  ” 
in  Sicilia.’  In  the  old  copies  V  dropped  out,  making  the  sentence  appear  as  if  un¬ 
finished.  This  small  addition  is  from  the  MS.— Lettsom  (Note,  Walker,  Crit.  i, 
232)  :  Collier’s  appear' t  is  scarcely  English,  but  it  suggested  to  me  what  I  suspect  to 
be  the  genuine  reading:  ‘  Nor  shall  appear  so  in  Sicilia.’  ‘  My  lord  seems  to  be 
extra  metrum.  [Staunton  proposed  the  same  emendation.] 

674.  as  if]  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  114):  Note  the  position  of  ‘as  if’  in  the  line. 
Pronounce,  I  think,  as  if-,  since  ’r  if  seems  hardly  imaginable.— Dyce  (ed.  ii)  :  Mr 
Lettsom  suspects  that  here  we  ought  to  omit  ‘if’  and  to  read  play'd.  [Hudson 
adopted  play'd.\ 


246 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  xv,  sc.  iv. 


The  Scene  you  play,  were  mine.  For  inftance  Sir,  675 

That  you  may  know  you  fhall  not  want:  one  word. 

Enter  Autolicus . 

Ant.  Ha,  ha,  what  a  Foole  Honeftie  is  ?  and  Truft(his 
fworne  brother)  a  very  fimple  Gentleman.  I  haue  fold 
all  my  Tromperie:  not  a  counterfeit  Stone,  not  a  Ribbon,  680 
Glaffe,  Pomander,  Browch,  Table-booke,  Ballad,  Knife, 

Tape,  Gloue,  Shooe-tye,  Bracelet,  Horne-Ring,  to  keepe  682 


675.  Scene]  Scant  F2F  . 
you]  yov  F2. 

mine]  true  Coll.  MS. 

676.  [They  talk  aside.  Rowe. 

677.  Scene  x.  Pope-f. 


677.  Autolicus]  Autolichus  F3F4. 
Autolycus,  as  a  Courtier.  Kean. 

681.  Browch]  Ff,  Rowe  +  .  brock 
Cap.  brooch  Var.  ’73. 


681.  Pomander]  Grey  (i,  269) :  A  little  round  ball  made  of  perfumes,  and  wrorn 
tn  the  pocket  or  about  the  neck,  to  prevent  infection  in  times  of  plague.  In  a  tract, 
entitled  Certain  necessary  Directions,  as  well  for  the  curing  of  the  Plague,  as  for 
preventing  Infection,  1636,  there  are  directions  for  making  two  sorts  of  pomanders, 
one  for  the  rich,  and  another  for  the  poor.  [Hereupon  Grey  gives  the  receipt  for  the 
rich.  Steevens  quotes  another  receipt  from  Lingua,  IV,  iii  (p.  419,  ed.  Hazlitt- 
Dodsley)  which  I  think  is  meant  to  be  humourous.  Douce  gives  references  to  other 
receipts,  all  different ;  and  Halliwell  devotes  six  folio  pages  to  the  subject,  with 
illustrations.] — Knight:  We  have  a  passage  in  Cavendish’s  Life  of  tVolsey,  in 
which  the  great  Cardinal  is  described  coming  after  mass  into  his  privy  chamber, 

‘  holding  in  his  hand  a  very  fair  orange,  whereof  the  meat  or  substance  within  was 
taken  out,  and  filled  up  again  with  the  part  of  a  sponge,  wherein  was  vinegar  and 
other  confections  against  the  pestilent  airs;  the  which  he  most  commonly  smelt  unto, 
passing  among  the  press,  or  else  when  he  was  pestered  with  many  suitors.’  This  was 
a  pomander.  It  appears  from  a  passage  in  Burgon’s  Life  of  Sir  Thomas  Gresham 
that  the  supposed  orange  held  in  the  hand  in  several  ancient  portraits  was  in  truth  a 
pomander.  [The  Century  Diet.  :  Corrupted  from  earlier  pomeambre,  derived  from 
Old  French ,  pomme  d'ambre,  a  ball  of  amber.  Cotgrave :  Pomme  de  senteurs.  A 
Tomander,  or  sweet  Ball.] 

681.  Table-booke]  Halliwell:  The  table,  or  memorandum-books,  used  in 
England  in  the  sixteenth  century,  were  usually  imported  from  Germany.  In  the 
Secretes  of  Mayster  Alexis  of  Piemount,  1559,  is  a  receipt *  1  to  make  white  tables  to 
write  in,  with  the  point  of  a  wire,  suche  as  come  out  of  Germanie,’  which  is  as  follows  : 

i  ake  plaister  called  Gipsum,  cribled  and  syfted,  and  stiepe  it,  and  temper  it  with 
hartes  glue,  or  other,  and  geve  your  parchement  leafe  one  touch  with  it,  and  whan  it 
is  drie,  scrape  it  that  it  may  be  even  and  bright,  and  cover  it  over  agayne  with  the 
said  plaister  called  Gipsum,  and  scrape  it  as  before ;  than  take  ceruse,  wel  braied  and 
sifted,  and  stiepe  it  with  the  oile  of  linseed  sodden ;  annoynt  your  tables  with  this 
mixtion,  and  let  it  drie  in  the  sliadowe  the  space  of  five  or  six  daies.  This  doone, 
take  a  clout  or  linnen  clothe  wete  in  water,  wherewith  you  shall  slike  and  make 
smoothe  the  sayde  tables,  but  the  clothe  muste  fyrste  be  wronge  harde,  and  the  water 
pressed  oute,  then  leave  it  so  the  space  of  xv  or  xx  dayes,  until  it  be  thorowe  dry, 
than  apply  it  to  your  use.’  The  table-books  of  the  Shakespearian  period  were  occa- 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


I 


247 

683 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


my  Pack  from  fafting  :  they  throng  who  fhould  buy  firft, 
as  if  my  Trinkets  had  beene  hallowed,  and  brought  a  be¬ 
nediction  to  the  buyer  :  by  which  meanes,  I  faw  whofe  685 
Purfe  was  belt  in  Picture  ;  and  what  I  faw,  to  my  good 
vfe,  I  remembred.  My  Clowne  (who  wants  but  fome- 
thing  to  be  a  reafonable  man)  grew  fo  in  loue  with  the 
Wenches  Song,  that  hee  would  not  ftirre  his  Petty-toes, 
till  he  had  both  Tune  and  Words,  which  fo  drew  the  reft  690 
of  the  Heard  to  me,  that  all  their  other  Sences  ftucke  in 
Eares  :  you  might  haue  pinch’d  a  Placket,  it  was  fence- 
leffe  ;  ’twas  nothing  to  gueld  a  Cod-peece  of  a  Purfe  :  I 
would  haue  fill’d  Keyes  of  that  hung  in  Chaynes  :  no  694 


683.  fafiing]  fafining  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope. 

throng]  thronged  Coll,  ii,  iii 
(MS),  Huds. 

686.  Picture]  pasture  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

687.  remembred.]  remember  F  . 

My]  My  good  Rowe  + . 


689.  Wenches]  Wenches'  Johns. 

Petty-toes]  Pettytoes  Ff. 

692.  Eares]  their  ears  Mason,  Rann. 
694.  would]  could  Long  MS.  ap. 
Cam. 

694.  fill'd  Keyes  of]  Fa.  fil'd  Keyes 
off  F3F4  (Keys  Fff 


sionally  in  large  oblong  quarto,  a  prepared  composition  being  placed  on  the  parchment 
or  vellum. 

683.  throng]  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  Is  this  meant  for  the  past  tense,  or  is  Collier’s  MS 
right  in  substituting  thronged? 

684.  hallowed]  Johnson  :  This  alludes  to  beads  often  sold  by  the  Romanists,  as 
made  particularly  efficacious  by  the  touch  of  some  relic. 

686.  best  in  Picture]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  No  remark  has  been  made  upon 
this  singular  phrase,  the  meaning  of  which  is  not  very  clear.  Is  ‘  picture  ’  used  in 
the  sense  of  seeming,  and  with  an  eye  to  a  pun  upon  ‘  pick  ’  ?  [White  has  no  note 
on  this  ‘  not  very  clear  ’  phrase,  in  his  Second  Edition.  It  is  to  be  presumed,  there¬ 
fore,  that  his  ‘  washerwoman  ’  (see  p.  xii  of  his  Preface )  had  in  the  mean  time 
‘cleared’  it  for  him,  as  well  as  her  starch.  Having  no  such  help,  I  must  confess 
that  the  phrase  still  remains  for  me  obscure.  The  Rev.  John  Hunter  says  that 
‘picture’  means  the  ‘stamp  of  coin.’  Schmidt  {Lex.)  observes  of  the  phrase  that 
‘  Autolycus  is  playing  the  amateur,’  whatever  that  may  mean.  Rolfe  defines  ‘  picture  ’ 
by  ‘  had  the  best  look.’  Hudson  remarks  that  ‘  in  picture  ’  seems  to  be  ‘  used  here  as 
a  sort  of  equivoque ;  the  sense  of  in  picking  being  implied.’  Lastly,  Deighton  ex¬ 
plains  ‘  best  in  picture  ’  by  ‘  best  to  look  at,  i.  e.  fullest.’  An  Anonymous  critic  is 
recorded  in  the  Cambridge  Edition  as  having  suggested  the  substitution  of  pasture 
for  ‘  picture,’  which  has  much  to  commend  it,  if  the  text  is  to  be  disturbed  at  all, 
which  is  not  to  be  thought  of.  From  pasture  to  posture  the  transition  is  not  violent, 
and  posture  may  mean  not  only  appearance ,  of  which  Schmidt  gives  examples,  but 
it  may  mean  the  position  as  one  which  would  be  convenient  for  a  cut-purse.  But 
such  phrases  must  be  left  undisturbed  till  time  reveals  them  incontestably. — Ed.] 

693,  694.  I  would]  It  is  possible  that  here,  as  Hudson  says,  ‘  would  ’  is  used  for 
coudd.  At  the  same  time,  the  meaning  of  Autolycus  may  be :  I  would  have  filed 
them  off  had  I  wanted  to. — Ed. 


248 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


hearing,  no  feeling,  but  my  Sirs  Song,  and  admiring  the 
Nothing  of  it.  So  that  in  this  time  of  Lethargie,  I  pickd 
and  cut  mod  of  their  Feftiuall  Purfes  :  And  had  not  the 
old-man  come  in  with  a  Whoo-bub  againft  his  Daugh¬ 
ter,  and  the  Kings  Sonne,  and  fear’d  my  Chowghes  from 
the  Chaffe,  I  had  not  left  a  Purfe  aliue  in  the  whole 
Army. 

Cam.  Nay,  but  my  Letters  by  this  meanes  being  there 
So  foone  as  you  arriue,  fhall  cleare  that  doubt. 

Flo.  And  thofe  that  you’le  procure  from  King  Leontes} 

Cam.  Shall  fatisfie  your  Father. 

Perd.  Happy  be  you  : 

All  that  you  fpeake,  fhewes  faire. 

Cam.  Who  haue  we  here  ? 

Wee’le  make  an  Inftrument  of  this  :  omit 
Nothing  may  giue  vs  aide. 

Aut.  If  they  haue  ouer-heard  me  now:why  hanging. 
Cam.  How  now  (good  Fellow) 

Why  fhak’ft  thou  fo  ?  Feare  not  (man) 

Here’s  no  harme  intended  to  thee. 

Aut.  I  am  a  poore  Fellow,  Sir. 


695 


7  00 


705 


710 


7i5 


696.  Nothing ]  noting  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 
Wh.  ii. 

698.  old-man']  old  man  F  F  . 
Whoo-bub]  hubbub  Steev. 

699.  Chowghes]  Rowe,  choughs  Pope. 

701.  [Cam.  Flor.  and  Perd.  come  for¬ 
ward.  Theob. 

702,  703.  Prose,  Pope. 

704.  Leontes  ?]  Ff,  Coll.  Leontes— 


Rowe  et  cet. 

708.  Who]  Whom  Coll. 

[Seeing  Autol.  Theob. 

71 1.  [Aside.  Theob. 

712-714.  As  verse,  endin g/o  ? ...thee. 
Han.  Cap.  Var.  Rann.  As  prose,  Mai. 
et  seq. 

713.  Why]  come,  why  Han.  where¬ 
fore  Cap. 


695.  my  Sirs]  A  reminiscence  of  the  French,  like  ‘  in  happy  time !’ 

696.  Nothing]  Staunton  :  It  has  been  suggested  that  ‘  nothing  ’  in  this  place  is 

a  misprint  for  noting-,  but  like  ‘moth’  for  mote,  it  is  only  the  old  mode  of  spelling 
that  word.  r  & 

698.  Whoo-bub]  The  old  spelling  of  hubbub.  It  occurs  in  Two  Noble  Kinsmen, 

”:V;  BeaU'  *  FL  Women  Pleased>  IV>  h  P-  60,  ed.  Dyce,  and  again  in  Monsieur 
Jhomas,  IV,  11,  p.  374. 

708.  Who]  See  V,  i,  137  :  <  Of  who.’  Also  for  other  examples  of  ‘  who  ’  for  whom 
Abbott,  §  274*  and  Shakespeare  passim. 

711.  hanging]  Rye  (p.  269)  :  John  Fit  [Fitz]  John  says,  in  his  Diamond  most 
realme^is  d  Mh1’^  =  ^  ^  P*cke  °r  stele  alx)ve  twelve  pence,  the  lawes  of  this 


act  iv,  sc.  iv.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  249 

Cam.  Why,  be  fo  ftill  :  here’s  no  body  will  fteale  that  716 

from  thee  :  yet  for  the  out-fide  of  thy  pouertie,  we  muft 
make  an  exchange;  therefore  dif-cafe  thee  inftantly(thou 
muft  thinke  there’s  a  neceffitie  in’t)and  change  Garments 
with  this  Gentleman  :  Though  the  penny-worth  (on  his  720 
fide)  be  the  word:, yet  hold  thee, there’s  fome  boot. 

Aut.  I  am  a  poore  Fellow,  Sir  :  (I  know  ye  well 
enough.) 

Cam.  Nay  prethee  difpatch  :  the  Gentleman  is  halfe 
fled  already.  725 

Aut.  Are  you  in  earned:,  Sir  ?  (I  fmell  the  trick  on’t.) 

Flo.  Difpatch,  I  prethee. 

Aut.  Indeed  I  haue  had  Earned:,  but  I  cannot  with 
confcience  take  it. 

Cam.  Vnbuckle,  vnbuckle.  730 


716.  Why..JWT\  Separate  line,  Han. 

716-721.  Seven  lines,  ending  Jlill... 
yet...mujl ...  instantly  ...  change. ..worth 
...boot.  Cap. 

719.  a  nectp/itie]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Theob.  i,  Cap.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Wh.  Ktly,  Cam.  necessity  Theob.  ii  et 
cet. 

720.  with"]  wi ’  Cap. 

722,  723.  (I... enough)]  Aside,  Han. 

724,  730.  As  verse,  ending  Gentleman 
...  Sir  ?  ...prethee  ...  cannot ...  vnbuckle 


(reading  Nay ,  pr'ythee  now  dispatch , 
and  ’S  for  is  in  line  724),  Cap. 

725 . fled]  Ff.  plead  Rowe,  play'd 
Steev. 

726.  (I...on't)]  Aside,  Han. 

on’t]  op  ii  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Coll,  i,  ii. 

728,  729.  [Aside.  Cap. 

730.  Vnbuckle]  Come,  unbuckle  Cap. 
conj. 

[Flor.  and  Autol.  exchange  gar¬ 
ments.  Cap.  ...Cloaks.  Kean. 


718.  dis-case]  That  is,  undress.  In  The  Temp.  V,  i,  97,  the  word  is  not  as  care¬ 
fully  printed  with  a  hyphen,  as  it  is  here. 

721.  boot]  Johnson:  That  is,  something  over  and  above,  or,  as  we  now  say, 
something  to  boot.  [After  ‘  hold  ’  Capell  inserts  a  double  dagger,  which  in  his 
edition  is  equivalent  to  a  stage-direction :  giving  something.  Dyce  boldly  printed  : 
Giving  money.  Is  it  not  a  matter  of  congratulation  that  we  are  spared,  after  ‘  Why 
shakest  thou  so?’  in  line  713,  a  stage-direction:  Autolycus  trembles.  ?] 

725.  fled]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  Possibly  we  should  read  ‘  half  phedj  as 
we  say  of  horses,  birds,  and  snakes,  that  they  shed  their  coats,  feathers,  and 
skins. 

728.  I  haue  had  Earnest]  Capell  (p.  179) :  This  should  relate  to  some  rich 
thing  which  he  finds  about  the  garments  that  Florizel  reaches  to  him,  which  his  *  con¬ 
science  ’  makes  him  return;  this  (whatever  it  may  be)  he  calls  his  ‘earnest,’  playing 
upon  what  he  had  used  before  in  another  sense.  [This  is  certainly  an  ingenious  sug¬ 
gestion,  but  it  reveals,  it  is  to  be  feared,  a  lack  of  appreciation  of  Autolycus’s  charac¬ 
ter,  in  imagining  that  his  conscience  would  have  even  remotely  prompted  the  return 
of  a  jewel. — Ed.] 


250 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Fortunate  Miftreffe  (let  my  prophecie 
Come  home  to  ye:)  you  muft  retire  your  felfe 
Into  feme  Couert  ;  take  your  fweet-hearts  Hat 
And  pluck  it  ore  your  Browes,  muffle  your  face, 
Dif-mantle  you,  and  (  as  you  can )  difliken 
The  truth  of  your  owne  feeming,  that  you  may 
(For  I  doe  feare  eyes  ouer)  to  Ship-boord 
Get  vndefcry’d. 

Perd.  I  fee  the  Play  fo  lyes, 

That  I  muft  beare  a  part. 

Cam.  No  remedie  : 

Haue  you  done  there  ? 

Flo.  Should  I  now  meet  my  Father 
He  would  not  call  me  Sonne. 

Cam.  Nay,  you  fhall  haue  no  Hat : 

Come  Lady,  come  :  Farewell  (my  friend.) 

Aut.  Adieu,  Sir. 

Flo.  O  Perdita  :  what  haue  we  twaine  forgot? 
’Pray  you  a  word. 


731 


735 


740 


745 


749 


732.  ye]  you  Cap.  Var.  Rann,  Mai. 
Steev.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

734-  your  Browes]  thy  brows  Var.  ’21. 
737.  ouer]  Ff,  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  Sta. 
Cam.  ever  Coll,  ii,  iii  (Egerton  and 
Coll.  MSS),  over's  Dyce  ii,  iii.  over 
us  Huds.  overt  Jervis,  over  you  Rowe 
et  cet. 


741.  remedies]  remedy — Rowe  +  . 
74Si  746.  no... friend.)]  One  line, 
Han.  Steev. 

745-  [giving  it  to  Perd.  Cap. 

747.  [retiring.  Cap. 

749.  [talking  with  her  aside. 
Cap. 


731.  let  my  prophecie]  Deighton:  May  the  prophecy  I  have  just  uttered,  viz. : 
‘  fortunate  mistress  !’  prove  a  true  one. 

73 7-  feare  eyes  ouer]  Without  some  change,  the  text  is,  to  me,  hopelessly 
obscure.  R.  G.  White,  Singer,  and  Rev.  J.  Hunter  say  that  ‘eyes  over’  means 
‘  overseeing  eyes,’  ‘  over-eyeing,’  and  ‘  being  overeyed,  overlooked,’  which  is  forced, 
and,  to  me,  quite  un-Shakeopearian.  The  various  devices  which  have  been  urged  to 
relieve  the  obscurity  may  be  found  in  the  Text.  Notes.  None  of  them  is  to  be 
heartily  commended.  Collier’s  ever  makes  the  remark  too  general;  Dyce’s  us 
implies  that  Camillo  was  to  accompany  Florizel  to  the  ship,  which  was  not  the  case. 
Rowe’s  you  is  perhaps  least  harmful.  Schmidt  {Lex.)  proposes  to  change  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  parenthesis  so  as  to  include  only  ‘  (I  do  fear  eyes)  ’ ;  the  couple  may  then 
'get  over  to  Shipboard.’ 

748.  forgot?]  Steevens:  This  is  one  of  our  author’s  dramatic  expedients  to 
introduce  a  conversation  apart,  account  for  a  sudden  exit,  etc.  So  in  Mer.  Wives.— 
Dr  Caius  suddenly  exclaims:  ‘  Od’s  me!  Qu’  ai-j’  oublie!’[I,  iv,  64];  and  Mrs 
Quickly, ‘Out  upon’t!  what  have  I  forgot?’  [I,  iv,  179]. 

) 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


251 


Cam.  What  I  doe  next,  fhall  be  to  tell  the  King  750 

Of  this  efcape,  and  whither  they  are  bound  ; 

Wherein,  my  hope  is,  I  fhall  fo  preuaile, 

To  force  him  after  :  in  whofe  company 
I  fhall  re-view  Sicilia  ;  for  whofe  fight, 

I  haue  a  Womans  Longing.  755 

Flo.  Fortune  fpeed  vs  : 

Thus  we  fet  on  ( Camillo )  to  th’Sea-fide. 

Cam.  The  fwifter  fpeed,  the  better.  Exit. 

Aut.  I  vnderfland  the  bufineffe,  I  heare  it  :  to  haue  an 
open  eare,  a  quick  eye,  and  a  nimble  hand,  is  neceffary  for  760 
a  Cut-purfe  ;  a  good  Nofe  is  requifite  alfo,  to  fmell  out 
worke  for  th’other  Sences.  I  fee  this  is  the  time  that  the 
uniuft  man  doth  thriue.What  an  exchange  had  this  been, 
without  boot  ?  What  a  boot  is  here,  with  this  exchange  ? 

Sure  the  Gods  doe  this  yeere  conniue  at  vs,  and  we  may  765 
doe  any  thing  extempore.  The  Prince  himfelfe  is  about 
a  peece  of  Iniquitie  (ftealing  away  from  his  Father,  with 
his  Clog  at  his  heeles:)  if  I  thought  it  were  a  peece  of  ho-  768 


750.  [Aside.  Rowe. 

fhall  be]  shall  be  next.  Rowe  i. 

753.  -whofe ]  his  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

754.  re-view]  F2,  Sta.  review  F3F4 
et  cet. 

757.  [Exit  Flo.  and  Perd.  Rowe. 

758.  Exit.]  Exeunt  Flo.  Perd.  and 
Cam.  Cap. 

Scene  xi.  Pope  +  . 


759.  heare]  heard  Han. 

764.  exchange,?]  exchange;  Ff. 

766.  extempore]  F2,  Dyce.  ex  tem¬ 
pore  Fj.  extempore  F4  et  cet. 

768.  I  thought  it  were]  Ff,  Mai.  Var. 
’21,  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce  i,  Wh.  Sta.  Ktly, 
Cam.  Rife,  Hunt.  I  thought  not  it  were 
Cap.  Rann,  Sing.  ,/ thought  it  were  not 
Han.  et  cet. 


760.  a  nimble  hand]  Rye  (p.  268)  gives  the  following  extract  from  a  report 
written  by  Fleetwood,  the  Recorder  of  London,  dated  July  7th,  1585  [Ellis,  ii,  297) : 
‘Amongest  our  travells  this  one  matter  tumbled  owt  by  the  waye,  that  one  Wotton,  a 
gentilman  borne,  kepte  an  Alehowse  att  Smarts  Keye  neere  Byllingsegate,  and  reared 
upp  a  newe  trade  of  lyffe,  and  in  the  same  howse  he  procured  all  the  Cutt  purses 
abowt  this  Cittie  to  repaire  to  his  said  howse.  There  was  a  Schole  Howse  sett  upp 
to  learne  younge  boyes  to  cutt  pursses.  Thare  were  hunge  up  two  devises,  the  one 
was  a  pockett,  the  other  was  a  purse.  The  pockett  had  in  yt  certen  cownters,  and 
was  hunge  abowte  with  hawkes  bells,  and  over  the  toppe  did  hannge  a  litle  sacringe 
bell ;  and  he  that  could  take  owt  a  cownter  without  any  noyse  was  allowed  to  be  a 
publique  ff  oyster-,  and  he  that  could  take  a  peece  of  sylver  owt  of  the  purse  without 
the  noyse  of  any  of  the  bells,  he  was  adjudged  a  judiciall  Nypper.  Nota  that  a 
ffoister  is  a  Pickpokett  and  a  Nypper  is  termed  a  Pickepurse,  or  a  Cutpurse.’  ‘  Those 
who  have  read  Oliver  Twist]  Rye  adds,  ‘  will  be  reminded  of  the  curious  game  played 
by  the  Artful  Dodger  and  his  companions  for  the  edification  of  the  young  novice.’ 

768,  769.  if  I  thought  .  .  .  not  do’t]  According  to  Malone  the  ‘  reasoning  of 


252 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


neftie  to  acquaint  the  King  withall,  I  would  not  do’t  :  I 
hold  it  the  more  knauerie  to  conceale  it  ;  and  therein  am 
I  conftant  to  my  Profeffion. 

Enter  Clowne  and  Sliepheard. 

Aflde,  afide,  here  is  more  matter  for  a  hot  braine  :  Euery 
Lanes  end,  euery  Shop,  Church,  Seffion,  Hanging,  yeelds 
a  carefull  man  worke. 

Clowne.  See,  fee  :  what  a  man  you  are  now  ?  there  is  no 
other  way,  but  to  tell  the  King  fhe’s  a  Changeling,  and 
none  of  your  flesh  and  blood. 

Shep.  Nay,  but  heare  me. 

Clow.  Nay  ;  but  heare  me. 

Shep.  Goe  too  then. 

Clow.  She  being  none  of  your  flefh  and  blood,  your 
flefh  and  blood  ha5s  not  offended  the  King,  and  fo  your 
flefh  and  blood  is  not  to  be  punifh’d  by  him.  Shew  thofe 


77  O 


775 


780 


784 


769.  I  would  not ]  Ff,  Mai.  Var.  ’21, 
Knt,  Coll.  Dyce  i,  Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  Ktly, 
Rife,  Hunt.  I  would  Han.  et  cet. 

772.  Enter,  etc.]  After  line  775,  Sta. 
77 3-  tiere  w]  here's  F  F  ,  Rowe+, 
Var.  Rann,  Mai. 


777-  Changeling]  Changling  F  F , 
Rowe  + . 

780.  Nay;]  Nay,  F3F4,  Rowe  et 
seq. 

784.  thofe]  these  Theob.  i. 


Autolycus  is  obscure,  because  something  is  suppressed,’  and  Malone’s  long  note, 
supplying  what  he  supposes  to  be  suppressed,  constitutes  Halliwell’s  only  comment.' 
1  can  find  nothing  obscure  in  this  passage,  nor  any  portion  of  the  reasoning  sup¬ 
pressed.  Autolycus  has  just  come  to  the  conclusion  that  this  year  the  very  gods 
connive  at  rascality,  so  that  even  if  it  were  a  piece  of  honesty  to  tell  the  king,  he 
would  not  do  it;  he  will  be  constant  to  his  knavery  and  conceal  it.  Hanmer’s  change 
seems  quite  needless. — Ed. 

777-  but  to  tell  the  King,  etc.]  See  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

778.  none  of  your  flesh  and  blood]  Lloyd  (Singer’s  ed.  ii,  p.  137)  ;  The 
unhesitating  selfishness  of  the  old  man  and  his  son  at  the  approach  of  danger 
though  otherwise  they  are  creditable  rustics  enough,  the  singleness  of  their  anxiety 
to  save  their  own  skins  from  royal  vengeance,  by  proving  the  foundling  none  of  their 
blood,  without  any  thought  of  her  fate  or  fortune,  belongs  to  the  revulsions  that  cha¬ 
racterise  the  play ;  it  also  finally  detaches  her,  in  our  associations,  from  the  class  she 
has  been  reared  amongst,  and  thus  she  is  acquitted  of  ingratitude  as  well  as  of  pre¬ 
sumption  in  moving  easily  toward  the  superior  rank  due  to  her  nature  as  to  her 
descent.  Her  own  courage  and  collectedness  at  once  place  her  in  contrast  to  the 
bewildered  and  frightened  hinds,  and  bring  her  worthily  into  sympathy  with  the 
patience  and  self-support  of  her  brave  mother,  Hermione. 

781  Goe  too]  This  expression  is  generally  deprecatory  in  its  meaning,  as  in  I  ii 
21 7 :  ‘  Go  to,  go  to  !  How  she  holds  up  the  neb  !’  but  here  it  means,  «  Go  on.’ 


ACT  XV,  sc.  iv.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  253 

things  you  found  about  her  (thofe  fecret  things,  all  but  785 
what  fhe  ha’s  with  her:)This  being  done,  let  the  Law  goe 
whittle:  I  warrant  you. 

Shep.  I  will  tell  the  King  all,  euery  word,  yea,  and  his 
Sonnes  prancks  too  ;  who,  I  may  fay,  is  no  honeft  man, 
neither  to  his  Father,  nor  to  me,  to  goe  about  to  make  me  790 
the  Kings  Brother  in  Law. 

Clow.  Indeed  Brother  in  Law  was  the  fartheft  off  you 
could  haue  beene  to  him,  and  then  your  Blood  had  beene 
the  dearer,  by  I  know  how  much  an  ounce. 

Aut.  Very  wifely  (Puppies.)  795 

Shep.  Well  :  let  vs  to  the  King  :  there  is  that  in  this 
Farthell,  will  make  him  fcratch  his  Beard. 

Aut.  I  know  not  what  impediment  this  Complaint 
may  be  to  the  flight  of  my  Matter. 

Clo.  ’Pray  heartily  he  be  at  ’  Pallace.  800 

Aut. Though  I  am  not  naturally  honeft,  I  am  fo  fome- 
times  by  chance  :  Let  me  pocket  vp  my  Pedlers  excre¬ 
ment.  How  now(Ruftiques)  whither  are  you  bound? 

Shep.  To  th’  Pallace  (and  it  like  your  Worfhip.) 

Aut.  Your  Affaires  there  ?  what?  with  whom?  the  805 
Condition  of  that  Farthell  ?  the  place  of  your  dwelling  ? 


792.  farthejl]  furthest  Steev.  Var.  ’21, 
Coll.  Dyce. 

794.  know ]  know  not  Han.  Cap. 
Rann,  Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

795.  [Aside.  Rowe. 

797,  etc.  Fartkeir\  F2F3-  Farthel  F4. 
fardel  Steev. 

798.  [Aside.  Cap. 

800.  at  ’ Pallace]  Dyce  i,  Wh.  ii.  at 
the  Palace  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 


Huds.  at  Palace  Ff,  Rowe  i  et  cet. 

801-803.  Though. ..excrement]  Aside. 
Cap. 

802.  [Takes  off  his  false  beard.  Steev. 
804.  and]  an  Theob.  ii  et  seq. 
805-807.  there?  what?  with  whom  ? 
...Farthell ?  ...  dwelling?  ...  names  ?  ... 
ages  ?... hauing  ?]  Ff,  Rowe,  Johns.  Wh. 
i.  Commas,  instead  of  interrogation 
marks,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.). 


794.  I  know  how  much]  Hanmer  inserted  a  not  after  ‘  know  ’  and  has  a  respect¬ 
able  following.  If  the  Clown’s  assertion  were  accompanied  with  a  knowing  wink,  no 
change  of  the  text  would  be  needed. — Ed. 

800.  at  ’  Pallace]  See  II,  i,  18. — Cambridge  Editors  :  Perhaps  the  Clown 
speaks  of  the  king  being  ‘  at  palace  ’  as  he  would  have  spoken  of  an  ordinary  man 
being  ‘  at  home.’ 

802.  excrement]  Nares  :  From  excresco.  Everything  that  appears  to  grow  upon 
the  human  body ;  as  hair,  beard,  nails.  Autolycus  here  means  his  pedler’s  beard 
[It  is  not  confined  to  the  ‘human  body;’  feathers  were  so  denominated.  W.  A. 
Wright  (note  on  Ham.  Ill,  iv,  121)  quotes  Bacon,  Natural  Hist.,  cent,  i,  sect.  58: 


254 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


your  names  ?  your  ages  ?  of  what  hauing  ?  breeding,  and  807 
any  thing  that  is  fitting  to  be  knowne,  difcouer  ? 

Clo.  We  are  but  plaine  fellowes,  Sir. 

Aut.  A  Lye  ;  you  are  rough,  and  hayrie:  Let  me  haue  810 
no  lying  ;  it  becomes  none  but  Tradef-men,  and  they  of¬ 
ten  giue  vs  (Souldiers)  the  Lye,  but  wee  pay  them  for  it 
with  ftamped  Coyne,  not  ftabbing  Steele,  therefore  they 
doe  not  giue  vs  the  Lye. 

Clo.  Your  Worfhip  had  like  to  haue  giuen  vs  one,  if  815 
you  had  not  taken  your  felfe  with  the  manner. 

807.  ages  l]  age  ?  Rowe  ii  + .  with  stamped. ..but  stabbing  Daniel. 

808.  to  be]  for  to  be  Rowe  ii  +  .  814.  not ]  Om.  Warb.  Han. 

813.  with  Jlamped... not flabbing]  not  816.  manner ]  manour  Han. 

‘  Living  creatures  put  forth  (after  their  period  of  growth)  nothing  that  is  young  but 
hair  and  nails,  which  are  excrements  and  no  parts.’] 

807.  hauing]  That  is,  possession,  estate.  Cf.  ‘  your  having  in  beard  is  a  younger 
brother’s  revenue.’ — As  You  Like  It,  III,  ii,  363. 

813.  not  stabbing]  Theobald  ( Nichols ,  ii,  365) :  So  in  Oth.  Ill,  iv,  5  :  ‘to  say 
a  soldier  lies  is  stabbing.’  What  if  we  should  read  the  passage  :  ‘  wohf-stabbing  steel,’ 
i.  e.  wound-impressing ;  and  then  stamped  coin  has  a  regard  both  to  the  wound  given, 
and  to  the  stamping  with  the  foot  in  making  a  pass. 

813,  814.  they  doe  not  giue  vs  the  Lye]  Heath  (p.  218)  :  That  the  poet  in¬ 
tended  no  more  than  mere  puzzle  and  amusement,  and  even  that  Autolycus  should 
contradict  himself,  is  evident  from  the  Clown’s  reply. — Johnson  :  The  meaning  is, 
they  are  paid  for  lying,  therefore  they  do  not  give  us  the  lie,  they  sell  it  us. — Hudson  : 
Autolycus  appears  to  be  punning  on  the  phrase  [to  giue  one  the  lie],  using  it  in  the 
sense  of  dealing  in  lies,  or  cheating  by  means  of  falsehood,  as  he  himself  has  often 
done  in  selling  his  wares.  Giving  the  lie  in  this  sense  is  paid  with  money,  and  not 
with  stabbing,  as  it  is  in  the  other  sense.  And,  in  lying  his  customers  out  of  their 
cash,  Autolycus  has  had  his  lies  well  paid  for;  therefore  he  did  not  give  them  the  lie. 
— Rolfe  :  When  Autolycus  said  that  tradesmen  ‘  often  give  us  soldiers  the  lie,’  he 
probably  meant  that  they  do  it  by  lying  about  their  wares  (a  trick  that  he  was  suf¬ 
ficiently  familiar  with) ;  but,  he  adds,  ‘  we  pay  them  for  it  with  stamped  coin,  not  with 
stabbing  steel  ’ — as  they  deserve,  or  as  you  would  suppose.  Tradesmen  could  hardly 
be  said  to  be  in  the  habit  of  giving  soldiers  the  lie  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  phrase. — 
Deighton  (not  knowing  that  he  had  been  anticipated  by  Daniel)  remarks :  It  looks, 
however,  as  if  the  words  ‘  stamped  coin  ’  and  ‘  stabbing  steel  ’  had  been  transposed. 
There  is  little  point  in  Autolycus’  saying  that  the  payment  was  made  in  ‘  stamped 
coin,’  not  ‘  stabbing  steel,’  whereas  in  his  assumed  character  there  would  be  a  point 
in  the  boast  that  tradesmen  were  requited  by  ‘  us  soldiers  ’  not  in  the  ordinary  way, 
but  by  being  run  through  with  the  sword.  Further,  *  stamped  coin  ’  as  an  antithesis 
to  ‘  stabbing  steel  ’  seems  in  itself  more  likely  than  ‘  stabbing  steel  ’  as  an  antithesis 
to  stamped  coin.’  [It  is  hazardous  to  attempt  to  improve  the  speeches  of  Shakespeare’s 
comic  characters.  Autolycus  was  not  the  man  to  waste  logic  on  ‘  puppies  ’  if  bv 
puzzling  their  poor  brains  he  could  impress  them  with  his  importance. — Ed.] 

815.  giuen  vs  one]  Capell  (p.  179) :  This  speech  of  the  Clown’s  imports — told 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


255 


Shep .  Are  you  a  Courtier,  and’t  like  you  Sir?  817 

Aut.  Whether  it  Ike  me,  or  no,  I  am  a  Courtier.  Seeft 
thou  not  the  ayre  of  the  Court,  in  thefe  enfoldingsf  Hath 
not  my  gate  in  it,  the  meafure  of  the  Court?  Receiues  not  820 
thy  Nofe  Court-Odour  from  me  ?  Refle6l  I  not  on  thy 
Bafeneffe,  Court-Contempt  ?  Think’ft  thou ,  for  that  I 
infmuate,  at  toaze  from  thee  thy  Bufineffe,  I  am  there¬ 
fore  no  Courtier?  I  am  Courtier  Cap-a-pe ;  and  one  that 
will  eyther  pufh-on,  or  pluck-back,  thy  Bufineffe  there  :  825 

whereupon  I  command  thee  to  open  thy  Affaire. 

Shep.  My  Bufineffe,  Sir,  is  to  the  King.  827 


817.  you  a]  yon  a  F2. 

and't]  and ’  F^.  and  Rowe, 
Pope,  an  Theob.  Warb.  Johns,  and 
Han.  Cap.  et  seq. 

818.  Ike']  Fj. 

820.  gate]  gaite  Johns,  gait  Cap. 
823.  inftnuate,  at  toaze]  insinuate  at 
ease  Spence  (N.  &  Qu.  VII,  ix,  24). 


823.  at]  to  Cap.  and  Mai.  or  Ff, 
Rowe  et  cet. 

toaze]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cam.  toze 
Pope,  touze  Coll,  touse  Dyce  ii,  iii. 
as  to  axe  Bulloch. 

825.  pluck-back]  push  back  Rowe  ii, 
Pope,  Han. 


us  one,  only :  for  it  refers  to  Autolycus’s  saying  first  ‘  they  [tradesmen]  often  give  us 
soldiers  the  he,'  and  then  retracting  that  saying  upon  better  consideration;  for  that, 
being  soldiers,  they  dare  not  give  them  the  lie,  meaning — cheat  them :  this  retracting 
the  Clown  calls — taking  himself  with  the  manner. 

816.  with  the  manner]  Rushton  ( Sh .  A  Lawyer,  p.  39)  <  Manner’  is  mainour, 
Old  French  manoevre,  meinor,  Latin  a  manu,  from  the  hand,  or  in  the  work.  The  old 
law  phrase,  to  be  taken  as  a  thief  with  the  mainour,  signifies  to  be  taken  in  the  very 
act  of  killing  venison,  or  stealing  wood,  or  in  preparing  to  do  so;  or  it  denotes  the 
being  taken  with  the  thing  stolen  in  his  hands  or  possession  [which  is  the  meaning  of 
the  Clown  in  the  present  passage]. 

820.  the  measure  of  the  Court]  Malone:  That  is,  the  stately  tread  of 
courtiers. 

823.  insinuate]  Malone  :  This  means  here  to  cajole,  to  talk  with  condescension 
and  humility.  So,  in  Ven.  and  Adonis,  ‘  With  Death  she  humbly  doth  insinuate ; 
Tells  him  of  trophies,  statues,’  etc.[ — line  1012.] 

823.  at  toaze]  Cambridge  Editors  :  This  is  apparently  a  corruption  [in  the 
First  Folio].  The  subsequent  Folios  read  ‘or  toaze,’  which,  in  default  of  a  more 
certain  correction,  we  have  adopted.  [As  far  as  concerns  the  change  from  ‘  at  ’  to 
or,  this  adoption  is  certainly  right. — Ed.] 

823.  toaze]  Skeat  ( Diet. )  :  Touse  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  V,  i,  313,  is  much  the  same 
word  as  ‘  toaze  ’  [here],  and  means  to  pull  about,  tear,  or  rend.  Spenser  has  touse  in 
the  sense  to  worry,  to  tease; — F.  Q.  ii,  11,  33.  Mid.  Eng.  tosen,  properly  to  tease 
wool,  Prompt.  Parv.  ‘  And  what  sheep,  that  is  full  of  wulle  Upon  his  backe  they 
toose  and  pulle;’  Gower,  Con.  Am.  i,  17,  1.  7. — Cambridge  Editors:  It  is  not 
improbable  that  Autolycus  may  have  coined  a  word  to  puzzle  the  clowns,  which  after¬ 
wards  puzzled  the  printers. 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  SC.  iv. 

828 


256 


Ant.  What  Aduocate  ha’ft  thou  to  him  ? 

Shep.  I  know  not  (and’t  like  you.) 

Clo.  Aduocate’s  the  Court-word  for  a  Pheazant:  fay  830 
you  haue  none. 

Shep.  None,  Sir  :  I  haue  no  Pheazant  Cock,  nor  Hen. 

Aut.  How  bleffed  are  we,  that  are  not  fimple  men  ? 

Yet  Nature  might  haue  made  me  as  thefe  are, 

Therefore  I  will  not  difdaine.  835 

Clo.  This  cannot  be  but  a  great  Courtier. 

Shep.  His  Garments  are  rich,  but  he  weares  them  not 
handfomely.  838 


829,  870,  893.  and't]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Tbeob.  i.  an't  Theob.  ii  et  seq. 

830,  831.  [Aside,  Cap.  Sta.  Dyce  ii, 
iii. 

830.  Pheazant ]  present  Kenrick, 

Dyce  ii,  iii,  Coll.  iii. 

832.  Pheazant  Cock]  pheasant,  cock 
Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.). 


833-835;  839-841.  As  mnemonic 
lines,  Warb. 

833.  bleffed]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cam.  Wb.  ii. 
bless'd  Pope  et  cet. 

835.  I  will]  I'll  Steev.  Var.  Knt, 
Coll.  Sta.  Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

836-841.  [Aside.  Cap.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

836.  be  but ]  but  be  Han.  Coll.  MS. 


830.  Pheazant]  Kenrick  {Rev.  p.  93) :  I  suspect,  but  I  will  not  be  positive,  that 
the  Clown  should  say,  ‘  Advocate’s  the  court  word  for  a  present l — Walker  {Grit. 
iii,  1 15)  :  Surely  [Kenrick]  is  right.  [Those  who  do  not  accept  Kenrick’s  emendatio 
certissima  (as  I  hold  it  to  be),  adopt  Steevens’s  interpretation:  *  As  he  was  a  suitor 
from  the  country,  the  Clown  supposes  his  father  should  have  brought  a  present  of 
game,  and  therefore  imagines,  when  Autolycus  asks  him  what  advocate  he  has,  that 
by  the  word  ‘  advocate  ’  he  means  a  ‘  pheasant.’] 

832.  Cock,  nor  Hen]  Reed  :  The  allusion  here  was  probably  more  intelligible  in 
the  time  of  Shakespeare  than  it  is  at  present.  Our  author  might  have  had  in  mind 
the  following,  then  a  recent  instance.  In  the  time  of  Elizabeth  there  were  Justices 
of  the  Peace,  called  Basket  Justices,  who  would  do  nothing  without  a  present ;  yet, 
as  a  member  of  the  House  of  Commons  expressed  himself,  ‘for  half  a  dozen  of 
chickens  would  dispense  with  a  whole  dozen  of  penal  statutes.’ — Sir  Simon  D’Ewes’s 
Journals  of  Parliament,  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  Reign.  [See  Hales’s  note  on  ‘  the  Just¬ 
ice  In  fair  round  belly  with  good  capon  lin’d,’  As  You  Like  It,  II,  vii,  161,  of  this  ed.] 
832,  833.  F.  J.  F.  {N.  dr*  Qu.  V,  x,  244)  calls  attention  to  the  rhyme  of  these  two 
lines.  ‘  Though,’  he  concludes,  ‘  as  line  832  is  better  read  with  a  strong  stress  on  ‘  no,’ 
Shakespeare  probably  intended  the  line  to  be  prose.’ 

837.  His  Garments  are  rich]  R.  G.  White  :  An  obvious  slip  of  memory.  The 
beggar  had  changed  garments  with  the  Prince  indeed ;  but  the  latter  was  obscured 
with  ‘  a  swain’s  wearing.’ — Gildemeister  (Einleitung,  p.  xi)  suggests  that  *  per¬ 
haps  Shakespeare  was  living  in  Stratford  when  The  Winter’s  Tale  was  put  on  the 
stage;  had  he  been  present,  he  would  not  have  failed  to  remedy  the  oversight.’ — 
Charles  Kean  in  his  Acting-copy  evaded  this  difficulty  by  having  Autolycus  enter 
at  line  674,  dressed  ‘  as  a  courtier ,’  and  by  making  the  subsequent  exchange  of  gar¬ 
ments  with  Florizel  extend  only  to  the  cloaks. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


257 


Clo.  He  feemes  to  be  the  more  Noble,  in  being  fanta- 
fticall  :  A  great  man,  lie  warrant  ;  I  know  by  the  picking  840 
on’s  Teeth. 

Aut.  The  Farthell  there  ?  What’s  in’th’  Farthell  ? 
Wherefore  that  Box  ? 

Shep.  Sir,  there  lyes  fuch  Secrets  in  this  Farthell  and 
Box,  which  none  muft  know  but  the  King,  and  which  hee  845 
fhall  know  within  this  houre,  if  I  may  come  to  th’  fpeech 
of  him. 

Aut.  Age,  thou  haft  loft  thy  labour. 

Shep.  Why  Sir  ? 

Aut.The  King  is  not  at  the  Pallace,  he  is  gone  aboord  850 
a  new  Ship,  to  purge  Melancholy,  and  ayre  himfelfe  :  for 
if  thou  bee’ft  capable  of  things  ferious,  thou  muft  know 
the  King  is  full  of  griefe. 

Shep.  So  ’tis  faid  (Sir:)  about  his  Sonne,  that  fhould 
haue  marryed  a  Shepheards  Daughter.  855 

Aut.  If  that  Shepheard  be  not  in  hand-faft,  let  him 

841.  on's]  of's  Cap.  conj.  842,  843.  Prose,  Cap.  Mai.  Dyce,  Wh. 

Ktly,  Cam.  Rife,  Huds. 


839.  to  be]  Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  115) :  ‘To  be  ’  sounds  awkward  and  uncolloquial. 
Qu.  ‘  He  seems  to  me'  ? 

840,  841.  picking  on’s  Teeth]  Johnson  :  It  seems  that  to  pick  the  teeth  was  at 
this  time  a  mark  of  some  pretension  to  greatness  or  elegance.  [Which  is  precisely 
what  the  text  reveals. — Ed.]  So  in  King  John  :  ‘  He  and  his  pick-tooth  [sic]  at  my 
worship’s  mess.’[ — I,  i,  190.  Had  Dr  Johnson  added  to  his  quotation  the  three  or 
four  preceding  words  of  Faulconbridge :  ‘  Now  your  traveller,  He,’  etc.,  they  would 
have  shown  that  it  was,  in  that  case,  the  mark  of  a  traveller,  wherein  consisted  the 
elegance.] 

844.  there  lyes]  See  Abbott,  §  335,  for  examples  of  a  singular  verb  preceding 
a  subject  in  the  plural,  or  Shakespeare  passim.  For  ‘  such  Secrets  .  .  .  which,' 
see  I,  i,  26. 

851.  a  new  Ship]  Stearns  (p.  153)  :  Why  a  new  ship?  Because  the  air  in  a 
new  ship  is  much  purer  than  in  an  old  one ;  as  the  bilge-water  is  less  fouled  by 
accumulated  sediment. 

854,  855.  that  should  haue]  Abbott,  §324:  That  is,  ‘  was  to  have  married,’ 
etc.  not  quite  ought. 

856.  hand-fast]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  mistook  the  meaning  of  this  phrase,  and 
proposed,  as  a  substitution  :  ‘  band,  fast.’ — Staunton  :  To  be  in  ‘  hand-fast,’  equiv¬ 
alent  to  mainprise,  is  to  be  at  large  only  on  security  given.  Sometimes  this  state  was 
called  handling-,  thus  in  The  London  Prodigal:  ‘  Ay,  but  he  is  nowin  huckster’s 
handling  for  (*.  e.  for  fear  of)  running  away.’  [Ill,  iii], — Heard  (p.  65):  Of  the 


17 


258 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  iv,  sc.  IV. 


flye  ;  the  Curfes  he  (hall  haue,the  Tortures  he  fhall  feele,  857 
will  breake  the  back  of  Man,  the  heart  of  Monfter. 

Clo.  Thinke  you  fo,Sir? 

Aut.  Not  hee  alone  fhall  fuffer  what  Wit  can  make  860 
heauie,and  Vengeance  bitter;but  thofe  that  are  Iermame 
to  him  (though  remou’d  fiftie  times)  fhall  all  come  vnder 
the  Hang-man  :  which,  though  it  be  great  pitty,  yet  it  is 
neceffarie.  An  old  Sheepe-whiftiing  Rogue,  a  Ram-ten¬ 
der,  to  offer  to  haue  his  Daughter  come  into  gracefSome  865 
fay’hee  fhall  be  fton’d  :  but  that  death  is  too  foft  for  him 
(fay  I:)  Draw  our  Throne  into  a  Sheep-Coat  ?  all  deaths 

are  too  few,  the  fharpeft  too  eafie. 

Clo.  Ha’s  the  old-man  ere  a  Sonne  Sir  (doe  you  heare) 

and’t  like  you,  Sir  ?  ^ ° 

Aut.  Hee  ha’s  a  Sonne  :  who  fhall  be  flayd  aliue,  then 

’noynted  ouer  with  Honey,  fet  on  the  head  of  a  Wafpes 
Nefl,then  ftand  till  he  be  three  quarters  and  a  dram  dead: 
then  recouer’d  againe  with  Aquavite,  or  fome  other  hot 
Infufion:  then,  raw  as  he  is(and  in  the  hoteft  day  Progno-  875 
ftication  proclaymes)  fhall  he  be  fet  againft  a  Brick-wall, 

(the  Sunne  looking  with  a  South-ward  eye  vpon  him  ; 
where  hee  is  to  behold  him,  with  Flyes  blown  to  death.) 

But  what  talke  we  of  thefe  Traitorly-Rafcals,  whofe  mi- 
feries  are  to  be  fmil’d  at,  their  offences  being  fo  capitall  ?  880 

Tell  me(for  you  feeme  to  be  honeft  plaine  men)what  you 
haue  to  the  King  :  being  fomething  gently  confider’d,  lie  882 


861.  Iermaine ]  Fa.  Jermain  F3F4> 
Germain  Rowe,  german  Theob. 

864.  whifliing]  Fx. 

867.  Sheep-  Coat]  sheep-cote  Han. 


873.  then Jland]  there  stand  Cap. 
Coll.  MS,  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

874.  Aquavite]  Aquavitce  F2.  Aqua- 
-vitce  FjF^. 


writ  of  mainprize  nothing  is  now  known  in  practice.  The  distinction  between  main¬ 
pernors  and  bail  was  technical  and  well  defined  in  the  time  of  Shakespeare. 

875.  Prognostication]  Johnson  :  That  is,  in  the  hottest  day  foretold  in  the 
almanack. — Malone  :  Almanacks  were  published  in  Shakespeare  s  time  under  this 
title:  ‘An  Almanack  and  Prognostication  made  for  the  year  of  our  Lord  God  1595.’ 

879.  Traitorly]  See  Abbott  (§  447)  for  other  examples  of  adjectives  formed  with 
-ly,  which  represents  like ,  and  is  a  corruption  of  it. 

882.  being  something  gently  consider’d]  Steevf.NS:  This  means,  ‘  I  having 
a  gentlemanlike  consideration  given  me,’  i.  e.  a  bribe.  So  in  The  Three  Ladies  of 
London ,  1584:  ‘  Sure  sir,  I’ll  consider  it  hereafter  if  I  can.  Dissimulation.  What, 
consider  me  ?  does  thou  think  that  I  am  a  bribe-taker  ?’[p.  279,  ed.  Hazlitt-Dodsley.] 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


259 


bring  you  where  he  is  aboord,  tender  your  perfons  to  his  883 
prefence,  whifper  him  in  your  behalfes  ;  and  if  it  be  in 
man,  befides  the  King,  to  effe<5l  your  Suites,  here  is  man  885 
fhall  doe  it. 

Clow.  He  feemes  to  be  of  great  authoritie:  clofe  with 
him,  giue  him  Gold ;  and  though  Authoritie  be  a  ftub- 
borne  Beare,  yet  hee  is  oft  led  by  the  Nofe  with  Gold  : 
fhew  the  in-fide  of  your  Purfe  to  the  out-fide  of  his  890 
hand,  and  no  more  adoe.  Remember  fton’d,  and  flay’d 
aliue. 

Shep.  And’t  pleafe  you(Sir)to  vndertake  the  Bufmeffe 
for  vs,  here  is  that  Gold  I  haue  :  lie  make  it  as  much 
more,  and  leaue  this  young  man  in  pawne,  till  I  bring  it  895 
you. 

Aut.  After  I  haue  done  what  I  promifed  ? 

Shep.  I  Sir. 

Aut.  Well,  giue  me  the  Moitie  :  Are  you  a  partie  in 
this  Bufmeffe?  900 

Clow.  In  fome  fort,  Sir  :  but  though  my  cafe  be  a  pit- 
tifull  one,  I  hope  I  fhall  not  be  flayd  out  of  it. 

Aut.  Oh,  that’s  the  cafe  of  the  Shepheards  Sonne  : 
hang  him,hee’le  be  made  an  example. 

Clow.  Comfort,  good  comfort  :  We  muft  to  the  King,  905 
and  fhew  our  flrange  fights  :  he  muft  know  ’tis  none  of 
your  Daughter,  nor  my  Sifter  :  wee  are  gone  elfe.  Sir,  I 
will  giue  you  as  much  as  this  old  man  do’s,  when  the  Bu- 
fineffe  is  performed,  and  remaine(as  he  fayes)your  pawne 
till  it  be  brought  you.  910 


884.  behalf es~\  behalf  F^,  Rowe  +  . 

885.  Suites ]  Suit  F4. 

is  man ]  is  a  man  F^F^,  Rowe  + , 
Var.  ’73,  ’85.  the  man  Ktly. 

887-892.  [Aside.  Cap. 

888.  and  though ]  for  though  Daniel. 


888,  889.  Mnemonic  lines,  Warb. 
894.  that  gold  ]  the  gold  Rowe  i. 
899.  partie~\  parting  F  ,  Rowe  i. 
903,  904.  Two  lines,  as  verse,  Rann, 
905,  907.  [Aside.  Cap. 


888.  and  though]  Walker  ( Crit .  ii,  157)  says  that  and  has  nothing  to  do  here, — 
it  is  ‘  an  though.’ — Abbott  (§  105)  says  that  ‘  and  ’  is  used  here  emphatically  for 
even. 

889.  hee  is]  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  246) :  I  think  the  English  of  Shakespeare’s  time 
requires  is  he  [which  is  possibly  the  reason  why  the  Clown  uses  ‘  he  is.’ — Ed.] 

901.  my  case]  It  has  been  thought  necessary  by  some  editors  to  explain  this 
evident  pun. 


26o 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[ACT  IV,  sc.  iv. 


Ant.  I  will  truft  you.  Walke  before  toward  the  Sea-  91 1 
fide ,  goe  on  the  right  hand,  I  will  but  looke  vpon  the 
Hedge,  and  follow  you. 

Clow.  We  are  blefs’d,  in  this  man  :  as  I  may  fay,  euen 
blefs’d.  915 

Shep.  Let’s  before,  as  he  bids  vs  :  he  was  prouided  to 
doe  vs  good. 

Aut.  If  I  had  a  mind  to  be  honeft,  I  fee  Fortune  would 
not  fufifer  mee  :  fhee  drops  Booties  in  my  mouth.  I  am 
courted  now  with  a  double  occafion:(Gold,  and  a  means  920 
to  doe  the  Prince  my  Mafter  good  ;  which,  who  knowes 
how  that  may  turne  backe  to  my  aduancement  ?  )  I  will 
bring  thefe  two  Moales,thefe  blind-ones,  aboord  him.  if 
he  thinke  it  fit  to  Ihoare  them  againe,  and  that  the  Com¬ 
plaint  they  haue  to  the  King,  concernes  him  nothing,  let  925 
him  call  me  Rogue,  for  being  fo  farre  officious,  for  I  am 
proofe  againft  that  Title,  and  what  fhame  elfe  belongs 
to’t  :  To  him  will  I  prefent  them,  there  may  be  matter  in 
it.  Exeunt.  929 


91 1.  you.]  you ,  F3F4,  Rowe-t-.  you ; 
Han. 

912.  looke]  leake  Theob.  conj. 
914-917.  [Aside.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

917.  [Exeunt.  Ff.  Exeunt  Sbep.  and 
Clown.  Rowe. 


922.  how  that  may  turne  backe]  both 
may  turn  belike  Bailey  (ii,  241). 

backe]  luck  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS). 

923.  Monies]  Moals  F  .  moles  Pope. 
929.  Exeunt.]  Exit.  Rowe. 


922.  that  may  turne  backe]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  All  editors  have  been  in  the 
habit  of  repeating  and  reprinting  nonsense  here.  To  turn  luck  is  a  very  common 
and  intelligible  expression,  and  Autolycus  uses  it,  according  to  the  MS.  There  is  no 
meaning  in  turning  ‘  back  to  my  advancement,’  whatever  efforts  may  be  made  to  ex¬ 
tract  one,  and  back  for  ‘  luck  ’  was  a  very  likely  misprint. — Lettsom  (. Preface  to 
Walker’s  Crit.  p.  xliii) :  I  agree  with  Collier  that  this  is  nonsense,  though  formerly 
he  as  well  as  all  other  editors,  thought  it  so  clear  as  to  need  no  explanation.  I  do 
not,  however,  see  how  the  matter  is  much  mended  by  merely  turning  ‘  back  ’  into 
luck.  ...  I  should  say  that  [to  turn  luck]  is  rather  ambiguous  than  intelligible. 
Possibly  Shakespeare  may  have  written  ‘  who  knows  but  luck  may  turn  to  my 
advancement.’  At  any  rate,  it  is  better  English  to  say  that  fortune  turns  an  oppor¬ 
tunity,  than  that  an  opportunity  turns  fortune,  to  a  man’s  advancement.  [Hudson 
adopted  Lettsom’s  emendation.  I  cannot  see  that  any  is  needed.  Autolycus  has 
two  ventures  on  hand :  Gold  from  the  Shepherd,  and  an  experiment  on  the  Prince. 
Of  the  issue  of  the  former  he  is  certain ;  but  as  to  the  shape  for  good  or  for  ill,  in 
which  the  result  of  the  experiment  on  the  Prince  will  come  back  to  him,  he  is  doubt¬ 
ful.  If  he  had  said :  ‘  as  to  which,  who  knows  how  that  may  recoil  to  my  advance¬ 
ment,’  it  could  not,  I  think,  be  termed  ‘  nonsense,’  although  it  might  be  said  ‘  recoil  ’ 
is  used  in  an  unusual  connection. — Ed.] 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


261 


A6lus  Quintus.  Scena  Prima. 


Enter  Leontes ,  Cleomines ,  Dion ,  Paulina ,  Seruants  : 

Florizel,  Perdita. 

Cleo.  Sir,  you  haue  done  enough,  and  haue  perform’d 
A  Saint-like  Sorrow  :  No  fault  could  you  make,  5 

Which  you  haue  not  redeem’d  ;  indeed  pay’d  downe 
More  penitence,  then  done  trefpas  :  At  the  laft 
Doe,  as  the  Heauens  haue  done  ;  forget  your  euill, 

With  them,  forgiue  your  felfe. 

Leo.  Whileft  I  remember  IO 

Her,  and  her  Vertues,  I  cannot  forget 
My  blemifhes  in  them,  and  fo  ftill  thinke  of 
The  wrong  I  did  my  felfe:  which  was  fo  much, 

That  Heire-leffe  it  hath  made  my  Kingdome,  and 

Deftroy’d  the  fweet’ft  Companion,  that  ere  man  15 

Bred  his  hopes  out  of,  true. 

Paul.  Too  true  (my  Lord:)  17 


1.  Scena]  Scsena  F^F^. 

A  Room  in  Leontes’  Palace.  Cap. 

2.  Seruants :]  Servants  F2F3.  Ser¬ 
vants,  F  . 

3.  Florizel,  Perdita.]  Om.  Rowe  et 
seq. 


10.  WhilefT\  Whiljl  F^  et  seq. 

16,  17.  of,  true.  Paul.  Too  true~\  Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope,  of:  true.  Paul.  Too  true 
Coll,  i,  ii.  of.  Paul.  True,  too  true 
Theob.  et  cet. 


12.  in  them]  See  Abbott  (§  162)  for  other  examples  of  the  use  of  ‘in’  with  the 
sense  of  as  regards,  about,  etc.;  as  ‘our  fears  in  Banquo  stick  deep.’ — Macb. 
Ill,  i,  49. 

16,  17.  true.  Too  true]  Theobald:  A  very  slight  examination  will  convince 
every  intelligent  reader  that  true  [at  the  end  of  Leontes’  speech]  has  jumped  out  of 
its  place  in  all  the  editions.  What  the  king  would  say  is  absolutely  complete  without 
it ;  and  the  placing  it  where  the  printed  copies  have  done  is  an  embarrassment  to  the 
sense.  These  two  reasons,  I  hope,  will  be  sufficient  to  justify  my  transposition  [of  it 
to  the  beginning  of  Paulina’s  speech], — Collter  :  We  restore  here  the  reading  of 
the  old  editions.  Leontes,  in  grief  and  remorse,  states  a  fact  and  adds  mournfully 
‘  true  ’ ;  to  which  Paulina  naturally  subjoins  that  it  is  ‘  too  true.’  .  .  .  The  word  ‘  true,’ 
printed,  as  it  is,  without  a  capital  in  Ft,  could  hardly  have  found  its  way  into  the  pre¬ 
ceding  line  by  a  mere  error  of  the  press. — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i) :  As  to  the  effect  of 
the  two  arrangements,  it  appears  that  if  Paulina,  on  the  close  of  the  king’s  self¬ 
accusation,  answers'  in  the  ordinary  phrase,  ‘  True,  too  true,’  she  is  far  less  bitter  than 
if,  after  he  had  paused  and  added  ‘  true,’  she  begins  her  reply,  ‘  too  true,’  thus  intensi- 


262 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 

18 


If  one  by  one,  you  wedded  all  the  World, 

Or  from  the  All  that  are,  tooke  fomething  good, 

To  make  a  perfedl  Woman  ;  fhe  you  kill’d,  20 

Would  be  vnparallell’d. 

Leo .  I  thinke  fo.  Kill’d  ? 

She  I  kill’d  ?  I  did  fo  :  but  thou  ftrik’ft  me 

Sorely,  to  fay  I  did  :  it  is  as  bitter  24 

23.  She  I  kill'd  /]  Kill' d  ?  she  I  kill' d  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 


tying  his  self-reproach  by  her  first  word,  instead  of  softening  it.  But  this  consideration 
is  of  less  consequence  than  the  entire  unfitness  of  ‘  true  ’  at  the  end  of  the  king’s 
speech;  what  was  strong  before,  it  makes  weak  and  commonplace. — Dyce  ( Strictures , 
p.  86)  :  It  is  almost  inconceivable  that  any  person  reading  these  speeches  with  mod¬ 
erate  attention  should  fail  to  see  that  the  word  *  true  ’  at  the  end  of  the  speech  of 
Leontes  has  been  shuffled  out  of  its  place,  and  that  it  should  be  restored  to  Paulina. 
[Walker  ( Crii .  ii,  179)  also  approves  of  restoring  ‘true’  to  Paulina,  whereof  the 
propriety  is,  to  me,  clear. — Ed.] 

19.  from  the  All  that  are,  etc.]  Johnson:  This  is  a  favourite  thought;  it  was 
bestowed  on  Miranda  and  Rosalind.  [See,  1  But  you,  O  you,  So  perfect,  and  so 
peerlesse,  are  created  Of  euerie  Creatures  best.’ — Temp.  Ill,  i,  57  (of  this  ed.) ;  also, 
‘  Thus  Rosalinde  of  manie  parts,  by  Heauenly  Synode  was  deuis’d,  Of  manie  faces, 
eyes,  and  hearts,  to  haue  the  touches  deerest  pris’d.’ — As  You  Like  It,  III,  ii,  148, 
of  this  ed.] 

22.  Kill’d  ?]  Mrs  Jameson  (ii,  28) :  We  see  in  Paulina  what  we  so  often  see  in 
real  life,  that  it  is  not  those  who  are  most  susceptible  in  their  own  temper  and  feel¬ 
ings  who  are  most  delicate  and  forbearing  toward  the  feelings  of  others.  She  does 
not  comprehend,  or  will  not  allow  for  the  sensitive  weakness,  of  a  mind  less  firmly 
tempered  than  her  own.  This  reply  of  Leontes  to  her  cutting  speech  is  full  of  feel¬ 
ing,  and  a  lesson  to  those  who  with  the  best  intentions  in  the  world,  force  the  painful 
truth,  like  a  knife,  into  the  already  lacerated  heart.  We  can  only  excuse  Paulina  by 
recollecting  that  it  is  a  part  of  her  purpose  to  keep  alive  in  the  heart  of  Leontes  the 
remembrance  of  his  queen’s  perfections,  and  of  his  own  cruel  injustice.  [For  once 
Mrs  Jameson  seems  to  have  failed  fully  to  grasp  the  dramatic  situation.  Paulina  had 
to  contend,  single-handed,  against  the  influence  of  the  whole  court,  and,  peradventure, 
for  aught  she  knew,  against  the  king’s  own  secret  inclinations.  Not  only  must  Leontes 
be  hindered  from  marrying  again,  but  his  repentance  must  be  kept  free  from  the 
influence  of  ‘  time’s  strong  hours,’  and  the  past  be  kept  ever-present  to  him, — to  effect 
this,  no  speech  can  be  too  cutting,  and  no  stab  go  too  deep.  We  are  not  yet  recon¬ 
ciled  to  Leontes.  We  must  see  him  quivering  under  the  lash.  Nothing  that  Paulina 
can  possibly  say  to  him  should  be  as  lacerating  as  his  own  memory.  We  can  only 
then  begin  to  forgive  him  when  we  find  that  he  cannot  forgive  himself. — Ed.] 

23.  She  I  kill’d]  Note  Theobald’s  fine  reading,  made  in  the  interest  of  rhythm 
and  of  pathos.  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  141)  proposed  the  same,  not  knowing  that  he  had 
been  anticipated. — Ed. 

24.  to  say]  See  II,  i,  122. 


act  v,  sc.  i.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE  263 

Vpon  thy  Tongue,  as  in  my  Thought.  Now,  good  now,  25 
Say  fo  but  feldome. 

Cleo.  Not  at  all,  good  Lady  : 

You  might  haue  fpoken  a  thoufand  things, that  would 
Haue  done  the  time  more  benefit,  and  grac’d 
Your  kindneffe  better.  30 

Paul.  You  are  one  of  thofe 
Would  haue  him  wed  againe. 

Dio.  If  you  would  not  fo, 

You  pitty  not  the  State,  nor  the  Remembrance 

Of  his  moft  Soueraigne  Name  :  Confider  little,  35 

What  Dangers,  by  his  Highneffe  faile  of  Iffue, 

May  drop  vpon  his  Kingdome,  and  deuoure 

Incertaine  lookers  on.  What  were  more  holy,  38 

28.  fpoken]  spoke  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Var.  33.  /o']  Om.  Han. 

Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii.  35.  Name ]  dame  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  ’21, 

29.  time]  King  Gould.  Sing,  i,  Harness,  Knt. 

31.  one]  none  F4.  little]  a  little  Heath. 

25.  Now,  good  now,]  R.  G.  White,  in  his  Second  Edition,  following  Dyce’s 
Third,  punctuates  ‘now,  good  now,’  and  observes  that  ‘ good  here  means  “my  good 
friend,”  as  in  Temp.  I,  i,  14,  and  elsewhere.’  It  is  simpler  to  regard  good  as  adding 
force  to  whatever  meaning  ‘  now  ’  may  happen  to  bear ;  here  ‘  now  ’  is  deprecatory, 
and  ‘  good  ’  adds  a  plaintive  emphasis.  The  phrase  may  convey  as  many  different 
meanings  as  the  common  interjection  ‘  Dear  me !’ ;  and  it  is  as  difficult  to  ex¬ 
plain. — Ed. 

31,  32.  those  Would]  See  IV,  iv,  397. 

34.  pitty]  A  zeugma,  ‘  You  pity  not  the  state,  nor  [regard]  the  remembrance,’  etc. 

35-  Name]  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  substitution,  in  the  Variorum  of 

1803,  of  dame  for  ‘  Name  ’  is  a  typographical  error  which  Reed  overlooked;  he  has 
no  note  thereon,  and  he  is  not  the  editor  to  make  such  a  change  without  referring  to 
it.  The  misprint  ran  undetected  through  all  subsequent  editions  until  Collier  arrested 
it.  Of  course,  ‘  Name  ’  is  the  only  fit  word  ;  Dion  goes  on  to  show  the  dangers  which 
would  arise  from  forgetting  it. — Ed. 

35.  Consider  little]  Heath  (p.  218):  Too  scrupulous  an  apprehension  for  the 
metre  hath  spoiled  the  sense.  We  should  read :  ‘  consider  a  little.’  An  anapest 
only  instead  of  an  iambic.  [Not  so  ;  the  phrase  means  :  you  little  consider. — Ed.] 

36.  Dangers,  by  .  .  .  faile  of  Issue]  See  in  ‘Date  of  Composition,’  in  the 
Appendix,  the  application,  made  by  Chalmers,  of  this  passage  in  determining  the 
date  of  the  play.  For  ‘  fail  ’  see  II,  iii,  206. 

38.  Incertaine  lookers  on]  Deighton  :  That  is,  the  bystanders,  who  will  not 
know  what  to  do,  who  will  be  paralysed  by  the  anarchy  likely  to  ensue.  Schmidt 
explains  ‘  incertain  ’  by  ‘  indifferent,  not  taking  measures  to  prevent  the  calamity but 
how  they  could  be  said  to  be  ‘  indifferent  ’  to  the  dangers,  or  in  what  way  they  could 
‘  take  measures  to  prevent  the  calamity,’  I  do  not  understand. 


264 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


Then  to  reioyce  the  former  Queene  is  well  ? 
What  holyer,  then  for  Royalties  rcpayre, 

For  prefent  comfort,  and  for  future  good, 

To  bleffe  the  Bed  of  Maieftie  againe 
With  a  fweet  Fellow  tq’t  ? 

Paul.  There  is  none  worthy, 

(RefpeCting  her  that’s  gone:)  befides  the  Gods 
Will  haue  fulfill’d  their  fecret  purpofes  : 

For  ha’s  not  the  Diuine  Apollo  faid  ? 

Is’t  not  the  tenor  of  his  Oracle, 

That  King  Leontes  fhall  not  haue  an  Heire, 

Till  his  loft  Child  be  found  ?  Which,  that  it  fhall, 
Is  all  as  monftrous  to  our  humane  reafon, 

As  my  Antigonus  to  breake  his  Graue, 

And  come  againe  to  me:  who,  on  my  life, 

Did  perifh  with  the  Infant.  ’Tis  your  councell, 
My  Lord  fhould  to  the  Heauens  be  contrary, 
Oppofe  again  ft  their  wills.  Care  not  for  Iffue, 
The  Crowne  will  find  an  Heire.  Great  Alexander 
Left  his  to  th’  Worthieft  :  fo  his  Succeffor 
Was  like  to  be  the  beft. 

Leo.  Good  Paulina , 

Who  haft  the  memorie  of  Hermione 

I  know  in  honor  :  O,  that  euer  I 

Had  fquar’d  me  to  thy  councell  :  then,  euen  now, 

I  might  haue  look’d  vpon  my  Queenes  full  eyes, 

Haue  taken  Treafure  from  her  Lippes. 


40 


45 


50 


55 


60 


65 


39.  Queene  is  well?]  Queen?  This 
•will.  Warb.  Han.  Cap. 

46.  fulfill'd ]  fulfill' n  F2. 

47 . faid?]  F2F3.  faid,  F4,  Rowe  et 
seq. 

51.  humane~\  human  Pope. 

52.  Antigonus]  Antigomus  Fa. 


55.  contrary ]  contray  F2. 

56.  Care]  [To  the  King.]  Care  Theob. 
et  seq.  (subs.). 

60.  Good ]  Ah!  good  Han.  Thou 
good  Cap.  Huds.  My  good  Ktly. 

65.  Lippes.]  lips , —  Cap.  et  seq. 


39-  Queene  is  well]  Malone  :  See  Ant.  &■»  Cleop. :  <  We  use  To  say  the  dead 
are  well,’  II,  v,  33. 

51.  humane]  See  III,  ii,  31  and  178. 

52.  Antigonus  to  breake]  See  III,  ii,  233. 

64.  full  eyes]  Walker  (Crit.  hi,  115) :  Cf.  <a  fair  face  will  wither,  a  full  eye 
wax  hollow.’ — Hen.  V:  V,  ii,  170. 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


265 

66 


Paul.  And  left  them 
More  rich,  for  what  they  yeelded. 

Leo.  Thou  fpeak’ft  truth  : 

No  more  fuch  Wiues,  therefore  no  Wife  :  one  worfe, 

And  better  vs’d,  would  make  her  Sainted  Spirit  70 

Againe  poffeffe  her  Corps,  and  on  this  Stage 
(Where  we  Offendors  now  appeare)  Soule-vext, 

And  begin,  why  to  me  ?  73 


71,  72.  Stage. ,.appeare)~\  Ff  ( appear 
F3F4),  Rowe,  Pope,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Stage ,  (  Where  we  of¬ 
fend  her  now )  appear  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Var.  Dyce,  Ktly,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 
stage,  (  Where  we  offended  anew )  appear 
Han.  stage  (  Where  we  offenders  now 
appear  soul- vex'd )  Steev.  conj.  stage, 
( Were  we  offenders  now)  appear  Rann. 
stage,  (  Where  we  offenders  now,)  appear 
Knt,  Wh.  i,  Sta.  Cam.  Hunter,  Del.  Rife. 
stage,  Where  we're  offenders  now,  ap¬ 
pear  Anon.  ap.  Cam.  Glo.  Bulloch,  Wh. 


ii,  Dtn.  stage,  Where  we  offenders  show, 
appear  Orger.  stage  (  Where  we  offend 
her)  new  appear  Spedding  ap.  Cam. 
stage,  (  Where  we  offenders  move)  appear 
Del.  conj.,  Kinnear. 

73.  And. ..me  f]  Ff  [me;  F2F3.  me. 
Fp.  Begin,  And  why  to  me  ?  Cap.  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  And  begin,  why  ? 
to  me  Mason,  Rann,  Spence.  And  beck¬ 
on  to  me  ‘  Why  ?'  Bulloch.  Demanding, 
Why  to  me  ?  Orger.  And  bellow  ‘  Why 
to  me  ?'  Kinnear. 


72,  73.  Where  we  Offendors  .  .  .  why  to  me]  Theobald:  ’Tis  obvious  that 
the  grammar  is  defective ;  and  the  sense  consequently  wants  supporting.  The  slight 
change  I  have  made  cures  both ;  and,  surely,  ’tis  an  improvement  to  the  sentiment  for 
the  king  to  say  that  Paulina  and  he  offended  his  dead  wife’s  ghost  with  the  subject 
of  a  second  match,  rather  than  in  general  terms  to  call  themselves  offenders,  sinners. 
— Dyce  (ed.  i)  :  I  adopt  the  alteration  of  Theobald,  which  is  by  no  means  violent, 
and  which  connects  (as  is  evidently  required)  the  word  ‘  appear’  with  ‘sainted  spirit.’ 
(A  parenthesis  wrongly  marked  is  not  unfrequent  in  the  Folio.)  [To  this  note  Dyce 
subjoined  in  his  Second  and  Third  Editions  Theobald’s  note  in  full.  Hudson  also 
quoted  it  in  full  and  pronounced  it  ‘just.’  It  is  in  its  favour  that,  to  the  ear,  ‘  offender  ’ 
and  ‘offend  her’  are,  what  what  would  be  termed  in  law,  idem  sonans. — Ed.] — 
Heath  (p.  218) :  But  how  did  the  king  and  Paulina  offend  the  deceased  Queen  at 
the  time  of  this  conversation  ?  Theobald  answers,  ‘  By  making  a  second  match  the 
subject  of  it.’  But  could  she  possibly  be  displeased  with  the  king  for  rejecting  the 
solicitation  to  it,  or  with  Paulina  for  earnestly  dissuading  him  from  it  ?  It  would  be 
unreasonable  to  suppose  it ;  and  it  is  necessary  therefore  to  have  recourse  to  some  more 
plausible  conjecture.  For  my  own  part,  I  have  little  doubt  but  that  the  poet  wrote, 
‘  and  on  this  stage  (  Were  we  offenders  now)  appear  soul-vext,’  etc.  That  is,  If  we 
should  now  at  last  so  far  offend  her. — [Capell  (p.  180),  in  line  73,  transposed  the 
‘  And,’  thereby  reading,  in  his  text,  ‘  Begin,  And  why  to  me  ?'  In  his  Notes  he 
thinks  that  this  transposition  ‘may  chance  to  put  an  end  to  much  controversy.’  In 
the  Variorum  of  1773  Steevens  suggested  that  we  might  read,  ‘  changing  the  place 
of  one  word  only,’  ‘And  why  to  me?’  which  was  Capell’s  text.  In  1790  Malone 
adopted  this  reading  and  gave  the  credit  of  it  to  Steevens,  who  thereafter  spoke  of 
it  as  his  own.  Mr  Churton  Collins  lately  vindicated  the  memory  of  Theobald  ;  a  like 
good  office  is  needed  for  Capell,  whose  text,  in  punctuation  and  division  of  lines  is 


266 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


Paul.  Had  fhe  fuch  power, 

She  had  iuft  fuch  caule. 

Leo.  She  had,  and  would  incenfe  me 
To  murther  her  I  marryed. 

Paul ,  I  fhould  fo  : 

Were  I  the  Ghoft  that  walk’d,  Il’d  bid  you  marke 
Her  eye, and  tell  me  for  what  dull  part  in’t  80 

You  chofe  her  :  then  Il’d  fhrieke,  that  euen  your  eares 
Should  rift  to  heare  me ,  and  the  words  that  follow’d, 

Should  be,  Remember  mine.  83 

75-  iuft  fuch]  Fa,  Theob.  i,  Var.  ’73,  82.  Should ]  Shou'd  Pope  ii,  Theob. 

’78.  such  just  Gould,  juft  F3F4,  Rowe  (shoud'd  Theob.  ii),  Warb.  Johns.  Var. 

et  cet  1773.  1778,  1785,  Mai.  Steev.  First  Am. 

77.  murther ]  murder  Warb.  Ed.  1796,  Var.  1803,  1813,  1821,  Har- 

79*  izialk  Tuuk  d  Rowe  ii.  ness. 

mainly  that  of  the  best  editors’  of  to-day.— Ed.]— Malone  :  Perhaps  the  author 
intended  to  point  it  thus :  ‘  Again  possess  her  corpse  (and  on  this  stage  Where 
we  offenders  now  appear  soul-vext)  And  begin,  why  to  me  ?'  Why  to  me  did  you 
prefer  one  less  worthy,  Leontes  insinuates  would  be  the  purport  of  Hermione’s  speech. 
There  is,  I  think,  something  awkward  in  the  phrase,  ‘  Where  we  offenders  now 
appear.’  By  removing  the  parenthesis  to  the  end  of  the  line,  and  applying  the 
epithet  ‘  soul-vexed  ’  to  Leontes  and  the  rest  who  mourned  the  loss  of  Hermione, 
that  difficulty  is  obviated.— Knight  :  We  have  shifted  the  place  of  the  parenthesis,’ 
making  ‘her  sainted  spirit’  the  nominative  case  to  ‘appear.’  By  this  arrangement,’ 

‘  Where  we  offenders  now  ’  are  must  be  understood.  By  any  other  construction  we 
lose  the  force  of  the  word  ‘appear’  as  applied  to  ‘sainted  spirit.’— R.  G.  White 
(ed.  i)  adopted  Knight’s  reading,  with,  substantially,  Knight’s  note ;  in  his  Second 
Edition  he  attempts  no  vindication  of  his  own  text,  which  follows  that  of  an  Anon¬ 
ymous  critic  as  recorded  in  the  Cam.  Ed.,  and  remarks  only  :  ‘  corruption  here,  which 
seems  to  be  hopeless.’— R.  M.  Spence  (N.  &  Qu.  VII,  ix,  24) :  I  punctuate  the  last 
line  thus  :  ‘  And  begin  “  Why  ?”  to  me.’  [See  Text.  Notes.]  All  were  offenders  before 
Heaven.  Leontes  alone  had  sinned  against  Hermione.  To  him  alone,  were  she  to 
appear,  would  she  (thought  he)  address  her  reproach.  The  one  word  ‘  Why  ?’  would 
be  enough  to  overwhelm  him  with  shame.— The  Cambridge  Editors  :  In  ‘  And 
begin,  why  to  me  ?’  there  is  possibly  a  corruption  which  cannot  be  removed  by  simple 
transposition.  It  ought,  however,  to  be  observed  that  Ben  Jonson  begins  his  Execra¬ 
tion  upon  Vulcan  with  the  words  ‘  And  why  to  me  this  ?’,  which  may  perhaps  be  a 
reminiscence  of  the  present  passage.  [In  a  strait  as  desperate  as  this  any  version 
may  be  regarded  leniently.  For  my  own  part  I  prefer  Spedding’s  reading :  ‘  and 

on  this  stage,  Where  we  offend  her,  new  appear,  soul-vext,  And,’  etc. _ Ed.] 

75-  lust  such]  Malone:  ‘Such’  was,  I  have  no  doubt,  inserted  by  the  composi¬ 
tor’s  eye  glancing  on  the  preceding  line. 

.  76,  lncense]  Cotgrave :  Provoquer.  To  prouoke,  egge,  vrge,  moue,  stirre,  incite, 
incense. 

82.  Should]  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  more  instructive  lesson  as  regards  the 
vitality  of  error  than  in  this  little  word  ‘  should.’  In  1728,  Pope’s  Second  Edition, 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


267 


Leo.  Starres,  Starres, 

And  all  eyes  elfe,  dead  coales  :  feare  thou  no  Wife  ;  85 

lie  haue  no  Wife,  Paulina. 

Paul.  Will  you  fweare 
Neuer  to  marry,  but  by  my  free  leaue  ? 

Leo.  Neuer  ( Paulina )  fo  be  blefs’d  my  Spirit. 

Paul. Then  good  my  Lords ,  beare  witneffe  to  his  Oath.  90 
Cleo.  You  tempt  him  ouer-much. 

Paul.  Vnleffe  another, 

As  like  Hermione ,  as  is  her  Pidture, 

Affront  his  eye. 

Cleo.  Good  Madame,  I  haue  done.  95 


84.  Starres,  Starres]  stars ,  very  stars 
Han.  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13. 

94.  eye.]  eye,-—  Knt,  Wh.  i. 

95.  Madame ,]  madam —  Cap.  Rann, 
Mai.  Steev.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. 


95.  I  haue  done ]  pray  have  done 
Rowe  + ,  Var.  ’73.  Paul.  I  have  done 
Cap.  Rann,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Walker,  Sta.  Ktly,  Cam.  Wh.  ii,  Huds. 
Rife,  Dtn,  Hunter. 


by  a  manifest  oversight,  printed  it  in  the  old-fashioned  way  Shou'd ;  directly  beneath, 
in  the  line  below,  it  was  spelled  Should.  If  any  typographical  error  be  unmistake- 
able,  since  the  days  when  would,  shotdd,  and  could  were  printed  with  an  apostrophe 
in  place  of  the  /,  it  is  this.  And  yet  for  one  hundred  and  eight  years,  in  fourteen 
different,  consecutive,  critical  editions  this  meaningless  ‘  shou’d  ’  survived,  fixed,  and 
unaltered.  It  was  transplanted  even  to  these  shores,  and  flourished  in  The  First 
American  Edition  of  1796;  Singer  checked  its  growth  in  1826,  but  it  sprang  up 
anew  in  Harness.  As  far  as  I  know,  it  is  now  for  the  first  time  detected  and  its 
venerable  longevity  recorded.  See  Dr  Johnson’s  ‘  ’as,’  IV,  iv,  239,  which  lived  only 
fifty-six  years. — Ed. 

82.  rift]  This  is  used  transitively  in  Temp.  V,  i,  52. 

84.  Starres,  Starres]  ‘To  assist  the  metre,’  Hanmer  reads  ‘  Stars,  very  stars !’ 
It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  metre  really  requires  no  assistance,  so  fine  and  so  Shake¬ 
spearian  is  this  very  of  Hanmer. — Ed. 

94.  Affront]  From  the  Latin  through  the  French.  See  Ham.  Ill,  i,  31 :  ‘That 
he  .  .  .  may  here  Affront  Ophelia.’  Cotgrave  :  Acarer.  To  affront,  confront,  set 
face  to  face,  or  before  the  face  of,  bring  neere  vnto,  or,  together. — Ed. 

95.  Good  Madame,  I  haue  done]  Capell  (p.  180) :  What  are  quoted  as  words 
of  Paulina’s,  follow  the  last  speaker’s  ‘  Good  Madam  ’  in  all  the  Folios;  which  being  evi¬ 
dently  wrong  from  him,  his  ‘  I  ’  was  made  pray  by  the  first  modern  [i.  e.  Rowe],  and 
‘  Good  madam,  pray  have  done  ’  is  handed  down  to  us  silently  as  a  reading  authentic  : 
Nothing  can  be  more  natural,  or  more  in  character  for  Paulina,  than  the  interrupting 
Cleomines,  declaring  she  had  done ;  and  still  going  on.  [A  reference  to  the  Text. 
Notes  will  ‘endow  Capell’s  purposes  with  words’;  it  will  be  there  seen  that  his 
emendation,  which  is  now  fairly  adopted  into  the  text,  consists  in  a  distribution  of  the 
speeches,  giving  ‘I  haue  done’  to  Paulina.  In  the  Var.  of  1778  Steevens  adopted 
the  change  as  though  for  the  first  time,  and  Malone  afterward  accredited  it  to  him. 
— Ed.] — Knight  dissents.  ‘  The  vehemence  of  Paulina,’  he  observes,  ‘  overbears  the 


268 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


Pmd.  Yet  if  my  Lord  will  marry  :  if  you  will,  Sir; 

No  remedie  but  you  will  :  Giue  me  the  Office 
To  chufe  you  a  Queene  :  fhe  fhall  not  be  fo  young 
As  was  your  former,  but  fhe  fhall  be  fuch 
As  (walk’d  your  firft  Queenes  Ghoft)  it  fhould  take  ioy 
To  fee  her  in  your  armes. 

Leo.  My  true  Paulina , 

We  fhall  not  marry,  till  thou  bidft  vs. 

Paid.  That 

Shall  be  when  your  firft  Queene’s  againe  in  breath: 

Neuer  till  then. 

96.  Sir]  Sirs  F^.  98.  you  a ]  your  Walker,  Huds. 

interruption  of  Cleomenes,  and  he  says,  “  I  have  done.”  The  modern  editors  give 
“  I  have  done  ”  to  Paulina;  when  she  is  evidently  going  on,  perfectly  regardless  of 
any  opposition.’  Both  Collier  and  Halliwell  are  also  opposed  to  the  change. 
Collier  says  that  ‘  Paulina  has  anything  but  concluded,’  and  that  ‘  the  change  is  on 
every  ground  objectionable.’— Dyce  ( Strictures ,  p.  87) :  When,  in  my  own  edition,  I 
adopted  the  regulation  suggested  by  Steevens  [Dyce  should  have  known  better;  in 
his  Second  Edition  he  attributed  it  rightly  to  Capell— but  then  it  was  after  the  pub¬ 
lication  of  the  Cambridge  Edition],  my  friend,  Mr  John  Forster,  favoured  me  with 
the  following  remarks :  ‘  The  only  thing  that  could  justify  the  notion  of  Cleomenes 
feeling  himself  overborne  by  Paulina’s  vehemence,  and  retreating  with  an  “  I  have 
done,”— would  be,  that  the  second  speech  of  Paulina  should  be  but  a  close  to  the 
impetuous  rush  of  the  first.  On  the  contrary,  the  “  Yet  ”  introduces  a  concession  on 
her  part,  which  properly  follows  the  “  I  have  done.”  ’ 

105.  when  your  first  Queene’s,  etc.]  Lady  Martin  (p.  382) :  It  is  here  the  first 
hint  is  given  that  Hermione  is  still  alive.  How  this  could  be,  and  how  the  secret 
could  have  been  so  well  kept,  Shakespeare  gives  no  hint.  One  is  thus  driven  to  work 
out  the  problem  for  one’s  self.  My  view  has  been  always  this  :  The  death-like  trance, 
into  which  Hermione  fell  on  hearing  of  her  son’s  death,  lasted  so  long,  and  had  so 
completely  the  semblance  of  death,  that  it  was  so  regarded  by  her  husband,  her 
attendants,  and  even  by  Paulina.  The  suspicion  that  animation  was  only  suspended 
may  have  dawned  upon  Paulina,  when,  after  the  boy  Mamillius  had  been  laid  by  his 
mother’s  side,  the  inevitable  change  began  to  appear  in  him,  and  not  in  Hermione 
She  would  not  give  voice  to  her  suspicion  for  fear  of  creating  a  false  hope,  but  had 
the  queen  conveyed  secretly  to  her  own  home,  making  arrangements,  which  her  high 
position  and  then  paramount  power  would  enable  her  to  make,  that  only  the  boy,  and 
his  mother’s  empty  coffin,  should  be  carried  to  the  tomb.  When  after  many  days  the 
trance  gave  way,  Paulina  would  be  near  to  perceive  the  first  flickering  of  the  eye¬ 
lids,  the  first  faint  blush  of  blood  returning  to  the  cheek.  Who  can  say  how  long  the 
fearful  shock  to  nerves  and  brain  may  have  left  Hermione  in  a  state  of  torpor,  hardly 
half  alive,  unconscious  of  everything  that  was  passing  around  her,  with  the  piteous 
look  m  those  full  eyes,  so  dear  to  Paulina,  of  a  wounded,  stricken,  voiceless  animal  > 
And  so  the  uneventful  years  would  pass  away,  as  such  years  do  somehow  pass  with 
those  whose  lives  are  blanks.  Gradually,  as  time  wore  on,  Hermione  would  recog- 


96 


IOO 


105 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


269 

107 


Enter  a  Seruant. 


Ser.  One  that  giues  out  himfelfe  Prince  Florizell, 

Sonne  of  Polixenes,  with  his  Princeffe  ( the 

The  faireft  I  haue  yet  beheld)  defires  acceffe  IIO 

To  your  high  prefence. 

Leo.  What  with  him  ?  he  comes  not 
Like  to  his  Fathers  Greatneffe  :  his  approach 
(So  out  of  circumftance,  and  fuddaine)  tells  vs, 

’Tis  not  a  Vifitation  fram’d,  but  forc’d  1 15 

By  need,  and  accident.  What  Trayne  ? 

Ser.  But  few, 

And  thofe  but  meane. 


Leo.  His  Princeffe  (fay  you)  with  him? 

Ser.  I  :  the  moft  peereleffe  peece  of  Earth,  I  thinke,  120 
That  ere  the  Sunne  fhone  bright  on. 


107.  Scene  ii.  Pope  +  . 

Servant.]  Gentleman.  Theob.  et 
seq.  (subs.). 

108.  out  himfelfe ]  himself  out  Pope, 
Han. 


no.  fairefi]  fair'st  Cap.  Walker, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

I  haue\  I've  Walker,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Huds. 

120.  /.•]  Yes;  Rowe  +  .  Ay;  Cap. 
et  seq.  (subs.). 


nise  her  faithful  Paulina  and  such  of  her  other  ladies  as  were  in  the  secret.  Their 
tender  care  would  move  her  in  time  to  wish  to  live,  because  they  wished  it,  and  be¬ 
cause  Paulina  could  comfort  her  with  the  hope  the  Oracle  had  given,  that  her  lost 
daughter  might  one  day  be  found.  Upon  this  slender  hope — the  words  are  her  own 
— she  ‘  preserved  herself  to  see  the  issue.’  The  name  of  Leontes  is  not  mentioned. 
For  a  while  he  appears  to  be  mercifully  swept  from  her  remembrance.  She  is  not 
unforgiving,  but  her  heart  is  dead  towards  him.  Paulina  feels  that  she  dares  not 
speak  his  name.  It  might  awake  too  terribly  the  recollection  of  the  misery  he  had 
brought  upon  her  mistress,  and  in  her  enfeebled  state  prove  fatal.  The  secret  that 
their  queen  was  still  alive  had  been  marvellously  kept,  although  it  had  not  escaped 
notice  that  Paulina  had  ‘  privately  twice  or  thrice  a  day,  ever  since  the  death  of  Her- 
mione,  visited  the  removed  house,’  to  which  she  had  been  secretly  conveyed.  Seeing 
the  genuine  contrition  of  Leontes,  Paulina  would  not  abandon  the  hope  that  Hermione 
might  in  time  be  reconciled  to  him.  She  had  therefore  the  strongest  reason  to  pro¬ 
test  against  the  projects  of  marriage  which  were  pressed  upon  him  by  his  ministers. 

107.  Seruant]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  It  is  obvious  from  what  this  character  says,  and 
is  said  to  him,  that  he  is  above  the  rank  of  a  ‘  servant.’  In  the  MS  a  singular, 
and  perhaps  unprecedented,  title  is  given  to  him,  in  the  words  *  Enter  a  Servant-poet,' 
as  if  he  were  a  poet  retained  in  the  service  and  pay  of  Leontes  ;  such,  indeed,  appears 
to  have  been  his  capacity. 

no.  fairest]  See  I,  ii,  109. 

1 14.  circumstance]  Schmidt  says  that  this  is  equivalent  to  ‘without  ceremony,’ 
but  it  is  more  than  this ;  it  means  everything  which  should  precede  and  accompany  a 
Royal  Progress,  avant  couriers,  heralds,  military  display,  etc. — Ed. 


2JO 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


Paul.  Oh  Hermione ,  122 

As  euery  prefent  Time  doth  boaft  it  felfe 
Aboue  a  better,  gone  ;  fo  mull  thy  Graue 

Giue  way  to  what’s  feene  now.  Sir,  you  your  felfe  125. 

Haue  faid,  and  writ  fo  ;  but  your  writing  now 
Is  colder  then  that  Theame  :  fhe  had  not  beene, 

Nor  was  not  to  be  equalPd,thus  your  Verfe 
Flow’d  with  her  Beautie  once  ;  ’tis  lhrewdly  ebb’d, 

To  fay  you  haue  feene  a  better.  130 

Ser.  Pardon,  Madame  : 

The  one,  I  haue  almoft  forgot.(your  pardon:) 

The  other,  when  the  ha’s  obtayn’d  your  Eye, 

Will  haue  your  Tongue  too.  This  is  a  Creature, 

Would  fhe  begin  a  Se6t,  might  quench  the  zeale  135 

Of  all  Profeffors  elfe  ;  make  Profelytes 
Of  who  Ihe  but  bid  follow. 

123.  euery]  ever  F  . 

124.  Graue]  graces  Han.  grace  Coll. 

Sing. 

126.  but]  that  Han. 

127.  then]  on  Han. 

Theame  :]  theme,  Mai.  et  seq. 

127,  128.  Jhe... equals d]  As  a  quota¬ 
tion,  Han.  et  seq. 

128.  was  not]  was  she  Pope  +  ,Var.  ’73. 

124.  Graue]  Edwards  (p.  152):  This  means  thy  beauties,  which  are  buried  in 
the  grave ;  the  continent  for  the  contents.— Collier  :  The  MS  Corrector  of  Lord 
Ellesmere’s  Folio,  1623,  has  altered  ‘grave’  to  grace,  which  seems  the  true  reading. 
The  MS  of  the  Folio  1632  introduces  no  change  here,  where  it  certainly  seems  re¬ 
quired.  Staunton  :  This  has  been  changed  to  grace, — to  the  destruction  of  a  very 
fine  idea.  Anon,  (quoted  by  Halliwell) :  [In  addition  to  the  interpretation  given  by 
Edwards]  Shakespeare  had  an  exquisite  reason,  for  such  an  expression  in  the  mouth 
of  Paulina.  It  is  her  object  through  the  whole  scene,  emphatically,  and  with  a  view 
to  the  project  she  is  so  soon  to  realise,  to  keep  the  death  of  Hermione  fresh  in  the 
minds  of  all,  nor  to  suffer  her  grave  to  be  even  for  an  instant  closed. 

126.  and  writ  so]  Johnson  :  ‘  So  ’  relates  not  to  what  precedes,  but  to  what  fol¬ 
lows,  that  She  had  not  been  .  .  .  equall’d.’  [Note  that  Hanmer  was  the  first  to  put 
these  words  in  quotation  marks.] 

127.  then  that  Theame]  Malone:  That  is, than  the  lifeless  body  of  Hermione, 
the  1  theme  ’  of  your  writing. 

134-  This  is  a  Creature]  Walker  (  Vers.  84) :  Read,  I  think,  This'  a  creature. 
[See  ‘This’  again  for  This  is  or  This’  in  V,  iii,  181.  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  20)  gives 
many  instances  where  ‘  creature  ’  should  be  pronounced,  as  here,  a  trisyllable,  which. 

seems,  indeed,  to  be  its  natural  pronunciation  as  derived  from  create _ Ed  ] 

137-  Of  who]  See  IV,  iv,  708. 


137 

128.  equall'd]  equalled  Hunter. 

130.  you  haue]  you've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii. 

134-  This  is]  This  is  such  Han.  Steev. 
Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Huds. 

Creature]  creature  who  Ktly. 
137.  who]  whom  Han.  Coll.  Huds. 
bid]  did  Coll,  i,  iii  (misprint). 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


271 

138 


Paul.  How?  not  women? 

Ser .  Women  will  loue  her,  that  the  is  a  Woman 
More  worth  then  any  Man  :  Men,  that  the  is  140 

The  rareft  of  all  Women. 

Leo.  Goe  Cleomines , 

Your  felfe  (affifted  with  your  honor’d  Friends) 

Bring  them  to  our  embracement.  Still  ’tis  llrange, 

He  thus  fhould  fteale  vpon  vs.  Exit.  145 

Paid.  Had  our  Prince 

(Iewell  of  Children)  feene  this  houre,  he  had  payr’d 
Well  with  this  Lord  ;  there  was  not  full  a  moneth 
Betweene  their  births. 

Leo.  ’Prethee  no  more  ;  ceafe  :  thou  know’ft  150 

He  dyes  to  me  againe,  when  talk’d-of :  fure 
When  I  lhall  fee  this  Gentleman,  thy  fpeeches 
Will  bring  me  to  confider  that,  which  may 
Vnfurnifh  me  of  Reafon.  They  are  come. 

Enter  Florizell,  Perdita,  Cleomines ,  and  others.  155 

Your  Mother  was  moft  true  to  Wedlock,  Prince, 

For  the  did  print  your  Royall  Father  off, 

Conceiuing  you.  Were  I  but  twentie  one, 

Your  Fathers  Image  is  fo  hit  in  you,  159 


143.  Your  felfe~\  You  felf  F4. 

[Exit  Cleom.  Johns,  Var.  Rann. 
145.  Exit.]  Exit  Cleom.  Rowe. 

148.  full  a ]  a  full  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  half  a  So  quoted  by  Walker  (  Crit . 


iii,  116). 

148.  moneth ]  month  F  . 

150.  ceafe\  Om.  Han.  Steev.  Var.  ’03, 
’13,  Huds. 

155.  Scene  iii.  Pope  +  . 


138.  How  ?  not  women  ?]  Macdonald  (p.  158) :  What  a  significant  speech  is 
this,  given  to  Paulina,  who  is  a  thorough  partisan,  siding  with  women  against  men, 
and  strengthened  in  this  by  the  treatment  her  mistress  had  received  from  her  husband  ! 
Having  received  assurances  that  ‘  women  will  love  her,’  she  has  no  more  to  say. 
[The  interrogation  after  ‘  women  ’  (adopted  by  all  editors)  should  be,  I  think,  either 
a  period  or  an  exclamation  mark.  It  is  not  a  question,  but  an  assertion.  Proselytes 
the  new  Beauty  might  make  of  men,  but  of  a  woman— never ! — Ed.] 

143.  assisted  with]  For  other  examples  of  ‘  with,’  where  we  should  use  by,  see 
Abbott,  §  193 ;  and  in  the  next  scene,  line  64,  ‘  he  was  torn  to  pieces  with  a  bear.’ 

150.  ’Prethee  no  more;  cease]  Dyce  (ed.  iii):  Walker  [Crit.  iii,  116)  says, 
‘  Perhaps,  “  Pray,  no  more,”  etc.’ — ‘  Here,’  observes  Mr  W.  N.  Lettsom,  ‘  is  an  evi¬ 
dent  jumble  of  two  genuine  readings,  one  the  correction  of  the  other;  “  Prethee ,  no 
more,”  and  “  I  prithee,  cease.”  ’ 

154.  Vnfurnish  me  of  Reason]  See  Abbott  (§  166)  for  numerous  examples  of 
the  use  of  ‘of’  after  verbs  that  signify  depriving,  delivering,  etc. 


272  THE  WINTERS  TALE  [act  v,  sc.  i. 

(His  very  ayre)  that  I  fhould  call  you  Brother,  160 

As  I  did  him,  and  fpeake  of  fomething  wildly 
By  vs  perform’d  before.  Molt  dearely  welcome, 

And  your  faire  Princeffe  (Goddeffe)  oh:  alas, 

I  loft  a  couple,  that  ’twixt  Heauen  and  Earth 

Might  thus  haue  flood,  begetting  wonder,  as  165 

You  (gracious  Couple)  doe  :  and  then  I  loft 

(All  mine  owne  Folly)  the  Societie, 

Amitie  too  of  your  braue  Father,  whom 
(Though  bearing  Miferie)  I  defire  my  life 

Once  more  to  looke  on  him.  170 

Flo.  By  his  command 
Haue  I  here  touch’d  Sicilia,  and  from  him 
Giue  you  all  greetings,  that  a  King  (at  friend) 

Can  fend  his  Brother  :  and  but  Infirmitie 

(Which  waits  vpon  worne  times)  hath  fomething  feiz’d  175 

His  wifh’d  Abilitie,  he  had  himfelfe 

The  Lands  and  Waters,  ’twixt  your  Throne  and  his, 

Meafur’d,to  looke  vpon  you  ;  whom  he  loues  178 


163.  And ]  As  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Var.  ’73. 

your']  you  Var.  ’21. 

Princeffe  ( Goddeffe )]  Ff,  Rowe. 
princess :  Goddess,  Pope,  Han.  Prin¬ 
cess,  Goddess  :  Theob.  i.  princess, — god¬ 
dess  ! — Dyce  i,  Wh.  Sta.  Cam.  princess- 
-goddess  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
princess,  goddess  !  Theob.  ii  et  cet. 

1 66.  gracious]  gracions  F4. 

168.  whom]  whom, —  Mai. 

too]  too,  Cap. 


170.  on  him]  on  Theob.  4- ,  Cap.  Var. 
Rann.  upon  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13. 

1 71.  By]  Sir,  by  Theob. +  ,  Cap.  Var. 
Rann. 

172.  touch'd  Sicilia,]  touch' d,  Sicilia  ; 
Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

173.  at  friend]  as  friend  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  Coll.  Ellesmere  MS.  and 
friend  Mai.  conj.,  Harness,  a  friend 
Steev.  conj.,  Hazlitt.  to  friend  Anon, 
ap.  Dyce. 

175.  times  ...feiz’d]  limbs  ...  stay' d 
Gould. 


163.  And  your  faire]  Theobald’s  reading  ‘As  your  fair,’  which  has  hitherto 
escaped  notice,  means  ‘  You  are  welcome  as  well  as  your  fair  Princess.’ — Ed. 

163.  Princesse  (Goddesse)]  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  24)  would  make  of  these  a 
compound  word :  princess-goddess ;  from  which  I  dissent.  *  Goddess  ’  is  a  climax. 
—Ed. 

164.  I  lost  a  couple]  Theobald:  The  king’s  meaning  is  this:  He  had  lost  a 
pair  of  children,  who  might  have  stood  the  wonder  of  two  worlds,  the  objects  of 
admiration  to  gods  and  men ;  as  this  young  prince  and  princess  did,  in  his  opinion. 

168-170.  whom  ...  on  him]  See  II,  i,  199. 

173.  at  friend]  For  examples  of  a  similar  use  of*  at,’  see  Abbott,  §  143;  and  for 
*  but’  in  the  next  line,  in  the  sense  of  except,  see  §  120. 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


273 


(He  bad  me  fay  fo)more  then  all  the  Scepters, 

And  thofe  that  beare  them,  liuing.  180 

Leo.  Oh  my  Brother, 

(Good  Gentleman)  the  wrongs  I  haue  done  thee,  ftirre 
Afrefh  within  me  :  and  thefe  thy  offices 
(So  rarely  kind)  are  as  Interpreters 

Of  my  behind-hand  flackneffe.  Welcome  hither,  185 

As  is  the  Spring  to  th’Earth.  And  hath  he  too 
Expos’d  this  Paragon  to  th’fearefull  vfage 
(At  leaft  vngentle)  of  the  dreadfull  Neptune , 

To  greet  a  man,  not  worth  her  paines;  much  leffe, 

Th’aduenture  of  her  perfon  ?  190 

Flo.  Good  my  Lord, 

She  came  from  Libia. 

Leo.  Where  the  Warlike  Swains, 

That  Noble  honor’d  Lord,  is  fear’d,  and  lou’d  ? 

Flo.  Moft  Royall  Sir,  195 

From  thence  :  from  him,  whofe  Daughter 
His  Teares  proclaym’d  his  parting  with  her  :  thence 
(A  profperous  South-wind  friendly )we  haue  crofs’d, 

To  execute  the  Charge  my  Father  gaue  me, 

For  vifiting  your  Highneffe  :  My  beft  Traine  200 

I  haue  from  your  Sicilian  Shores  difmifs’d  ; 

Who  for  Bohemia  bend,  to  fignifie 
Not  onely  my  fucceffe  in  Libia  (Sir) 

But  my  arriuall,  and  my  Wifes,  in  fafetie  204 


181.  Brother ,]  Brother  !  Rowe  + ,  Var. 
Rann,  Coll.  Ktly. 

182.  Gentleman )]  gentleman!  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Wh. 

188.  At  leajl\  At  best  Wh.  ii. 

192.  Libia]  F2.  Lybia  F3F4,  Rowe, 


Pope  i.  Libya  Pope  ii.  Lydia  or 
Lycia  Douce. 

195,  196.  One  line,  Han.  et  seq. 

197.  his  parting~\  his,  parting  Han. 
Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.),  her  parting  Thirlby 
(Nichols,  ii,  226).  at  parting  Heath. 
her,  parting  Ktly. 


197.  proclaym’d  his  parting]  Johnson  :  This  is  very  ungrammatical  and 
obscure.  We  may  better  read:  ‘proclaim’d  her  parting,’  etc.  The  prince  first  tells 
that  the  lady  came  from  Libya ;  the  King,  interrupting  him,  says,  from  Smalus  ?  from 
him,  says  the  Prince,  whose  tears,  at  parting,  showed  her  to  be  his  daughter. — 
Steevens  :  The  obscurity  arises  from  want  of  proper  punctuation.  By  placing  a 
comma  after  ‘  his,’  I  think  the  sense  is  cleared. 

198.  South-wind  friendly]  See  Abbott  (§  380)  for  instances  where  adjectives 
are  used  instead  of  a  participle ;  here  an  adverb  is  so  used. 

18 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  V,  sc.  i. 

205 


2/4 


Here,  where  we  are. 

Leo.  The  bleffed  Gods 
Purge  all  Infection  from  our  Ayre,  whileft  you 
Doe  Clymate  here  :  you  haue  a  holy  Father, 

A  gracefull  Gentleman,  againft  whofe  perfon 
(So  facred  as  it  is)  I  haue  done  finne,  2 10 

For  which,  the  Heauens  (taking  angry  note) 

Haue  left  me  Iffue-leffe  :  and  your  Father’s  blefs’d 
(As  he  from  Heauen  merits  it)  with  you, 

Worthy  his  goodneffe.  What  might  I  haue  been, 

Might  I  a  Sonne  and  Daughter  now  haue  look’d  on,  215 

Such  goodly  things  as  you  ? 

Enter  a  Lord. 

Lord.  Moft  Noble  Sir, 

That  which  I  fhall  report,  will  beare  no  credit, 

Were  not  the  proofe  fo  nigh.  Pleafe  you(great  Sir)  220 

Bohemia  greets  you  from  himfelfe,  by  me  : 

Defires  you  to  attach  his  Sonne,  who  ha’s 
(His  Dignitie,  and  Dutie  both  caft  off) 

Fled  from  his  Father, from  his  Hopes, and  with 
A  Shepheards  Daughter.  225 

Leo.  Where’s  Bohemia  ?  fpeake : 

Lord.  Here, in  your  Citie  :  know  came  from  him. 

I  fpeake  amazedly,  and  it  becomes 

My  meruaile,and  my  Meffage.  To  your  Court  229 


205.  we  are]  we  happily  are  Han. 
Cap. 

206.  The  biffed  ]  Oh  !  (or  And )  may 
the  blessed  Mitford  ap.  Cam. 

207.  whileJT\  whiljl  F4  et  seq. 

208.  holy]  noble  Coll.  MS. 

217.  Scene  iv.  Pope  +  . 


220.  nigh]  high  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns.  Var.  ’73. 

223.  No  parenthesis,  Rowe,  Pope. 
227.  your]  the  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  ’21. 

229.  meruaile]  marvel  F4. 

Meffage.  To]  Meffage,  to  F4> 
message  :  to  Rowe  4- . 


205.  Here,  where  we  are.]  Malone  :  Unless  both  the  words  ‘  here  ’  and  ‘  where  ’ 
were  here  employed  as  disyllables,  the  metre  is  defective.  We  might  read — the  ever- 
blessed  gods ; — but  whether  there  was  any  omission  is  very  doubtful  for  the  reason 
already  assigned.— Ritson  (Curs.  Crit.  p.  60) :  O  by  all  means  let  them  be  employed 
as  disyllables;  they  are  most  useful  and  excellent  things,  and  make  the  sweetest  versi¬ 
fication  imaginable.  For  instance  :  ‘  He-br,  whe-ar  we  ar§.  The  blessed  Gods.’  Or 
thus,  more  softly :  ‘  He-rle,  whe-rle  we  are.  The  blessed  Gods.’ 

208.  Clymate]  See  IV,  iv,  550. 

209.  gracefull]  M.  Mason  :  That  is,  full  of  grace  and  virtue. 

229.  meruaile]  This  is,  my  own  wonderment. 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


275 


Whiles  he  was  haftning  (in  the  Chafe,  it  feemes,  230 

Of  this  faire  Couple)  meetes  he  on  the  way 

The  Father  of  this  feeming  Lady,  and 

Her  Brother,  hauing  both  their  Countrey  quitted, 

With  this  young  Prince. 

Flo.  Camilla  ha’s  betray’d  me  ;  235 

Whofe  honor,  and  whofe  honeftie  till  now, 

Endur’d  all  Weathers. 

Lord.  Lay’t  fo  to  his  charge  : 

He’s  with  the  King  your  Father. 

Leo.  Who  ?  Camillo  ?  240 

Lord.  Camillo  (Sir:)  I  fpake  with  him:  who  now 
Ha’s  thefe  poore  men  in  queftion.  Neuer  faw  I 
Wretches  fo  quake  :  they  kneele,they  kiffe  the  Earth; 

Forfweare  themfelues  as  often  as  they  fpeake : 

Bohemia  flops  his  eares,  and  threatens  them  245 

With  diuers  deaths,  in  death. 

Perd.  Oh  my  poore  Father  ; 

The  Heauen  fets  Spyes  vpon  vs,  will  not  haue 
Our  Contract  celebrated. 

Leo.  You  are  marryed?  250 

Flo.  We  are  not  (Sir)  nor  are  we  like  to  be : 


230.  Whiles ]  Whilst  Rowe  + .  Sir,  Rowe  ii  +  .  Camillo ,  sir;  Cap.  et 

241.  Camillo  (Sir:)"]  Camillo?  (Sir:)  seq. 

F  .  Camillo  ?  Sir,  Rowe  i.  Camillo,  248.  fets  Spyes  vpon ]  which  sets  spies 

on  Pope,  Han. 


242.  in  question]  Schmidt’s  definition  of  this  as  a  ‘judicial  trial,’  was  probably 
derived  from  Delius,  who  explains  it  as  Verhor, — a  needless  amplification  of  the  ordi¬ 
nary  meaning  of  ‘  question,’  which  is  simply  conversation.  Naturally  the  conversation 
was  grave  and  earnest,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  it  partook  of  the  nature  of  a 
legal  investigation. — Ed. 

248,  249.  The  Heauen  .  .  .  celebrated]  Mrs  Jameson  (i,  240) :  This  love  of 
truth,  this  conscientiousness,  which  forms  so  distinct  a  feature  in  the  character  of 
Perdita,  and  mingles  with  its  picturesque  delicacy  a  certain  firmness  and  dignity,  is 
maintained  to  the  last.  .  .  .  During  this  [present]  scene,  Perdita  does  not  utter  a 
word.  In  the  strait  in  which  they  are  placed,  she  cannot  deny  the  story  which 
Florizel  relates;  she  will  not  confirm  it.  Her  silence,  in  spite  of  all  the  compli¬ 
ments  and  greetings  of  Leontes,  has  a  peculiar  and  characteristic  grace;  and,  at 
the  conclusion  of  the  scene,  when  they  are  betrayed,  the  truth  bursts  from  her 
as  if  instinctively,  and  she  exclaims  with  emotion,  1  The  Heavens  set  spies  on 
us,’  etc. 


276 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 
252 


The  Starres  (I  fee)  will  kiffe  the  Valleyes  firft  : 

The  oddes  for  high  and  low’s  alike. 

Leo.  My  Lord, 

Is  this  the  Daughter  of  a  King?  255 

Flo.  She  is, 

When  once  fhe  is  my  Wife. 

Leo.  That  once(I  fee)  by  your  good  Fathers  fpeed, 

Will  come-on  very  flowly.  I  am  forry 

(Moft  forry)  you  haue  broken  from  his  liking,  260 

Where  you  were  ty’d  in  dutie  :  and  as  forry, 

Your  Choife  is  not  fo  rich  in  Worth,  as  Beautie, 

That  you  might  well  enioy  her. 

Flo.  Deare,  looke  vp  : 

Though  Fortune ,  vifible  an  Enemie,  265 

Should  chafe  vs,  with  my  Father  ;  powre  no  iot 
Hath  fhe  to  change  our  Loues.  Befeech  you  (Sir) 

Remember,  fince  you  ow’d  no  more  to  Time  268 


258.  once']  As  a  quotation,  Johns. 
Var.  ’73,  Dyce,  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 

262.  Worth]  birth  Warb.  Han. 

265.  Fortune,  vifible ]  Fortune  visible , 


Han. 

266.  Father ;  powre ]  father,  power 
Knt,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  Cam. 

268.  fnce~\  when  Ktly  conj. 


253.  The  oddes  .  .  .  alike]  Capell  (p.  181) :  The  difficulties  of  high  and  low’s 
meeting,  the  ‘  odds  ’  that  lay  against  them  for  doing  it,  were  hardly  less  than  that  of 
the  *  valleys  and  stars  ’  meeting.  [I  think  it  is  only  fair  to  infer  that  in  ‘  high  and 
low  ’  Capell  refers  to  rank,  in  which  case  he  is  more  correct  than  Douce,  who  finds 
in  these  words  a  ‘  quibble  upon  the  false  dice  so  called.’  In  this  opinion  of  Douce, 
Malone  and  Steevens  silently  acquiesce.  But  I  doubt  that  false  dice  were  ever  called 
‘  high  and  low  ’ ;  they  were  termed  high -men  and  low-#z<?».  Capell  is  right  as  far  as 
the  interpretation  of  ‘  high  and  low  ’  is  concerned,  but  I  cannot  extract  from  his  note 
what  I  think  is  the  full  meaning  of  the  line. — Singer  paraphrases  it  thus  :  ‘  Fortune 
is  as  unfavourable  to  us  as  Prince  and  Princess,  as  when  we  were  Shepherd  and 
Shepherdess.’  This  paraphrase  is  defective,  I  think,  inasmuch  as  it  makes  Fortune 
‘  unfavourable,’  whereas  Florizel  says  that  the  ‘  odds  ’  are  ‘  alike  ’ ;  this  leads  us  to 
the  true  meaning,  which  is,  I  think,  that  the  degree  of  probability,  the  odds,  the 
balance  in  favour,  will  be  the  same  for  the  high-born  and  the  low-born.  Fortune  will 
favour  Florizel  no  more  than  she  favours  Doricles,  and  the  case  is  so  hopeless  that  the 
stars  will  kiss  the  valleys  first,  and  Fortune  will  not  intervene.— Ed.] 

262.  Worth]  Johnson  :  ‘  Worth  ’  signifies  any  kind  of  worthiness,  and  among 
others  that  of  high  descent.  The  king  means  that  he  is  sorry  the  Prince’s  choice 
is  not  in  other  respects  as  worthy  of  him  as  in  beauty. — Malone  :  Our  author  often 
uses  ‘  worth  ’  for  wealth  ;  which  may  also,  together  with  high  birth,  be  here  in 
contemplation. 

268.  since]  That  is,  when;  for  other  examples  see  Abbott,  §  132. 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


2/7 


Then  I  doe  now:  with  thought  of  fuch  Affections, 

Step  forth  mine  Aduocate  :  at  your  requeft,  270 

My  Father  will  graunt  precious  things, as  Trifles. 

Leo.  Would  he  doe  fo,  I’ld  beg  your  precious  Miftris, 

Which  he  counts  but  a  Trifle. 

Paul.  Sir  (my  Liege ) 

Your  eye  hath  too  much  youth  in’t :  not  a  moneth  275 

’Fore  your  Queene  dy’d,  the  was  more  worth  fuch  gazes, 

Then  what  you  looke  on  now. 

Leo.  I  thought  of  her, 

Euen  in  thefe  Lookes  I  made.  But  your  Petition 

Is  yet  vn-anfwer’d  :  I  will  to  your  Father  :  280 

Your  Honor  not  o’re-throwne  by  your  defires, 

I  am  friend  to  them,  and  you  :  Vpon  which  Errand 
I  now  goe  toward  him  :  therefore  follow  me, 

And  marke  what  way  I  make :  Come  good  my  Lord. 

Exeunt.  285 

269.  Affections,]  affections.  Warb.  282.  I  am]  I'm  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

275.  moneth']  month  F4.  friend]  a  friend  Var.  ’03,  ’13, 

279.  thefe]  those  Cap.  conj.  ’21,  Coll.  Wh.  i. 

[To  Florizel.  Theob. 

272.  I’ld  beg]  Halliwell  :  The  present  line  would  probably  not  have  been 
■written,  had  not  the  author  had  in  his  remembrance  the  revolting  conclusion  of  the 
original  novel.  It  is  true  that  in  the  text  there  is  merely  the  evidence  of  great  kind¬ 
ness,  yet  the  prose  tale  has  probably  exerted  an  influence  in  the  direction  of  the  dia¬ 
logue.  [This  may  possibly  be  so,  but  mark  the  delicate  and  deeply  pathetic  turn 
which  Shakespeare  imparts  to  it  in,  ‘  I  thought  of  her,  even  in  those  looks  I  made.’ 
—Ed.] 

281.  not  o’re-throwne]  Abbott  (§  377) :  The  participle  is  often  used  to  express 
a  condition  where,  for  perspicuity,  we  should  now  mostly  insert  if. 


278 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


Sccena  Secunda. 


Enter  Autolicus ,  and  a  Gentleman. 

Aut.  Befeech'  you  (Sir)  were  you  prefent  at  this  Re¬ 
lation  ? 

1.  Sccena...]  Scene  v.  Pope  + .  The  same.  Before  the  Palace.  Cap 

Near  the  Court  in  Sicily.  Theob.  2.  Autolicus]  Autolichus  F3F4. 

I.  Gildon  (p.  336)  :  The  narration  of  the  Discovery  in  the  last  Act  is  not  only 
entertaining  but  moving,  and  [Shakespeare]  seems  accidentally  to  have  hit  on  some¬ 
thing  like  the  Ancients,  whose  catastrophes  were  generally  in  narration.  And  is  a 
proof  that  if  our  Poets  had  the  genius  of  Shakespear,  the  shocking  representations 
of  the  stage  might  easily  and  with  beauty  be  thrown  into  narration,  and  so  leave  room 
for  the  poet  to  show  his  eloquence  and  imagery. — Johnson  :  It  was,  I  suppose,  only 
to  spare  his  own  labour  that  the  poet  put  this  whole  scene  into  narrative,  for  though 
part  of  the  transaction  was  already  known  to  the  audience,  and  therefore  could  not 
properly  be  shewn  again,  yet  the  two  kings  might  have  met  upon  the  stage,  and,  after 
the  examination  of  the  old  Shepherd,  the  young  lady  might  have  been  recognised  in 
sight  of  the  spectators. — Harness  :  Probably  this  scene  is  given  in  narrative  that  the 
paramount  interest  of  the  play  may  rest,  as  it  ought  to  do,  with  the  restoration  of 
Hermione. — Hartley  Coleridge  (ii,  150) :  What  was  Shakespeare’s  motive  for 
conveying  by  narrative  what  he  might  have  made  so  pathetic  in  representation? 
This  is  the  more  strange  and  provoking,  inasmuch  as  narrative  is  by  no  means  his 
forte,  except  when  it  is  combined  with  action  or  passion ;  and  those  euphuistic  gen¬ 
tlemen  talk  mere  epigram  and  antithesis,  very  like,  I  dare  say,  the  newsmongers  of 
that  day,  when  it  was  as  essential  to  be  quaint  as  at  present  to  be  commonplace. 
I  suspect  Shakespeare  was  hurried  in  his  latter  scenes,  and  could  compose  this  sort 
of  dialogue  with  the  least  aid  from  inspiration. — Gervinus  (p.  815) :  The  poet  has 
wisely  placed  this  recognition  of  Perdita  behind  the  scenes,  otherwise  the  play  would 
have  been  too  full  of  powerful  scenes.  .  .  .  The  mere  relation  of  this  meeting  is  in 
itself  a  rare  masterpiece  of  prose  description. — Guizot  (p.  406) :  It  is  easy  to  see 
that  Shakespeare  was  here  in  a  hurry  to  conclude ;  the  play  would  have  been  com¬ 
plete  had  that  which  is  here  narrated  been  placed  on  the  stage.  Segnius  irritant 
animos  demissa  per  aurem,  etc.— Delius  {Sh.  Jahrbuch,  1870,  p.  251) :  Shakespeare 
gives  merely  a  description  of  the  reconciliation  of  Leontes  and  Polixenes  and  of  the 
recognition  of  Perdita,  either  out  of  regard  to  the  scheme  of  the  play,  which  is  already 
long  drawn  out,  or  else  to  avoid  weakening  the  effect  of  the  final  scene  by  having  it 
preceded  by  one  of  a  similar  purport.  For  a  mere  narrative,  prose  was  here  all-suf¬ 
ficient,  but  for  the  pathetic  and  touching  subject  of  this  narrative  there  was  needed  a 
euphuistic  prose  adorned  with  all  delicacies  of  style,  such  as  the  fashion  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  day  deemed  befitting  and  natural  in  the  mouths  of  cultivated  courtiers.  It 
is  manifest  that  the  Poet  devoted  an  especial  care  to  this  portion  of  his  drama ;  the 
antitheses  and  parallelisms  are  arranged  artistically,  the  metaphors  and  the  style  are 
harmoniously  rounded.  We  have  an  amusing  offset  to  the  ceremonious  and  artistic 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


279 

Gent.i.  I  was  by  at  the  opening  of  the  Farthell,  heard  5 

the  old  Shepheard  deliuer  the  manner  how  he  found  it  : 
Whereupon(after  a  little  amazedneffe)  we  were  all  com¬ 
manded  out  of  the  Chamber  :  onely  this  (me  thought)  I 
heard  the  Shepheard  fay,  he  found  the  Child. 

Aut.  I  would  molt  gladly  know  the  iffue  of  it.  •  10 

Gent.i.  I  make  a  broken  deliuerie  of  the  Bufineffe  ; 
but  the  changes  I  perceiued  in  the  King,  and  Camillo,  were 
very  Notes  of  admiration  :  they  feem’d  almoft,with  fla¬ 
ring  on  one  another,  to  teare  the  Cafes  of  their  Eyes. 

There  was  fpeech  in  their  dumbneffe,  Language  in  their  15 
very  gefture  :  they  look’d  as  they  had  heard  of  a  World 
ranfom’d,  or  one  deftroyed  :  a  notable  paffion  of  Won¬ 
der  appeared  in  them  :  but  the  wifeft  beholder,  that  knew  1 8 

5.  Farthell ]  Fardel  F?F4.  16.  as  they]  as  if  they  Rowe,  Pope, 

1 6.  very]  every  Anon.  ap.  Cam.  Han. 

prose  of  the  earlier  portion  of  the  scene  in  the  downright  prose  of  the  two  Clowns 
with  their  delicious  simplicity  over  their  newly  bom  nobility.  [Is  it  not  allowable  to 
suppose  that  Shakespeare  was  afraid  of  his  actors  ?  He  knew,  none  so  well,  how 
easily  deep  and  tragic  emotion  may  be  converted  by  a  single  false  expression  into  not 
merely  comedy,  but  even  farce.  Could  a  spectator,  even  the  most  sympathetic,  repress 
a  smile  at  the  sight  of  Shylock  with  wildly  flying  hair  and  distorted  features  rushing 
hither  and  thither  uttering  frenzied  shrieks  for  his  ducats,  and  pursued  with  laughter 
by  all  the  little  boys  in  Venice  ?  Even  in  so  small  a  matter  as  whetting  the  knife  in 
the  Trial  Scene  of  that  same  play,  Edwin  Booth  said  that  as  Shylock  he  was 
always  fearful  lest  he  should  overdo  it,  and  make  it  comic,  and  in  the  MS  stage- 
directions  which  he  kindly  wrote  out  for  this  edition  it  will  be  noticed  that  to  the 
direction  in  regard  to  whetting  the  knife,  he  adds  ‘  — not  too  rapidly,’  so  conscious 
was  he  of  the  thin  partition  between  tragedy  and  comedy.  Thus  here,  merely  let 
us  vividly  picture  to  ourselves  what  might  be  fairly  termed  the  joyous,  ebullient 
antics  of  Leontes,  first  begging  pardon  of  Polixenes,  then  hugging  Florizel,  then 
worrying  Perdita  with  his  embraces,  then  wringing  the  old  Shepherd’s  hand,  who 
was  crying  vigourously  and  probably  with  superfluous  noise, — and  I  think  we  shall 
be  quite  aware  that  unless  all  the  characters  were  assumed  by  actors  of  commanding 
power,  the  scene  would  degenerate  into  farce  and  end  amid  uproarious  jeers. — Ed.] 
7.  after  a  little  amazednesse]  Deighton  :  That  is,  at  first  the  king  and 
Camillo  were  so  amazed  at  the  story  that  no  notice  was  taken  of  us,  but  after  a  little 
time  we  were  all  ordered  to  leave  the  room. 

14.  Cases  of  their  Eyes]  Steevens  has  been  followed  in  defining  ‘  Cases  ’  as 
‘sockets,’  and  in  Lear,  IV,  vi,  141,  such  appears  to  be  the  meaning;  but  here  the 
meaning  is  eyelids ;  it  is  expressly  so  given  in  Per.  Ill,  ii,  99:  ‘  Behold,  Her  eyelids, 
the  cases  to  those  heavenly  jewels,’  etc.  Schmidt,  to  be  right  beyond  cavil,  gives,  as 
the  meaning  here,  both  ‘  eyelids  and  sockets,’  thereby  imparting  to  the  expression  great 
vigour,  to  say  the  least. — Ed. 


28o 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


no  more  but  feeing,  could  not  fay,  if  th’importance  were 
Ioy,  or  Sorrow  ;  but  in  the  extremitie  of  the  one,  it  muft 
needs  be.  Enter  another  Gentleman. 

Here  comes  a  Gentleman ,  that  happily  knowes  more  : 
The  Newes,  Rogero. 

Gent. 2.  Nothing  but  Bon-fires:the  Oracle  is  fulfill’d: 
the  Kings  Daughter  is  found  :  fuch  a  deale  of  wonder  is 
broken  out  within  this  houre,  that  Ballad-makers  cannot 
be  able  to  expreffe  it.  Enter  another  Gentleman. 

Here  comes  the  Lady  Paulina’s  Steward,  hee  can  deliuer 
you  more.  How  goes  it  now  (Sir.)  This  Newes  (which 
is  call’d  true)  is  fo  like  an  old  Tale,  that  the  veritie  of  it  is 
in  ftrong  fufpition  :  Ha’s  the  King  found  his  Heire  ? 

Gent .  3.  Moft  true,  if  euer  Truth  were  pregnant  by 
Circumftance  :  That  which  you  heare  ,  you’le  fweare 
you  fee,  there  is  such  vnitie  in  the  proofes.  The  Mantle 
of  Queene  Hermiones  :  her  Iewell  about  the  Neck  of  it  : 
the  Letters  of  Antigonus  found  with  it,  which  they  know 
to  be  his  Character  :  the  Maieftie  of  the  Creature,  in  re- 
femblance  of  the  Mother  :  the  Affeftion  of  Nobleneffe, 


20 


25 


30 


35 


38 


21.  Enter...]  Enter  Rogero.  Sta. 

22.  happily~\  haply  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly, 
Cam.  Wh.  ii. 

27.  Enter  another...]  Enter  a  third... 

Cap.  Enter  Paulina’s  Steward.  Sta. 

29.  Sir. ]  Sir?  F  F  . 

'  J  34 


33.  Circumjlance\  circumstances  Cap. 
(Corrected  in  Errata.) 

35.  Hermiones]  Hermione's  Cap.  Mai. 
Wh.  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Cam.  Hermione 
Rowe  et  cet. 


19.  importance]  Malone:  That  is ,  import. — Collier  (ed.  ii) :  But  the  word  is 
rather  to  be  taken  in  its  etymological  sense,  from  the  Fr.  emporter.  Spenser  uses 
1  important  ’  in  a  kindred  manner:  ‘  He  fiercely  at  him  flew,  And  with  important  out¬ 
rage  him  assailed.’  The  meaning  of  the  text  seems  to  be,  that  a  mere  beholder  could 

not  have  said  whether  they  were  carried  away  by  joy  or  by  sorrow. _ R.  G.  White 

(ed.  i) :  The  meaning  seems  plainly  to  be,  ‘  if  their  passion  were  of  joyful  or  sorrowful 
import.’  [Halliwell  quotes  only  Collier,  Dyce  quotes  only  R.  G.  White,  whose 
definition  is  really  the  same  as  Malone’s.] 


26.  Ballad-makers]  See  IV,  iv,  303. 

32,  33.  Truth  .  .  .  Circumstance]  Delius  explains  ‘  pregnant  ’  by  clear,  per¬ 
fectly  evident,  and  Schmidt,  who  generally  follows  Delius,  gives  as  its  equivalent: 
‘ probable  in  the  highest  degree,  clear,  evident .’  I  incline  to  think  that  the  whole  phrase 
means  ‘  if  ever  truth  were  stored  full  by  circumstance.’  Wherever  Shakespeare  uses 
the  word  ‘  pregnant  ’  it  will  be  generally  found  to  involve  the  idea  of  fulness,  whether 
it  be  of  information,  of  proof,  of  fawning,  etc. _ Ed. 


38.  the  Affetfhon]  Malone:  ‘  Affection  ’  here  perhaps  means  disposition  or 
quality.  The  word  seems  to  be  used  nearly  in  the  same  sense  in  the  following 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


281 


which  Nature  fhewes  aboue  her  Breeding,  and  many  o- 
ther  Euidences,  proclayme  her,  with  all  certaintie,  to  be  40 
the  Kings  Daughter.  Did  you  fee  the  meeting  of  the 
two  Kings  ? 

Gent.  2.  No. 

Gent.5.  Then  haue  you  loft  a  Sight  which  was  to  bee 
feene,  cannot  bee  fpoken  of.  There  might  you  haue  be-  45 
held  one  Ioy  crowne  another,  fo  and  in  fuch  manner,  that 
it  feem’d  Sorrow  wept  to  take  leaue  of  them  :  for  their 
Ioy  waded  in  teares.  There  was  calling  vp  of  Eyes,  hol¬ 
ding  vp  of  Hands,  with  Countenance  of  fuch  diftradlion, 
that  they  were  to  be  knowne  by  Garment, not  by  Fauor.  50 
Our  King  being  ready  to  leape  out  of  himfelfe,  for  ioy  of 
his  found  Daughter  ;  as  if  that  Ioy  were  now  become  a 
Loffe,  cryes,  Oh,  thy  Mother,  thy  Mother  :  then  askes 
Bohemia  forgiueneffe,  then  embraces  his  Sonne-in-Law: 
then  againe  worryes  he  his  Daughter,  with  clipping  her.  55 
Now  he  thanks  the  old  Shepheard  (which  Hands  by, like 
a  Weather-bitten  Conduit,  of  many  Kings  Reignes. )  I  57 

56.  which ]  who  Rowe+,  Var.  ’73.  57.  Weather-bitten]  weather-beaten 

F3F4,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Coll,  ii  (MS). 

title :  ‘  The  first  set  of  Italian  Madrigalls  Englished,  not  to  the  sense  of  the  Original 
Ditty,  but  to  the  Affection  of  the  Noate,’  etc.,  by  Thomas  Watson,  1590.  [‘  Affection’ 
is  certainly  not  used  here  as  it  is  in  I,  ii,  167:  ‘Affection,  thy  intention  stabs  the 
center.’  In  the  present  Euphuistic  language  ‘  the  affection  of  nobleness  ’  means 
simply  ‘the  noble  affection’  or  ‘the  noble  quality  which  Nature  reveals  above  her 
peasants’  breeding.’ — Ed.] 

46.  so  and  in  such  manner]  Ritson  :  Our  author  seems  to  have  picked  up  this 
little  piece  of  tautology  in  his  clerkship.  It  is  the  technical  language  of  con¬ 
veyancers. 

49.  Countenance]  Deighton  :  If  ‘  countenance  ’  is  to  be  retained,  it  may  either 
be  taken  as  in  reality  plural,  there  being  other  examples  in  Shakespeare  of  nouns  in 
-ce  having  such  forms  for  their  plural ;  or  as  the  abstract  for  the  concrete. 

50.  Fauor]  That  is,  features,  countenance. 

55.  clipping  her]  That  is,  embracing  her. 

56.  which  stands  by]  Although  Abbott  (§  265)  gives  examples  of  ‘  which  ’  used 
for  who,  yet  it  is  possible  that  ‘  which  ’  is  here  used  proleptically  in  reference  to  the 
conduit,  in  which  simile,  by  the  way,  we  see  the  ‘  gentlemanlike  tears  ’  whereof  the 
Clown  afterward  boasted.— Ed. 

57.  Weather-bitten]  Steevens:  Hamlet  says,  ‘The  air  bites  shrewdly’;  and 
the  Duke  in  As  You  Like  It :  ‘when  it  bites  and  blows.’  ‘Weather-bitten’  may, 
therefore,  mean  corroded  by  the  weather. — Ritson  :  Antony  Munday,  in  the  Preface 
to  Gtrileon  of  England,  the  second  part,  etc.  1592,  has:  ‘winter-bitten  epitaph.’ — 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


282 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


neuer  heard  of  fuch  another  Encounter;which  lames  Re-  58 
port  to  follow  it,  and  vndo’s  defcription  to  doe  it. 

Gent.2.  What,  ’pray  you,  became  of  Antigonus ,  that  60 
carryed  hence  the  Child  ? 

Gent. 3.  Like  an  old  Tale  ftill,  which  will  haue  matter 
to  rehearfe,  though  Credit  be  afleepe,  and  not  an  eare  o- 
pen  ;  he  was  torne  to  pieces  with  a  Beare  :  This  auouches 
the  Shepheards  Sonne;  who  ha’s  not  onely  his  Innocence  65 
(which  feemes  much)to  iuftifie  him,  but  a  Hand-kerchief 
and  Rings  of  his,  that  Paulina  knowes. 

Gent.  1.  What  became  of  his  Barke ,  and  his  Fol¬ 
lowers  ? 

Gent.  3.  Wrackt  the  fame  inftant  of  their  Matters  70 
death,  and  in  the  view  of  the  Shepheard  :  fo  that  all  the 
Inftruments  which  ayded  to  expofe  the  Child,  were  euen 
then  loft,  when  it  was  found.  But  oh  the  Noble  Combat, 
that  ’twixt  Ioy  and  Sorrow  was  fought  in  Paulina.  Shee 
had  one  Eye  declin’d  for  the  Ioffe  of  her  Husband,  ano-  7 5 
ther  eleuated,  that  the  Oracle  was  fulfill’d:  Shee  lifted  the 
Princeffe  from  the  Earth,  and  fo  locks  her  in  embracing, 
as  if  fhee  would  pin  her  to  her  heart,  that  fhee  might  no 
more  be  in  danger  of  looting.  79 


59.  to  doe  zV]  to  draw  it  Han.  to  do 
it  justice  Sing,  conj.,  Ktly.  to  show  it 
Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS). 

62.  matter ]  matters  F^,  Rowe -I- ,  Var. 
Rann. 

64.  with  a]  of  a  Cap.  conj. 


70.  Wrack f  Wreckt  Theob.  ii. 

Wreck’d  Han. 

77.  /ocks]  lock'd  Han. 

79.  looftng\  lofing  Ff.  losing  her 
Coll,  ii  (MS),  Ktly,  Huds. 


Henley  :  Conduits,  representing  a  human  figure,  were  heretofore  not  uncommon. 
See  Romeo  and  Juliet :  ‘  How  now  ?  a  conduit,  girl  ?  what  still  in  tears  ?'  etc. 

58,  59.  lames  Report  to  follow  it]  Malone  :  Cf.  Temp.  IV,  i,  10:  ‘She  will 
outstrip  all  praise  And  make  it  halt  behind  her.’  Again  in  the  103d  Sonnet :  a  ‘  face 
That  overgoes  my  blunt  invention  quite.’ 

59.  to  doe  it]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  old  compositor  blundered  between  ‘  do,’ 
which  he  printed,  and  show  which  must  have  stood  in  the  MS  under  his  eyes ;  the 
word  ‘  undoes,’  just  before,  probably  added  to  his  confusion,  and  the  old  Corrector  of 

Fa  erased  ‘  do  ’  and  placed  show  on  his  margin ;  the  last  is,  in  all  probability  right. _ 

Deighton  :  The  word  ‘  do  ’  is  here  used  in  antithesis  to  ‘  undoes  it  ’  in  another  sense. 

64.  with  a  Beare]  See  V,  i,  143. 

75,  76.  one  Eye  declin’d  .  .  .  another  eleuated]  Cf.  Ham.  I,  ii,  11  :  ‘With  one 
auspicious  and  one  dropping  eye.’ 

79.  loosing]  Collier  (ed.  ii,  reading  ‘losing  her'  in  his  text) :  Her  is  from  the 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


283 

Gent .  1.  The  Dignitie  of  this  A61  was  worth  the  au-  80 
dience  of  Kings  and  Princes  ,for  by  fuch  was  it  adted. 

Gent.  3.  One  of  the  prettyeft  touches  of  all,  and  that 
which  angPd  for  mine  Eyes  (caught  the  Water,  though 
not  the  Fifh)  was,  when  at  the  Relation  of  the  Queenes 
death  (with  the  manner  how  the  came  to’t,  brauely  con-  85 
fefs’d,  and  lamented  by  the  King)  how  attentiueneffe 
wounded  his  Daughter,  till  (from  one  figne  of  dolour  to 
another)  fhee  did(with  an  Alas)  I  would  faine  fay, bleed 
Teares  ;  for  I  am  fure,  my  heart  wept  blood.  Who  was 
moft  Marble,  there  changed  colour  :  fome  fwownded,all  90 


83.  caught ]  and  caught  Ktly. 

83,  84.  ( caught. . . Fijh ) ]  Om.  Warb. 
Han. 

85.  to’t]  Ff,  Cap.  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.  to  it  Rowe  et  cet. 

85,86.  brauely  ...King))  In  parenthe¬ 
sis,  Cap.  et  seq.  (generally). 

85.  brauely ]  heavily  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS). 


90.  Marble ,  there ]  F2,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Var.  ’73.  Marble  there  F3,  Pope, 
Han.  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  Sta.  Ktly, 
Cam.  Rife,  marble  there,  F^,  Rowe  et 
cet. 

fwownded  ]  Fs.  /wounded  F3F4, 
Rowe,  swooned  Pope. 


MS,  and  is  absolutely  necessary  to  the  completion  of  the  sentence.  [Collier  aban¬ 
doned  her  in  his  Third  Edition,  having  discovered,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  that  ‘  she  ’  in 
this  clause  does  not  refer  to  Paulina,  but  to  Perdita.  We  have  already  had  a  present 
for  a  past  participle  in  IV,  iv,  599,  ‘  your  discontenting  father,’  i.  e.  your  discontented 
father.  So  here,  ‘  losing  ’  is  equivalent  to  being  lost. — Ed.] 

83,  84.  caught  the  Water,  though  not  the  Fish]  Warburton:  I  dare  pro¬ 
nounce  these  words  a  most  stupid  interpolation  of  some  player,  that  angled  for  a  witti¬ 
cism;  and  therefore  have  struck  them  out  of  the  text. — Capell  (p.  181)  :  A  poor 
conceit  certainly ;  but  not  therefore  an  ‘  interpolation  of  players.’  But,  without  seek¬ 
ing  to  prove  its  genuineness  by  example  (for  which  we  need  go  no  further  than  lines 
47  and  48  of  this  scene),  what  conception  can  readers  possibly  have  of  the  expres¬ 
sions  before  them:  ‘angl’d  for  mine  eyes’  when  these  words  are  dismissed?  [If  it 
were  not  for  the  stilted  language  throughout  of  all  these  courtiers,  Warburton’s  te¬ 
merity  might  be  heartily  commended. — Ed.] 

84-86.  when  at  the  Relation  .  .  .  how  attentiuenesse]  Abbott  (§  415) :  An 
instance  of  the  construction  changed  by  change  of  thought.  The  narrator  first  intends 
to  narrate  the  point  of  time,  then  diverges  into  the  manner,  of  the  action. 

85.  brauely  confess’d]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  May  we  not  be  sure  that  the  word 
‘  bravely  ’  was  a  misprint,  and  that  the  old  MS  Corrector  was  well  warranted  when 
he  changed  ‘  bravely  ’  to  heavily  ?  The  two  words  were  easily  confounded. 

90.  most  Marble]  Steevens  :  That  is,  most  petrified  with  wonder. — M.  Mason 
(p.  138)  :  It  means  those  who  had  the  hardest  hearts.  It  would  not  be  extraordinary 
that  those  persons  should  change  colour  who  were  petrified  with  wonder,  though  it 
was,  that  hardened  hearts  should  be  moved  by  a  scene  of  tenderness. — Malone  :  So 
in  Hen.  VIII :  II,  iii,  II  :  ‘  Hearts  of  most  hard  temper  Melt  and  lament  for  her.’ — 
Steevens:  Mason  and  Malone  may  be  right.  Cf.  Ant.  6°  Clcop.  V,  ii,  240:  ‘now 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


284 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


forrowed  :  if  all  the  World  could  haue  feen’t,  the  Woe  91 
had  beene  vniuerfall. 

Gent.  1.  Are  they  returned  to  the  Court? 

Gent.T, .  No  :  The  Princeffe  hearing  of  her  Mothers 
Statue  (which  is  in  the  keeping  of  Paulina)  a  Peece  many  95 
yeeres  in  doing,  and  now  newly  perform’d,  by  that  rare 
Italian  Mafler,  Iuho  Romano ,  who  (had  he  himfelfe  Eter-  97 

97.  he)  Om.  Rowe  i. 

from  head  to  foot  I  am  marble-constant.’  [The  Text.  Notes  show  that  the  comma 
after  ‘  Marble  ’  is  shifted  in  the  Fourth  Folio.  Perhaps  those  editors  are  the  wisest 
who  evade  the  difficulty  by  omitting  the  comma  altogether. — Ed.] 

92.  vniuersall]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  It  may  deserve  a  note  that  the  whole  of  this 
description,  from  ‘  Did  you  see  the  meeting  of  the  two  kings  ’  [line  41],  is  struck  out 
by  the  MS,  as  if  not  formerly  acted. 

96,  97.  newly  perform’d  .  .  .  Iulio  Romano]  Theobald:  Julio  Romano 
was  born  in  1492,  and  died  in  1546.  Fine  and  generous  as  this  tribute  of  praise 
must  be  owned,  yet  it  was  a  strange  absurdity,  sure,  to  thrust  it  into  a  Tale,  the  action 
of  which  is  supposed  within  the  period  of  Heathenism,  and  whilst  the  oracles  of 
Apollo  were  consulted.  This,  however,  was  a  known  and  wilful  anachronism. — 
Warburton  :  This  passage  is  quite  unworthy  Shakespeare.  1.  He  makes  his 
speaker  say,  that  was  Julio  Romano  the  God  of  Nature,  he  would  outdo  Nature. 
For  that  is  the  plain  meaning  of  the  words :  ‘  had  he  himself  eternity,  and  could  put 
breath  into  his  work,  he  would  beguile  Nature  of  her  custom.’  2ndly,  He  makes  of 
this  famous  Painter,  a  Statuary ;  but,  what  is  worst  of  all,  a  painter  of  statues.— 
Heath  (p.  220) :  The  plain  meaning  is  no  other  than  this :  Were  Julio  Romano  as 
immortal  as  Nature,  and  could,  like  her,  put  breath  into  his  works,  he  would  be  so 
generally  preferred  as  to  beguile  her  of  her  custom.  ...  I  suppose  the  painting  a 
statue  executed  under  his  own  direction,  on  a  particular  occasion,  and  for  a  particular 
purpose,  could  be  no  disparagement  to  him. — Capell  (p.  182)  :  It  is  not  said  by  the 
Poet  that  this  painter  was  the  supposed  statue’s  carver,  but  its  colourer,  for  which  his 
word  is  ‘perform’d’;  it  had  been  ‘  many  years  in  doing’  (carving)  and  was  ‘now 
newly  perform’d  ’  (finished  by  having  colouring  given  it)  by  the  hand  of  ‘  that  rare 
master ;  the  supposition  of  colouring  being  in  this  case  necessary ;  And  for  the  com¬ 
pliment,  that  has  no  fault  in  it  but  excess,  a  thing  expected  in  compliment;  nature 
and  natures  God  are  distinct,  not  confounded  as  [Warburton]  says;  the  sense  of 
had  he  eternity  being  only — had  he  a  portion  of  the  Divinity,  such  portion  as 

should  enable  him  to  put  breath  into  his  work  ;  and  the  thing  asserted, _ that,  if  he 

had  such,  he  ‘  would  beguile  of  her  custom  ’  nature  who  is  God’s  agent. — Johnson  : 
By  ‘  eternity  ’  Shakespeare  means  only  immortality,  or  that  part  of  eternity  which  is 
to  come ;  so  we  talk  of  eternal  renown,  and  eternal  infamy.  Immortality  may  sub¬ 
sist  without  divinity ;  and  therefore  the  meaning  only  is,  that  if  Julio  could  always 
continue  his  labours,  he  would  mimic  nature.— Tollet  calls  attention  to  the  following 
passage  in  Jenson’s  Magnetic  Lady ,  V,  v :  ‘  Dr.  Rut.  I’ll  have  her  statue  cut  now  in 
white  marble.  Sir  Moth.  And  have  it  painted  in  most  orient  colours.  Dr.  Rut. 
That’s  right !  all  city  statues  must  be  painted,’  etc.  Whereon  Gifford  has  this 
note :  This  practice  sir  Plenry  Wotton  calls  an  ‘  English  Barbarism.’  If  sir  Henry 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


285 


[96,  97.  newly  perform’d,  by  that  rare  Italian  Master,  Iulio  Romano] 

were  only  known  by  this  expression,  no  great  injustice  would  be  done  by  concluding 
that  he  had  read  to  as  little  purpose  as  he  had  travelled.  The  custom  of  painting 
and  gilding  statues  (however  barbarous  it  may  be)  is  of  all  ages  and  countries. — 
Green  (p.  Ill) :  Whether  any  of  Julio  Romano’s  works  were  in  England  during  the 
reign  of  Elizabeth  we  cannot  affirm  positively;  but  as  there  were  ‘sixteen  by  Julio 
Romano  ’  in  the  fine  collection  at  Whitehall,  made,  or,  rather,  increased  by  Charles  I., 
of  which  Henry  VIII.  had  formed  the  nucleus,  it  is  very  probable  there  were  in 
England  some  by  that  master  as  early  as  the  writing  of  the  Winter’s  Tale ,  or  even 
before.  It  may  therefore  be  reasonably  conjectured  that  in  the  statue  of  Hermione 
Shakespeare  has  accurately  described  some  figure  which  he  had  seen  in  one  of  Julio 
Romano’s  paintings. — Elze  (p.  284) :  To  the  question  why  Shakespeare  should  have 
selected  Julio  Romano  before  all  others,  some  critics  may  be  inclined  to  answer  that 
he  picked  up  the  name  at  random,  if  we  may  use  the  expression.  But  such  an  answer 
would  be  quite  unsatisfactory  in  the  face  of  the  fact  that  the  poet  most  correctly  esti¬ 
mates  Romano’s  merits  as  an  artist,  and  praises  him  not  only  in  eloquent,  but  in  the 
most  appropriate  words.  .  .  .  No  art-critic  or  art-historian  can  find  anything  to  object 
to  in  his  judgement  of  Romano.  Kugler  ( Kunstgeschichte ,  1842,  p.  728)  says  that 
Romano’s  peculiar  tendency  induced  him  ‘  to  unfold  in  rapid  strokes,  a  bold,  fresh, 
natural  life,  unconcerned  about  the  deeper  life  of  the  soul.’  .  .  .  Burckhardt’s  judge¬ 
ment  agrees  entirely  with  Kugler’s.  .  .  .  The  question  here  forces  itself  upon  us  as 
to  the  source  whence  Shakespeare  may  have  drawn  his  knowledge.  [Fynes  Moryson, 
Tom  Coryat,  etc.],  even  apart  from  chronological  impossibility,  could  not  furnish  him 
with  materials  for  his  judgement  of  Romano ;  they  do  not  treat  of  art,  much  less  of 
art-criticism.  Manuals  of  the  history  of  art,  which  he  might  have  consulted,  did  not 
exist,  with  the  exception  of  one  presently  to  be  mentioned,  nor  is  it  likely  that  there 
existed  in  London  any  of  Romano’s  paintings,  or  copies  of  them,  accessible  to  Shake¬ 
speare.  Whence  then  did  he  obtain  his  knowledge,  if  not  by  having  seen  Romano’s 
paintings  himself?  The  Palazzo  del  T  in  Mantua,  built  by  Romano,  and  filled  with 
his  paintings  and  drawings,  was  one  of  the  wonders  of  the  age.  We  cannot  be  sur¬ 
prised  if  it  was  here  *  that  Shakespeare  became  enchanted  by  Romano’s  works  in  all 
their  richness  and  beauty,  and  that  he  here  learned  to  form  a  correct  judgement  of 
the  peculiar  nature  of  his  art.  The  chief  and  apparently  the  most  serious  objection 
to  this  hypothesis,  is  very  obvious — Shakespeare  makes  Romano  a  sculptor !  Does 
not  this  prove  complete  ignorance,  and  could  he  have  committed  such  an  unpardon¬ 
able  mistake  if  he  himself  had  been  at  Mantua?  .  .  .  What,  however,  will  be  said  if 
just  this  seeming  error  should  most  unexpectedly  serve  to  confirm  our  hypothesis  ? 
In  Vasari,  who,  according  to  his  own  account,  visited  Romano  at  Mantua,  we  find  the 
following  two  Latin  epitaphs  of  the  great  painter :  ‘  Romanus  moriens  secum  tres 
Julius  arteis  Abstulit :  haud  mirum  quatuor  unus  erat.’  The  second  inscription,  which 
in  Vasari  precedes  this  distich,  runs  as  follows  :  ‘  Videbat  Jupiter  corpora  sculpta 
pictaque  Spirare,  aedes  mortalium  aequarier  coelo  Julii  virtute  Romani :  tunc  iratus 
Concilio  divorum  omnium  vocato  Ilium  aetereis  sustulit :  quod  pati  nequiret  Vinci  aut 
aequari  ab  homine  terrigena.’  Tres  artes  !  Corpora  sculpta  !  It  is  true  that  Vasari 
makes  no  further  mention  of  Romano’s  sculptures,  neither  do  his  German  translators, 
nor,  as  far  as  we  know,  any  recent  art-historian,  say  a  word  about  them.  But  Shake- 

*  Be  it  remembered  that  Elze’s  admirable  Essay  is  written  to  prove  that  Shake¬ 
speare  must  have  travelled  in  Italy. — Ed. 


286 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


nitie,  and  could  put  Breath  into  his  Worke)  would  be-  98 
guile  Nature  of  her  Cuftome,  fo  perfe6tly  he  is  her  Ape: 

He  fo  neere  to  Hermione,  hath  done  Hermione ,  that  they  100 
fay  one  would  fpeake  to  her,  and  ftand  in  hope  of  anfwer. 

Thither  (with  all  greedineffe  of  affection )are  they  gone, 
and  there  they  intend  to  Sup. 

Gent. 2,  I  thought  fhe  had  fome  great  matter  there  in 
hand,  for  fhee  hath  priuately,  twice  or  thrice  a  day,  euer  105 
fince  the  death  of  Hermione ,  vifited  that  remoued  Houfe. 

Shall  wee  thither,  and  with  our  companie  peece  the  Re- 
ioycing  ?  io8 

98.  put  Breath ]  F2.  but  breath  F3.  ioi.  to  her]  ro  her  F 

but  breathe  F^. 

speare  is  nevertheless  right;  he  has  made  no  blunder,  he  has  not  abused  poetic 
license  by  introducing  Romano  as  a  sculptor.  And  more  than  this,  his  praise  of 
Romano  wonderfully  agrees  with  the  second  epitaph,  in  which  truth  to  nature  and 
to  life  is  likewise  praised  as  being  Julio’s  chief  excellence  (‘  if  he  could  put  breath  into 
his  work,’— videb'at  Jupiter  corpora  spirare).  Is  this  chance  ?  Whether  the  statement 
of  the  two  inscriptions,  that  Julio  Romano  was  a  sculptor  as  well  as  a  painter  and 
architect,  be  in  accordance  with  historical  facts  or  not,  does  not  matter  in  the  present 
case.  Shakespeare  had  the  less  reason  to  doubt  it,  as  the  union  of  the  three  arts  in 
one  and  the  same  hand  was  by  no  means  without  illustrious  examples  among  Italian 
artists.  In  either  case  we  here  stand  before  the  dilemma :  either  Shakespeare  must 
have  studied  Vasari,  or  he  had  been  in  Mantua  and  had  there  seen  Romano’s  works 
and  read  his  epitaphs.  A  third  supposition— oral  communication — will  hardly  serve 
the  purpose.  .  .  .  Vasari’s  work  was  first  published  in  1550,  ...  but  it  was  not  trans¬ 
lated  into  English  till  three  hundred  years  afterward  (1850).  Shakespeare  must 
therefore  have  been  a  perfect  master  both  of  the  Italian  and  Latin  languages,  to  have 
made  use  of  the  work  ai  l  the  epitaphs.  Vasari,  it  is  true,  repeatedly  praises  the 
truth  to  nature  by  which  Julio’s  works  are  distinguished,  ...  but  was  Vasari  a  book 
of  so  great  an  attraction  for  Shakespeare  that  he  should  have  perused  it  without  occa¬ 
sion  ?  [In  the  Shakespeare  Jahrbuch,  1894,  p.  249,  Sarrazin  attempts  to  prove  that 
the  paintings  described  in  the  Rape  of  Lucrece  were  the  frescoes,  in  Mantua,  by  Julio 
Romano,  of  the  Trojan  War,  etc.] 

99.  of  her  Custome]  Johnson:  That  is,  of  her  trade,— would  draw  her  cus¬ 
tomers  from  her. 

104-106.  I  thought  .  .  .  remoued  House]  Hudson  (p.  27) :  Nothing  could 
better  suggest  the  history  of  that  quiet,  placid  intercourse,  with  its  long  record  of 
patient,  self-rewarding  service ;  a  fellowship  in  which  little  needed  to  be  said,  for 
each  knew  what  was  in  the  other’s  mind  by  a  better  language  than  words.  P 
is  such  an  idea  of  friendship  as  it  does  the  heart  good  to  rest  upon.  .  .  .  What 
a  powerful  charm  of  love  and  loyalty  must  have  been  cast  upon  Paulina’s  impul¬ 
sive  tongue,  that  she  should  keep  so  reticent  of  her  dear  cause  through  all  that 
time  ! 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE  287 


Gent.  1 .  Who  would  be  thence,  that  ha’s  the  benefit 
of  Accelfe  ?  euery  winke  of  an  Eye,  fome  new  Grace  no 
will  be  borne  :  our  Abfence  makes  vs  vnthriftie  to  our 
Knowledge.  Let’s  along.  Exit. 

Aut.  Now  (had  I  not  the  dafh  of  my  former  life  in 
me)  would  Preferment  drop  on  my  head.  I  brought  the 
old  man  and  his  Sonne  aboord  the  Prince  ;  told  him,  I  115 
heard  them  talke  of  a  Farthell,  and  I  know  not  what :  but 
he  at  that  time  ouer-fond  of  the  Shepheards  Daughter(fo 
he  then  tooke  her  to  be)who  began  to  be  much  Sea-fick, 
and  himfelfe  little  better,  extremitie  of  Weather  conti¬ 
nuing,  this  Myfterie  remained  vndifcouer’d.  But  ’tis  all  120 
one  to  me  :  for  had  I  beene  the  finder-out  of  this  Secret, 
it  would  not  haue  rellifh’d  among  my  other  difcredits. 

Enter  Sliepheard  and  Clowne. 

Here  come  thofe  I  haue  done  good  to  againft  my  will, 

and  alreadie  appearing  in  the  bloffomes  of  their  For-  125 

tune. 

Shep.  Come  Boy,  I  am  paft  moe  Children  :  but  thy 
Sonnes  and  Daughters  will  be  all  Gentlemen  borne. 

Clow.  You  are  well  met  (Sir.)  you  deny’d  to  fight 
with  mee  this  other  day  ,  becaufe  I  was  no  Gentleman  1 30 


1 12.  Exit]  Exeunt.  Rowe. 

1 13.  had  I  not]  had  not  I  Rowe  ii, 
Pope,  Theob.  i,  Han. 

1 15.  the~\  the  the  F2. 

1 19.  extremitie ]  and  extremity  Ktly. 
123.  Scene  vi.  Pope  +  . 

Clowne]  Clown,  in  new  apparel. 


Coll,  ii  (MS).  Clown,  richly  dressed. 
Dyce  ii. 

127.  moe]  Cam.  Wh.  ii.  more  Ff  et 
cet. 

129-135.  As  mnemonic,  Warb. 

130.  this  other]  the  other  Han. 


109-112.  Who  would  be  .  .  .  along]  Walker  ( Crit .  i,  13)  divides  this  speech 
into  four  lines :  ‘  Who  would  be  thence,  that  has  the  benefit  |  Of  access  ?  every 
winking  of  an  eye  |  Some  new  grace  will  be  born ;  our  absence  makes  us  |  Un¬ 
thrifty  to  our  knowledge ;  Let’s  along.’  It  is  incomprehensible  why  Walker  should 
have  wished  to  turn  into  verse  these  four  lines  in  the  middle  of  a  scene  wholly  in 
prose.  There  might  be  some  justification  had  he  succeeded  in  the  attempt.  The 
speech  is  as  genuine  prose  as  ever  was  written,  and  Walker’s  division  into  lines  does 
not  change  it. — Ed. 

122.  not  haue  rellish’d]  That  is,  would  not  have  been  relished  by  the  kings  and 
Florizel. 

127.  moe]  See  I,  ii,  10. 

128.  Gentlemen  borne]  Douce  (i,  363) :  Thus  in  The  Booke  of  Honor  and 
Armes,  1590  :  ‘  In  saying  a  gentleman  borne,  we  meane  he  must  be  descended  from 
three  degrees  of  gentry,  both  on  the  mother’s  and  father’s  side.’ 


288 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


borne.  See  you  thefe  Clothes  ?  fay  you  fee  them  not,  1 3 1 
and  thinke  me  ftill  no  Gentleman  borne  :  You  were  beft 
fay  thefe  Robes  are  not  Gentlemen  borne.  Giue  me  the 
Lye  :  doe  :  and  try  whether  I  am  not  now  a  Gentleman 
borne.  135 

Ant.  I  know  you  are  now(Sir)a  Gentleman  borne. 

Clow.  I,  and  haue  been  fo  any  time  thefe  foure  houres. 

Shep.  And  fo  haue  I,  Boy. 

Clow.  So  you  haue  :  but  I  was  a  Gentleman  borne  be¬ 
fore  my  Father  :  for  the  Kings  Sonne  tooke  me  by  the  140 
hand,  and  call’d  mee  Brother  :  and  then  the  two  Kings 
call’d  my  Father  Brother  :  and  then  the  Prince  ( my  Bro- 
ther)and  the  Princeffe(my  Sifter)call’d  my  Father,  Father; 
and  fo  wee  wept  :  and  there  was  the  firft  Gentleman-like 
teares  that  euer  we  fhed.  145 

Shep.  We  may  liue  (Sonne)  to  fhed  many  more. 

Clow.  I  :  or  elfe  ’twere  hard  luck,  being  in  fo  prepofte- 
rous  eftate  as  we  are. 

Aut.  I  humbly  befeech  you  (Sir)  to  pardon  me  all  the 
faults  I  haue  committed  to  your  Worfhip,  and  to  giue  150 
me  your  good  report  to  the  Prince  my  Matter. 

Shep.  ’Prethee  Sonne  doe  :  for  we  mutt  be  gentle,  now 
we  are  Gentlemen. 

Clow.  Thou  wilt  amend  thy  life  ? 

Aut.  I, and  it  like  your  good  Worthip.  155 

Clow.  Giue  me  thy  hand:  I  will  fweare  to  the  Prince, 
thou  art  as  honeft  a  true  Fellow  as  any  is  in  Bohemia. 

Shep.  You  may  fay  it,  but  not  fweare  it. 

Clow.  Not  fweare  it,  now  I  am  a  Gentleman  ?  Let 
Boores  and  Francklins  fay  it,  lie  fweare  it.  160 

1 3 1  -  fay\  say.  Theob.  147.  /.•]  Ay,  Rowe  et  seq. 

144.  there  was]  these  were  Rann.  conj.  155.  and  it  ]  an  it  Theob.  ii  et  seq,. 

*44,  *45-  As  mnemonic,  Warb.  160.  Boones']  Bores  F  . 

132.  You  were  best]  For  this  ungrammatical  remnant  of  ancient  usage,  see 
Abbott,  §§  230  and  352. 

144,  145-  ‘here  was  .  .  .  teares]  Abbott  (§  335)  gives  this  as  an  example  of  the 
‘  inflection  in  -s  preceding  a  plural  subject  ’ ;  of  course  it  is  a  legitimate  example,  but 
be  it  remembered  that  it  is  the  Clown  who  is  speaking. 

147.  preposterous]  Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  n6):  Quasi  prosperous. 

160.  Boores]  Halliwell:  ‘It  was  my  chance  to  meete  two  clownes,  commonly 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 

Shep.  How  if  it  be  falfe  (Sonne? ) 

Clow.  If  it  be  ne’re  fo  falfe,  a  true  Gentleman  may 
fweare  it,  in  the  behalfe  of  his  Friend  :  And  lie  fweare  to 
the  Prince,  thou  art  a  tall  Fellow  of  thy  hands,  and  that 

162.  ne're]  near  Johns. 


called  boores,  who  because  they  went  in  ragged  cloathes,  strooke  no  small  terrour  into 
mee.’ — Coryat’s  Crudities ,  1611.  ‘In  our  English  tongue,  the  name  bore  or  boore 
doth  truely  explaine  their  swinish  condition,  for  most  of  them  are  as  full  of  humanity 
as  a  bacon-hog,  or  a  bore,  and  their  wives  are  as  courteous  and  cleanly  as  sowes.  For 
the  most  part  of  the  men  they  are  clad  in  thin  buckerom,  unlined,  bare  legged  and 
footed,  neyther  band  nor  scarce  shirt,  no  woollen  in  the  world  about  them,  and  thus 
will  they  run  through  all  weathers  for  money  by  the  waggon’s  side,  and  though  no 
better  apparelled,  yet  all  of  them  have  houses,  land,  or  manuall  meanes  to  live  by.’ — 
Taylor’s  Workes,  1630. 

160.  Francklins]  Johnson:  A  ‘Franklin’  is  a  freeholder,  or  yeoman,  a  man 
above  a  villain,  but  not  a  gentleman.  [I  cannot  believe  that  either  time  or  space 
is  ill-bestowed  in  reprinting  here  the  graphic  picture  which  Overbury  gives  (ed.  1627, 
sig.  O4)  of  ‘A  Franklin  ’ :  ‘  His  outside  is  an  ancient  Yeoman  of  England,  though 
his  inside  may  giue  armes  (with  the  best  Gentleman)  and  ne’re  see  the  Herauld. 
There  is  no  truer  seruant  in  the  house  then  himselfe.  Though  he  be  Master  he  sayes 
not  to  his  servants,  goe  to  field,  but  let  vs  goe ;  and  with  his  owne  eye,  doth  both 
fatten  his  flocke,  and  set  forward  all  manner  of  husbandrie.  Hee  is  taught  by  nature 
to  bee  contented  with  little ;  his  owne  fold  yeeld  him  both  food  and  rayment :  hee  is 
pleas’d  with  any  nourishment  God  sends,  whilest  curious  gluttonie  ransackes,  as  it 
were,  Noah's  Arkc  for  food,  onely  to  feed  the  riot  of  one  meale.  Hee  is  nere  knowne 
to  goe  to  Law ;  vnderstanding,  to  bee  Law-bound  among  men,  is  like  to  bee  hide¬ 
bound  among  his  beasts ;  they  thriue  not  vnder  it ;  and  that  such  men  sleepe  as  vn- 
quietly,  as  if  their  pillowes  were  stuft  with  Lawyers  pen-kniues.  When  he  builds,  no 
poore  Tenants  cottage  hinders  his  prospect :  they  are  indeed  his  Almes-houses, 
though  there  be  painted  on  them  no  such  superscription.  He  neuer  sits  vp  late,  but 
when  he  hunts  the  Badger,  the  vowed  foe  of  his  Lambes :  nor  vses  hee  any  cruelty, 
but  when  he  hunts  the  Hare,  nor  subtilty  but  when  he  setteth  snares  for  the  Snite, 
or  pitfals  for  the  Blacke-bird ;  nor  oppression,  but  when  in  the  moneth  of  Iuly,  he 
goes  to  the  next  Riuer,  and  sheares  his  sheepe.  He  allowes  of  honest  pastime,  and 
thinkes  not  the  bones  of  the  dead  anything  bruised,  or  the  worse  for  it,  though  the 
countrey  Lasses  dance  in  the  Church-yard  after  Euen-song.  Rocke-Monday,  and 
the  Wake  in  Summer,  shrouings,  the  wakefull  ketches  on  Christmas  Eue,  the  Hoky, 
or  Seed-cake,  these  he  yeerely  keepes,  yet  holds  them  no  reliques  of  Popery.  He  is 
not  so  inquisitiue  after  newes  deriued  from  the  priuie  closet,  when  the  finding  an  eiery 
of  Hawkes  in  his  owne  ground,  or  the  foaling  of  a  Colt  come  of  a  good  straine,  are 
tydings  more  pleasant,  more  profitable.  Hee  is  Lord  paramount  within  himselfe, 
though  hee  hold  by  neuer  so  meane  a  Tenure ;  and  dyes  the  more  contentedly 
(though  he  leaue  his  heire  young)  in  regard  he  leaues  him  not  liable  to  a  couetous 
Guardian.  Lastly,  to  end  him;  hee  cares  not  when  his  end  comes,  he  needs  not 
feare  his  Audit,  for  his  Quietus  is  in  heauen.’ — Ed.] 

164.  a  tall  Fellow  of  thy  hands]  In  a  note  on  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  IV, 


289 

l6l 

164 


19 


290 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


thou  wilt  not  be  drunke  :  but  I  know  thou  art  no  tall  Fel-  165 
low  of  thy  hands,  and  that  thou  wilt  be  drunke  :  but  lie 
fweare  it,  and  I  would  thou  would’ft  be  a  tall  Fellow  of 
thy  hands. 

Aut.  I  will  proue  fo  (Sir)  to  my  power. 

Clow.  I,  by  any  meanes  proue  a  tall  Fellow:  if  I  do  not  170 
wonder,  how  thou  dar’ft  venture  to  be  drunke,  not  being 
a  tall  Fellow,  truft  me  not.  Harke,  the  Kings  and  the  Prin¬ 
ces  (our  Kindred)  are  going  to  fee  the  Queenes  Pidture. 

Come,  follow  vs:  wee’le  be  thy  good  Mailers.  Exeunt.  174 


Sccena  Tertia. 


Enter  Leontes,  Polixenes  ,Florizell,  Perdita ,  Camillo, 
Paulina:  Hermione  ( like  a  Statue :)  Lords ,  &c. 

Leo.  O  graue  and  good  Paulina,  the  great  comfort 
That  I  haue  had  of  thee  ? 

Paul.  What  (Soueraigne  Sir) 

I  did  not  well,  I  meant  well  :  all  my  Seruices 

You  haue  pay’d  home.  But  that  you  haue  vouchfaf’d 

(With  your  Crown’d  Brother,  and  thefe  your  contrafted 


172.  no/.]  not.  [Trumpets]  Coll.  ii. 
not.  [Trumpets  within]  Dyce  ii. 

174-  Majlers]  Majler  Ff,  Rowe. 

1 .  Scene  vii.  Pope  + . 

Paulina’s  House.  Pope.  The  same. 
A  Chapel  in  Paulina’s  House  :  at  upper 


End,  a  Nich;  a  Curtain  before  it.  Cap. 

2.  Florizell,]  Plorizell,  Fa. 

3.  Hermione  (like  a  Statue:)]  Om. 
Rowe  et  seq. 

6.  Soueraigne]  Soveragine  F2. 


v,  p.  124,  Gifford  remarks:  ‘There  is  scarcely  a  writer  of  Jonson’s  age  who  does 
not  frequently  use  “  tall  ”  in  the  sense  of  bold  or  courageous.’  For  the  phrase  ‘  Fel¬ 
low  of  thy  hands,’  of  which  Halliwell  gives  more  than  a  folio  page  of  quotations 
containing  it,  I  think  Cotgrave’s  definition  of  Homme  cl  la  main  (s.  v.  main)  is  ample; 
it  is:  ‘A  man  of  execution  or  valour;  a  man  of  his  hands.’ 

*74-  good  Masters]  Whalley  :  It  was  the  fashion  for  an  inferior,  or  suitor,  to 
beg  of  the  great  man,  after  his  humble  commendations,  that  he  would  be  good  master 
to  him.  Many  letters  written  at  this  period  run  in  this  style.  Thus  Fisher,  Bishop 
of  Rochester,  when  in  prison,  in  a  letter  to  Cromwell  to  relieve  his  want  of  clothing : 

Furthermore,  I  beseeche  you  to  be  gode  master  unto  one  in  my  necessities,  for  I  have 
neither  shirt,  nor  sute,  nor  yet  other  clothes,  that  are  necessary  for  me  to  wear.’ 

9.  With  your  .  .  .  your  contracted]  Staunton  :  This  verse  reads  so  uncouthly 
that  we  suspect  the  second  ‘  your  ’  to  be  an  interpolation  of  the  compositor. 


ACT  V,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


291 


Heires  of  your  Kingdomes)  my  poore  Houfe  to  vifit  ;  10 

It  is  a  furplus  of  your  Grace,  which  neuer 
My  life  may  laft  to  anfwere. 

Leo.  O  Paulina , 

We  honor  you  with  trouble  :  but  we  came 

To  fee  the  Statue  of  our  Queene.  Your  Gallerie  15 

Haue  we  pafs’d  through,  not  without  much  content 

In  many  Angularities  ;  but  we  faw  not 

That  which  my  Daughter  came  to  looke  vpon, 

The  Statue  of  her  Mother. 

Paul.  As  fhe  liu’d  peereleffe  ,  20 

So  her  dead  likeneffe  I  doe  well  beleeue 
Excells  what  euer  yet  you  look’d  vpon, 

Or  hand  of  Man  hath  done  :  therefore  I  keepe  it 
Louely,  apart.  But  here  it  is  :  prepare 

To  fee  the  Life  as  liuely  mock’d,  as  euer  25 

Still  Sleepe  mock’d  Death: behold, and  fay  ’tis  well. 

22.  you ]  you've  Anon.  ap.  Cam.  26.  [Paulina  draws  a  Curtain,  and 

24.  Louely ]  Lovely  Ff.  Lonely  Han.  discovers  Hermione  standing  like  a. 
Cap.  et  seq.  Statue.  Rowe,  et  seq.  (subs.). 


14.  We  honor  you  with  trouble]  Cf.  Macb.  I,  vi,  12-14:  Herein  I  teach  you 
How  you  shall  bid  God  ’ild  you  for  your  pains,  And  thank  us  for  your  trouble.’ 

24.  Louely]  Warburton  :  That  is,  charily ;  with  more  than  ordinary  regard  and 
tenderness.  The  Oxford  editor  [*.  e.  Hanmer]  reads  Lonely.  As  if  it  could  be 
apart  without  being  alone! — Johnson:  I  am  yet  inclined  to  lonely,  which  in  the 
old  angular  writing  cannot  be  distinguished  from  lovely.  To  say,  that  ‘  I  keep  it 
alone,  separate  from  the  rest,’  is  a  pleonasm  which  scarcely  any  nicety  declines. — 
Malone  :  In  Rich.  III.  we  find  this  very  error :  ‘  Advantaging  their  loue  with  inter¬ 
est  Of  ten  times  double.’  [IV,  iv,  323.]  Here  we  have  ‘  loue  ’  instead  of  lone,  the  old 
spelling  of  loan. — Cambridge  Editors  :  Halliwell  says  that  ‘  Lonely  ’  is  the  reading 
of  the  First  Folio.  Capell’s  copy  has  ‘  Louely,’  and  the  same  is  found  in  Dr  Ferrers’ 
copy,  and  in  another  copy  in  the  Library  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  [It  is 
‘  Louely  ’  in  Verner  and  Hood’s  Reprint,  1807,  in  Booth’s  Reprint,  in  Staunton’s 
Photolithograph,  and  in  the  First  Folio  in  the  Library  of  the  present  Ed.] 

26.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  MS  adds  these  important  words  to  the  stage-direction. 
Music  playing. — A  pause.  Such  was  the  mode  in  his  time.  [This  is  not  clearly 
expressed.  Collier  means,  I  think,  that  the  important  words :  A  pause  are  added  to 
the  stage-direction  :  Music  playing.  It  cannot  be  that  all  four  words  were  added  to 
the  ‘  stage-direction  ’ ;  there  is  no  stage-direction  in  the  Second  Folio.  His  own  stage- 
direction  here  is  virtually  Rowe’s,  except  that  in  his  ed.  ii  he  says  undraws  instead  of 
draws  as  in  his  ed.  iii,  and  in  Rowe.] — Lady  Martin  (p.  385) :  It  was  necessary 
that  Paulina  should  lay  emphasis  on  the  colouring  of  the  statue,  as  the  living  Her¬ 
mione,  however  skillfully  arrayed,  must  of  necessity  be  very  different  from  an  ordi- 


292 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


I  like  your  filence,  it  the  more  fhewes-off 
Your  wonder:  but  yet  fpeake,  first  you  (my  Liege) 
Comes  it  not  fomething  neere  ? 

Leo .  Her  naturall  Pofture. 

Chide  me  (  deare  Stone )  that  I  may  fay  indeed 
Thou  art  Hermione ;  or  rather,  thou  art  the, 

In  thy  not  chiding  :  for  the  was  as  tender 
As  Infancie,  and  Grace.  But  yet  ( Paulina ) 

27.  Jhewes-off  ]  Om.  hyphen,  Ff. 


27 


30 


34 


nary  statue.  My  dress  in  acting  this  scene  was  arranged  to  carry  out  this  effect.  It 
was  composed  of  soft  white  cashmere,  the  draperies  and  edges  bordered  with  the 
royal  purple  enriched  with  a  tracery  in  gold,  and  thus  harmonising  with  the  colouring 
of  the  lips,  eyes,  hair,  etc.,  of  the  statue.  ...  At  the  back  of  the  stage,  when  I  acted  in 
this  play,  was  a  dais  which  was  led  up  to  by  a  flight  of  six  or  eight  steps,  covered  with 
rich  cloth  of  the  same  material  and  crimson  colour  as  the  closed  curtain.  The  cur¬ 
tains  when  gradually  opened  by  Paulina  disclosed,  at  a  little  distance  behind  them, 
the  statue  of  Hermione,  with  a  pedestal  of  marble  by  her  side.  Here,  let  me  say, 
that  I  never  approached  this  scene  without  much  inward  trepidation.  You  may 
imagine  how  difficult  it  must  be  to  stand  in  one  position,  with  a  full  light  thrown 
upon  you,  without  moving  an  eyelid  for  so  long  a  time.  I  never  thought  to  have  the 
time  measured,  but  I  should  say  it  must  be  more  than  ten  minutes, — it  seemed  like 
ten  times  ten.  I  prepared  myself  by  picturing  what  Hermione’s  feelings  would  be 
when  she  heard  Leontes’  voice,  silent  to  her  for  so  many  years,  and  listened  to  the 
remorseful  tender  words  addressed  to  what  he  believed  to  be  her  sculptured  sem¬ 
blance.  Her  heart  hitherto  has  been  full  only  of  her  lost  children.  She  has  thought 
every  other  feeling  dead,  but  she  finds  herself  forgetting  all  but  the  tones  of  the 
voice,  once  so  loved,  now  broken  with  the  accents  of  repentance  and  woe-stricken 
desolation.  To  her  own  surprise  her  heart,  so  long  empty,  loveless,  and  cold,  begins 
to  throb  again,  as  she  listens  to  the  outpourings  of  a  devotion  she  had  believed  to  be 
extinct.  She  would  remember  her  own  words  to  him,  when  the  familiar  loving  tones 
were  turned  to  anger  and  almost  imprecation  :  ‘  I  never  wished  to  see  you  sorry,  now 
I  trust  I  shall.’  Of  the  sorrow  she  had  thus  wished  for  him,  she  is  now  a  witness, 
and  it  all  but  unnerves  her.  Paulina  had,  it  seemed  to  me,  besought  Hermione  to 
play  the  part  of  her  own  statue,  in  order  that  she  might  hear  herself  apostrophised, 
and  be  a  silent  witness  of  the  remorse  and  unabated  love  of  Leontes  before  her 
existence  became  known  to  him,  and  so  be  moved  to  that  forgiveness  which,  without 
such  proof,  she  might  possibly  be  slow  to  yield.  She  is  so  moved ;  but  for  the  sake 
of  the  loving  friend,  to  whom  she  has  owed  so  much,  she  must  restrain  herself,  and 
carry  through  her  appointed  task.  But,  even  although  I  had  fully  thought  out  all  this, 
it  was  impossible  for  me  ever  to  hear  unmoved  what  passes  in  this  wonderful  scene. 
My  first  Leontes  was  Mr  Macready,  and,  as  the  scene  was  played  by  him,  the  dif¬ 
ficulty  of  wearing  an  air  of  statuesque  calm  became  almost  insuperable.  As  I  think 
over  the  scene  now,  his  appearance,  his  action,  the  tones  of  his  voice,  the  emotions 
of  that  time,  come  back.  There  was  a  dead  awe-struck  silence  when  the  curtains 
were  gradually  drawn  aside  by  Paulina.  She  has  to  encourage  Leontes  to  speak. 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


293 


Hermione  was  not  fo  much  wrinckled,  nothing  35 

So  aged  as  this  feemes. 

Pol.  Oh,  not  by  much. 

Paul.  So  much  the  more  our  Caruers  excellence, 

Which  lets  goe-by  fome  fixteene  yeeres,and  makes  her 
As  the  liu’d  now.  40 

Leo.  As  now  fhe  might  haue  done, 

So  much  to  my  good  comfort,  as  it  is 

Now  piercing  to  my  Soule.  Oh,  thus  fire  hood, 

Euen  with  fuch  Life  of  Maieflie(warme  Life, 

As  now  it  coldly  hands)  when  firft  I  woo’d  her.  45 

I  am  alham’d  :  Do’s  not  the  Stone  rebuke  me, 

For  being  more  Stone  then  it?  Oh  Royall  Peece  : 

There’s  Magick  in  thy  Maieftie,  which  ha’s 
My  Euils  coniur’d  to  remembrance  ;  and 

From  thy  admiring  Daughter  tooke  the  Spirits,  50 

Standing  like  Stone  with  thee. 

Perd.  And  giue  me  leaue, 

And  doe  not  fay  ’tis  Superflition,  that 
I  kneele,  and  then  implore  her  Bleffmg.  Lady, 

Deere  Queene,  that  ended  when  I  but  began,  55 

Giue  me  that  hand  of  yours,  to  kiffe. 

Paid.  O,  patience  : 

The  Statue  is  but  newly  fix’d  ;  the  Colour’s 
Not  dry. 

Cam.  My  Lord,  your  Sorrow  was  too  fore  lay’d-on,  60 

Which  fixteene  Winters  cannot  blow  away, 

So  many  Summers  dry  :  fcarce  any  Ioy 
Did  euer  fo  long  liue  ;  no  Sorrow, 

But  kill’d  it  felfe  much  fooner.  64 

50.  thy\  my  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  58.  Colour's]  colours  Walker,  Huds. 

Var.  ’73.  59’  [Staying  Perdita.  Cap. 

Spirits ]  spirit  Rowe  i.  61  .fixteene  Winters  cannot ]  cannot 

54.  then\  thus  Coll,  ii  (MS).  sixteen  winters  Sax.  ’85. 

40.  As  she  liu’d]  That  is,  ‘  As  if  ;  see  Abbott,  §  107. 

54.  and  then]  Coi.LIER  (ed.  ii) :  ‘  Then  ’  has  always  been  in  the  text,  and  it  may 
be  right,  but  it  seems  much  more  natural  that  Perdita  should  say,  ‘  I  kneel  and  thus 
implore  your  blessing,’  seeing  that  she  instantly  addresses  the  supposed  statue. 

57.  O,  patience]  Johnson  :  That  is,  ‘  stay  a  while,  be  not  so  eager.’ 

58.  the  Colour’s]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  116):  Colours  surely. 

63.  The  syllable  lacking  in  this  line,  Capell  supplied  by  sir  after  ‘  sorrow  ’ ; 


294 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  iii, 


Pol.  Deere  my  Brother,  65 

Let  him,  that  was  the  caufe  of  this,  haue  powre 
To  take-off  fo  much  griefe  from  you,  as  he 
Will  peece  vp  in  himfelfe. 

Paul.  Indeed  my  Lord, 

If  I  had  thought  the  fight  of  my  poore  Image  70 

Would  thus  haue  wrought  you  (for  the  Stone  is  mine) 

Il’d  not  haue  fhew’d  it. 

Leo.  Doe  not  draw  the  Curtaine. 

Paul.  No  longer  fhall  you  gaze  on’t,  leaft  your  Fancie 
May  thinke  anon, it  moues.  75 

Leo.  Let  be ,  let  be  : 

Would  I  were  dead,  but  that  me  thinkes  alreadie.  77 


68.  vp  in]  upon  Wh.  i. 

72.  IV  d]  /7/Var.  ’21  (misprint?). 
haue  fttew' d]  Fa.  have  you 
Jhevv' d  F3.  have  ftiew'd you  F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

[Offers  to  draw  the  curtain.  Coll. 


74.  leaft]  left  F*. 

75.  moues]  move  Pope  +  . 

77.  alreadie.]  already.  Ff.  already 
I  am  but  dead,  stone  looking  upon  stone. 
Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  already —  Rowe  et 
cet. 


Keightley  by  ever. — Abbott  (§  508)  suggests  that  it  may  be  supplied  by  the  pause 
before  ‘no  sorrow,’  arising  from  antithesis.  Walker  ( Vers.  28)  says  that  ‘perhaps 
we  should  read  (1 but  having  absorbed  it:)  “  no  sorrow,  but  |  It  kill’d,”  etc.’ — Hudson 
adopted  Walker’s  change.  An  Anonymous  conjecture,  recorded  in  the  Cambridge 
Edition,  proposes  :  ‘  nor  ever  Sorrow.’ 

66-68.  Let  him  .  .  .  himselfe]  Deighton:  Let  him  (*.  e.  myself)  who  was, 
though  unintentionally,  the  cause  of  this,  have  the  power  by  his  sympathy  to  divert 
upon  himself  so  much  of  this  grief  as  he  may  justly  make  his  own.  Schmidt 
strangely  explains  ‘  piece  up  ’  as  equivalent  to  ‘  hoard  up  so  as  to  have  his  fill.’ 

71.  Would  .  .  .  mine]  Warburton  (MS) :  Read  ‘  (For  the  Stone  is  mine)  would 
thus  have  wrought  you.’ — N.  &  Qu.  VIII,  iii,  203. 

71.  for  the  Stone  is  mine]  Tyrwhitt  (p.  26):  I  do  not  know  whether  we 
should  not  read,  without  a  parenthesis:  ‘ — for  the  stone  Ith'  mine  I’d  not  have 
shew’d  it.’  A  mine  of  stone,  or  marble,  would  not  at  present  perhaps  be  esteemed  an 
accurate  expression,  but  it  may  still  have  been  used  by  Shakespeare,  as  it  has  been 
by  Holinshed,  Description  of  England,  c.  ix,  p.  235. — Johnson:  To  change  an 
accurate  expression  for  an  expression  confessedly  not  accurate,  has  somewhat  of 
retrogradation. 

77.  Would  I  .  .  .  alreadie]  Warburton:  The  sentence  completed  is:  ‘but 
that,  methinks,  already  I  converse  with  the  dead.’  But  there  his  passion  makes  him 
break  off. — Heath  (p.  221) :  The  poet’s  meaning  was  the  direct  contrary,  ‘methinks, 
already  she  is  on  the  point  of  moving.’  [Capell  approves.] — Tieck  (p.  337) :  I  thus 

interpret  the  line:  ‘Would  I  were  dead — if  thereby  I  could  reanimate  Hermione _ 

but  that,— methinks,— already — there  are  signs  of  life  in  the  Statue.’  And  then _ 

who  was  he  that  did  make  it  ?  etc.  [The  play  itself  was  translated  by  Dorothea 


ACT  v,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


295 


[77.  Would  I  were  dead,  but  that  me  thinkes  alreadie.] 

Tieck,  but  this  note  is  presumably  her  brother’s.] — Collier’s  MS  removed  the 
period  after  ‘  already  ’  and  added  the  following  line  :  ‘  I  am  dead,  stone  looking  upon 
stone.’  On  which  Collier  comments  ( Notes  Emend,  p.  197):  But  for  this  piece 
of  evidence,  that  so  important  an  omission  has  been  made  by  the  old  printer,  or  by 
the  copyist  of  the  manuscript  for  the  printer’s  use,  it  might  have  been  urged,  that, 
supposing  our  great  dramatist  to  have  written  here  no  more  elliptically  than  in  many 
other  places,  his  sense  might  be  complete  at  ‘  already  ’ ;  ‘  Would  I  were  dead  !’  ex¬ 
claims  Leontes,  ‘  but  that,  methinks,  I  am  already  ;’  in  other  words,  it  was  needless 
for  him  to  wish  himself  dead,  since,  looking  upon  the  image  of  his  lost  queen,  he 
was,  as  it  were,  dead  already.  However,  we  see  above,  that  a  line  was  wanting,  and 
we  may  be  thankful  that  it  has  been  furnished,  since  it  is  striking  and  beautiful  in 
itself,  and  adds  much  to  the  force  and  clearness  of  the  speech  of  Leontes. — Dyce 
{Few  Notes,  p.  81) :  There  is  room  to  suspect  that  something  has  dropped  out;  and 
on  first  reading,  the  new  line  [of  Collier’s  MS]  it  appeared  to  me  so  exactly  in  the 
style  of  Shakespeare,  that,  like  Mr  Collier,  I  felt  ‘  thankful  that  it  had  been  furnished.’ 
But  presently  I  found  it  was  too  Shakespearian.  Only  a  few  speeches  before,  Leontes 
has  exclaimed :  ‘  does  not  the  stone  rebuke  me,  For  being  more  stone  than  it  ?’  [and 
a  few  lines  after,  speaking  of  Perdita :  ‘  Standing  like  stone  with  thee !’]  Now, 
which  is  the  greater  probability  ? — that  Shakespeare  (whose  variety  of  expression  was 
inexhaustible)  repeated  himself  in  the  line, — ‘I  am  but  dead,  stone  looking  upon 
stone  ’  ?  or  that  a  reviser  of  the  play  (with  an  eye  to  the  passages  just  cited)  in¬ 
geniously  constructed  the  said  line,  to  fill  up  a  supposed  lacuna  ?  The  answer  is 
obvious. — Badham  {Cam.  Essays,  1856,  p.  268) :  [In  answer  to  Dyce]  I  confess  the 
self-repetition  in  the  case  of  so  monotonous  a  passion  as  grief,  does  not  weigh  so 
much  with  me.  Indeed,  if  we  look  at  it  narrowly,  it  is  not  a  repetition  of  the  same 
thought ;  for  in  the  first  place,  he  compares  himself  to  the  stone,  on  account  of  his 
hardheartedness,  and  in  the  second,  it  is  admiration  which  is  said  to  turn  the  daughter 
to  stone.  But  the  most  we  can  allow  [this  line  of  the  MS],  if  taken  by  itself,  is  the 
praise  of  great  ingenuity. — Lettsom  {Blackwood,  Aug.  1853,  p.  202)  :  Here  the 
train  of  emotion  is  evidently  this  :  Would  I  were  dead,  but  that  methinks  already 
(he  is  about  to  add)  I  am,  when  the  life-like  appearance  of  the  statue  forcibly  im¬ 
presses  his  senses,  whereupon  he  checks  himself  and  exclaims,  ‘  What  was  he  that 
did  make  it  ’ — a  god  or  a  mere  man,  etc.  .  .  .  [Collier’s  MS]  is  not  satisfied  with 
making  Shakespeare  write  poorly,  he  frequently  insists  on  making  him  write  con¬ 
tradictorily,  as  in  the  present  instance.  I  am  stone,  says  Leontes,  according  to  this 
version,  looking  upon  stone,  for  see,  my  lord,  the  statue  breathes,  these  veins  do  verily 
bear  blood.  Is  not  that  a  proof,  my  lord,  that  this  statue  is  mere  stone  ?  Most  people 
would  have  considered  this  a  proof  of  the  very  contrary.  .  .  .  Mr  Collier  may  be 
assured  that  the  very  thing  which  Leontes  says  most  strongly,  by  implication,  is,  that 
he  is  not  stone  looking  upon  stone. — Singer  {Sh.  Text  Vind.  p.  81)  :  If  a  line  were 
wanting,  and  that  is  more  than  doubtful,  a  much  better  one  [than  Collier’s  MS]  has 
been  suggested:  ‘but  that,  methinks,  already  I  am  in  heaven,  and  looking  on  an 
angel.' — Staunton:  To  Mr  Collier  and  his  annotator  the  eloquent  abruption, — ‘but 
that,  methinks,  already —  ’  is  but  a  blot,  and  so,  to  add  ‘  to  the  force  and  clearness  of 
of  the  speech  of  Leontes,’  they  stem  the  torrent  of  his  passion  in  mid-stream  and 
make  him  drivel  out:  ‘  lam  but  dead,  stone  looking  upon  stone' !  Can  anything  be 
viler?  Conceive  Leontes  whimpering  of  himself  as  ‘dead,’  just  when  the  thick 


296 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


(What  was  he  that  did  make  it?)  See  (my  Lord)  78 

Would  you  not  deeme  it  breath’d  ?  and  that  thofe  veines 
Did  verily  beare  blood  ?  80 

Pol.  ’Mafterly  done  : 

The  very  Life  feemes  warme  vpon  her  Lippe. 

Leo.  The  fixure  of  her  Eye  ha’s  motion  in’t, 

As  we  are  mock’d  with  Art.  84 


81.  ' Majlerly~\  Ft.  84.  As  we  are~\  As  we  were  Rowe  ii  + . 

83.  fixure ]  fixture  F  ,  Rowe  ii,  Wh.  And  we  are  Cap.  Huds.  So  are  we 
ii,  Huds.  Dtn.  fissure  Warb.  conj.  Mason,  Rann. 

pulsation  of  his  heart  could  have  been  heard  !  and  speaking  of  the  statue  as  a  ‘  stone  ’ 
at  the  very  moment  when,  to  his  imagination,  it  was  flesh  and  blood !  Was  it  thus 
Shakespeare  wrought  ?  The  insertion  of  such  a  line  in  such  a  place  is  absolutely 
monstrous,  and  implies,  both  in  the  forger  and  the  utterer,  an  entire  incompetence  to 
appreciate  the  finer  touches  of  his  genius.  But  it  does  more,  for  it  betrays  the  most 
discreditable  ignorance  of  the  current  phraseology  of  the  poet’s  time.  When  Leontes 
says,  ‘  Would  I  were  dead,  but  that,  methinks,  already — ’  Mr  Collier’s  annotator,  and 
Mr  Collier,  and  all  the  advocates  of  the  intercalated  line,  assume  him  to  mean,  ‘  I 
should  desire  to  die,  only  that  I  am  already  dead  or  holding  converse  with  the  dead;’ 
whereas,  in  fact,  the  expression,  ‘  Would  I  were  dead]  etc.  is  neither  more  nor  less 
than  an  imprecation,  equivalent  to,  ‘  Would  I  may  die,’  etc. ;  and  the  king’s  real 
meaning,  in  reference  to  Paulina’s  remark,  that  he  will  think  anon  it  moves,  is,  ‘  May 
I  die,  if  I  do  not  think  it  moves  already.'  In  proof  of  this,  take  the  following  exam¬ 
ples,  which  might  easily  be  multiplied  a  hundred-fold,  of  similar  forms  of  speech : 

‘ — and  would  I  might  be  dead ,  If  I  in  thought,’  etc. —  The  Two  Gent.  IV,  iv. 

‘  Would  I  had  no  being ,  If  this  salute  my  blood  a  jot.’ — Hen.  VIII :  II,  iii.  «  The 
Gods  rebuke  me,  but  it  is  tidings  To  wash  the  eyes  of  the  kings.’ — Ant.  dr5  Cleop. 
V,  i.  ‘  Would  I  with  thunder  presently  might  die  So  I  might  speak.’ — Summer  s 

Last  Will  and  Testament.  ‘  Let  me  suffer  death  If  in  my  apprehension,’  etc. _ 

Beau.  &  FI.  The  Night  Walker ,  III,  vi.  ‘  Would  L  were  dead,  etc.  If  I  do  know,’ 
etc- — Jonson’s  Tale  of  a  Tub,  II,  i.  ‘  Pass  ’  io  morire,  an  oath  much  used,  as  we  say, 
I  would  L  were  dead,  I  pray  God  I  may  dye,  may  I  dye.' — Florio,  Worlde  of  Wordes. 
[Staunton’s  interpretation  carries  conviction. — Ed.] 

Lady  Martin  (p.  387):  Never  can  I  forget  the  manner  in  which  Mr  Macready 
here  cried  out,  ‘  Do  not  draw  the  curtain !’  and,  afterwards,  ‘  Let  be,  let  be!'  in  tones 
irritable,  commanding,  and  impossible  to  resist.  ‘  Would  I  were  dead,’  he  continues, 
but  that,  methinks  already — .’  Has  he  seen  something  that  makes  him  think  the 
statue  lives  ?  Mr  Macready  indicated  this,  and  hurriedly  went  on  ‘  What  was  he,’ 
etc.  His  eyes  have  been  so  riveted  upon  the  figure,  that  he  sees  what  the  others 
have  not  seen,  that  there  is  something  about  it  beyond  the  reach  of  art.  He  continues 
— ‘  Still,  methinks,  There  is  an  air,’  etc. 

81.  ’Masterly]  What  ellipsis  is  indicated  by  the  apostrophe,  I  do  not  know. 

83.  fixure]  Bradley  (New  Eng.  Diet.)-.  An  adaptation  of  late  Lat.  fixura-, 
fixture  is  an  altered  form,  after  the  analogy  of  mixture.  The  earliest  example 
(given  by  Steevens  also)  is  ‘This  dreadfull  Commet  .  .  .  Whose  glorious  fixure  in 
so  faire  a  sky  Strikes  the  beholder  with  a  chilly  feare.’ — Drayton,  Barons  Wars, 


ACT  v,  sc.  iii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 

Paul.  lie  draw  the  Curtaine  : 

My  Lord’s  almoft  fo  farre  tranfported,that 
Hee’le  thinke  anon  it  hues. 

Leo.  Oh  fweet  Paulina , 

Make  me  to  thinke  fo  twentie  yeeres  together  : 

No  fetled  Sences  of  the  World  can  match 
The  pleafure  of  that  madneffe.  Let’t  alone. 

Paul.  I  am  forry  (Sir)  I  haue  thus  farre  Hir’d  you  :  but 
I  could  afflict  you  farther. 

Leo.  Doe  Paulina  : 

For  this  Afflidtion  ha’s  a  tafte  as  fweet  95 

As  anyCordiall  comfort.  Still  me  thinkes 
There  is  an  ayre  comes  from  her.  What  fine  Chizzell 
Could  euer  yet  cut  breath  ?  Let  no  man  mock  me, 

For  I  will  kiffe  her. 

Paul.  Good  my  Lord,  forbeare  :  1 00 

The  ruddineffe  vpon  her  Lippe,  is  wet  : 

You’le  marre  it,  if  you  kiffe  it  ;  flayne  your  owne 
With  Oyly  Painting:  fhall  I  draw  the  Curtaine. 

Leo.  No:  not  thefe  twentie  yeeres. 

Perd.  So  long  could  I  1 05 

Stand-by,  a  looker-on. 

Patel.  Either  forbeare, 

Quit  prefently  the  Chappell,  or  refolue  you 

For  more  amazement  :  if  you  can  behold  it,  109 

87.  Offers  again  to  draw,  Coll.  ii.  93.  farther ]  F2,  Cap.  Cam.  further 

91.  Let ’/]  Let's  Y^F^.  Let  Johns.  F2F3,  Rowe  et  cet. 

92.  Lam ]  L’m  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii.  100.  my  Lord ]  me  Lord  F2. 

[She  stays  him.  Coll.  ii. 

i,  xxxiii. — Edwards  (p.  47)  :  The  meaning  here  is,  though  her  eye  be  fixed  (as  the 
eye  of  a  statue  always  is),  yet  it  seems  to  have  motion  in  it :  that  tremulous  motion, 
which  is  perceptible  in  the  eye  of  a  living  person,  how  much  soever  one  endeavour 
to  fix  it. 

84.  As  we  are]  The  ‘As  ’  here  is  hardly  the  same  as  that  in  line  40 :  ‘As  she 
liv’d  now,’  although  Malone  and  M.  Mason  so  consider  it,  and  say  that  it  is  equiv¬ 
alent  to  as  if.  The  latter  suggested  that  the  verb  should  be  changed :  ‘As  we  were,' 
or  else,  retaining  the  verb,  read  ‘so  we  are.’  Abbott  (§  no)  more  correctly  defines 
its  present  meaning  by  ‘  for  so,’  and  classes  it  with  such  phrases  as  :  ‘This  Jacob  from 
our  Holy  Abraham  was,  As  his  wise  mother  wrought  in  his  behalf.’ — Mer.  of  Ven. 
I,  iii,  73 ;  and  ‘  Who  dares  receive  it  other  As  we  shall  make  our  griefs  and  clamour 
roar,’  etc. — Macb.  I,  vii,  78. 

84.  with  Art]  Cf.  line  64  in  the  preceding  scene  :  ‘  torn  with  a  bear.’ 


297 

85 


90 


298 


THE  WINTERS  * TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


lie  make  the  Statue  moue  indeed;  defcend,  HO 

And  take  you  by  the  hand  :  but  then  you’le  thinke 
(Which  I  proteft  againft)  I  am  affifted 
By  wicked  Powers. 

Leo .  What  you  can  make  her  doe, 

I  am  content  to  looke  on  :  what  to  fpeake,  1 1 5 

I  am  content  to  heare  :  for  ’tis  as  eafie 
To  make  her  fpeake,  as  moue. 

Paul.  It  is  requir’d 

You  doe  awake  your  Faith  :  then,  all  Hand  ftill  : 

On:  thofe  that  thinke  it  is  vnlawfull  Bufineffe  120 

I  am  about,  let  them  depart. 

Leo.  Proceed  : 

No  foot  fhall  ftirre.  123 

1 19, 120.  Jlill :  On  :  thofe ]  F2F3,  Knt,  those  Coll.  i.  still  On't :  those  Nicholson 

Cam.  Wh.  ii,  Dtn.  (misprint).  Jlill.  ap.  Cam.  still:  Or  those  Han.  et  cet. 
On;  thofe  F<(  Rowe,  still.  And  those  120.  On  .•]  All  Coll.  MS.  But  Gould. 

Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns,  still.  On, 


120.  On:  those]  Knight:  We  understand  this  as,  ‘  Let  us  go  on.’  The  king 
immediately  adds  ‘  proceed.’— Collier  (ed.  i)  :  The  meaning  is,  ‘  Let  those  go  on, 
and  depart,  who  think  it  is  unlawful  business  I  am  about.’  .  .  .  ‘  On  ’  could  hardly 
have  been  misprinted  for  or,  because  in  all  the  old  copies  it  is  followed  by  a  colon.— 
Dyce  {Remarks,  p.  84)  :  Which  of  these  two  interpretations  [Knight’s  and  Collier’s] 
is  the  most  forced  and  ridiculous  it  would  be  difficult  to  decide.  Hanmer’s  alteration 
°f  ‘  °n  ’  to  Or  is  obviously  necessary :  in  IV,  iv,  823,  of  this  play,  where  the  right 
reading  is  undoubtedly  or,  the  Folio  has  ‘  at  toaze  ’ ;  and  in  the  56th  Sonnet,  where 
the  old  copy  has  ‘As  call  it,’  etc.,  Mr  Collier  has  rightly  given  ‘  Or  call  it,’  etc.  As 
to  his  remark  that  ‘“On”  could  hardly  have  been  misprinted  for  Or,  because  in  all 
the  old  copies  it  is  followed  by  a  colon,’— I  have  already  cited  from  the  First  Folio  a 
line  of  this  play  [I,  ii,  170]  in  the  middle  of  which  a  colon  occurs,  while  the  sense 
positively  requires  that  there  should  be  no  point  at  all ;  nor  would  it  be  difficult  to 
bring  forward  from  various  old  books  a  host  of  passages  in  which  stops  are  introduced 
with  the  grossest  impropriety;  e.  g.  ‘And  wish,  she  were  so  now,  as  when  my  lust 
Forc’d  you;  to  quite  the  Countrey.’—  Custom  of  the  Country,  V,  v,  p.  22.— Beau.  & 
Fletcher’s  Workes,  ed.  1647.  ‘Let’s  burn  this  Noble  body:  Sweetes  as  many  As 
sun-burnt;  Neroe  [ Meroe ]  breeds,  lie  make  a  flame  of  Shall  reach  his  soule  in 
heaven.’  Valentinian,  IV,  iv,  p.  22.— Ibid.— LETTSOM  (MS  note  in  margin  of  my 
copy  of  Dyce) :  And  in  the  grave  scene  in  Hamlet,  Horatio  says  in  the  First  Folio, 
‘’Twere.to  consider:  to  curiously  to  consider  so.’— Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  On  recon¬ 
sideration,  we  are  inclined  to  think,  with  Mr  Dyce,  that  Hanmer  was  right.— Collier 
(ed.  iii) :  It  is  'Or  those’  in  the  Folios,  but  the  old  corrector  of  the  Fol.  1632  need¬ 
lessly  altered  ‘  Or  ’  to  All.  [An  oversight  in  regard  to  the  text  of  the  Folios,  which 
no  one  would  have  more  regretted,  or  sooner  apologised  for,  than  my  excellent  old 
friend,  Collier,  himself.  I  prefer  Hanmer’s  reading. — Ed.] 


ACT  v,  sc.  iii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 

Paul.  Mufick  ;  awake  her:  Strike  : 

’Tis  time:  defcend:  be  Stone  no  more  :  approach  : 
Strike  all  that  looke  vpon  with  meruaile  :  Come  : 
lie  fill  your  Graue  vp:  ftirre :  nay,  come  away: 
Bequeath  to  Death  your  numneffe  :  (for  from  him, 
Deare  Life  redeemes  you)  you  perceiue  fhe  ftirres: 
Start  not  :  her  Actions  fhall  be  holy,  as 
You  heare  my  Spell  is  lawfull  :  doe  not  fhun  her, 
Vntill  you  fee  her  dye  againe  ;  for  then 
You  kill  her  double  :  Nay,  prefent  your  Hand  : 
When  fhe  was  young,  you  woo’d  her:  now,  in  age, 
Is  fhe  become  the  Suitor? 

Leo.  Oh  fhe’s  warme  : 


299 

125 


130 


135 


124.  [Musick.  Rowe. 

125.  time .•]  time ,  Rowe  +  . 

126.  vpon]  on  you  Han.  upon  you 
Ktly.  upon't  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

meruaile ]  mervaile  Fa.  mar- 
vaile  F„.  marvail  F.. 


128.  numneffe']  numbnefs  F4>  dumb¬ 
ness  Gould. 

129.  [Hermione  comes  down.  Rowe. 

135.  Suitor?]  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Knt,  Coll, 
i,  iii,  Cam.  Rife,  Dtn.  suitor.  Rowe  ii 
et  cet. 

136.  [Embracing  her.  Rowe. 


125.  be  Stone  no  more]  Mrs  Jameson  (ii,  18) :  Here  we  have  another  instance 
of  that  art  with  which  the  dramatic  character  is  fitted  to  the  circumstances  in  which 
it  is  placed, — that  perfect  command  over  her  own  feelings,  that  complete  self-posses¬ 
sion  necessary  to  this  extraordinary  situation,  is  consistent  with  all  that  we  imagine 
of  Hermione ;  in  any  other  woman  it  would  be  so  incredible  as  to  shock  all  our  ideas 
of  probability. 

126.  looke  vpon]  For  other  instances  of  ‘upon’  used  adverbially,  like  on,  after 
the  verb  look,  see  Abbott,  §  192. 

135.  Suitor?]  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  85):  Assuredly  no  question  is  asked;  Paulina 
means,  ‘  you  formerly  wooed  her,  and  now  she  wooes  you.’  The  original  compositor 
put  an  interrogation  point,  because  ‘  Is  she  ’  sounded  like  a  question.  [I  quite  agree 
with  Dyce,  albeit  some  excellent  editors  do  not  agree  with  him. — Ed.] 

136.  Oh  she’s  warme]  Staunton  :  To  a  reader  of  taste  and  sensibility,  the  art 
by  which  the  emotions  of  Leontes  are  developed  in  this  situation,  from  the  moment 
when  with  an  apparent  feeling  of  disappointment  he  first  beholds  the  ‘  so  much 
wrinkled  ’  statue,  and  gradually  becomes  impressed,  amazed,  enthralled,  till  at  length, 
borne  along  by  a  wild,  tumultuous  throng  of  indefinable  sensations,  he  reaches  that 
grand  climax  where,  in  delirious  rapture,  he  clasps  the  figure  to  his  bosom  and  faintly 
murmurs,  ‘  O,  she’s  warm  !’  must  appear  consummate.  [Staunton’s  ‘  faint  murmur  > 
seems  to  me  utterly  wrong.  For  Macready’s  truer  acting,  see  next  note. — Ed.] 

Lady  Martin  (p.  389) :  You  may  conceive  the  relief  I  felt  when  the  first  strain 
of  solemn  music  set  me  free  to  breathe  !  There  was  a  pedestal  by  my  side  on  which 
I  leant.  It  was  a  slight  help  during  the  long  strain  upon  the  nerves  and  muscles, 
besides  allowing  me  to  stand  in  that  ‘natural  posture’  which  first  strikes  Leontes, 
and  which  therefore  could  not  have  been  rigidly  statuesque.  By  imperceptibly  alter- 


300 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


If  this  be  Magick,  let  it  be  an  Art 
Lawfull  as  Eating. 

Pol.  She  embraces  him. 


ing  the  poise  of  the  body,  the  weight  of  it  being  on  the  forward  foot,  I  could  drop 
into  the  easiest  position  from  which  to  move.  The  hand  and  arm  still  resting  quietly 
on  the  pedestal  materially  helped  me.  Towards  the  close  of  the  strain  the  head 
slowly  turned,  the  ‘  full  eyes  ’  moved,  and  at  the  last  note  rested  on  Leontes.  This 
movement,  together  with  the  expression  of  the  face,  transfigured,  as  we  may  have 
imagined  it  to  have  been,  by  years  of  sorrow  and  devout  meditation, — speechless,  yet 
saying  things  unutterable,— always  produced  a  startling,  magnetic  effect  upon  all,— 
the  audience  upon  the  stage  as  well  as  in  front  of  it.  After  the  burst  of  amazement 
had  hushed  down,  at  a  sign  from  Paulina  the  solemn  sweet  strain  recommenced.  The 
arm  and  hand  were  gently  lifted  from  the  pedestal;  then,  rhythmically  following  the 
music,  the  figure  descended  the  steps  that  led  up  to  the  dais,  and  advancing  slowly, 
paused  at  a  short  distance  from  Leontes.  Oh,  can  I  ever  forget  Mr  Macready  at  this 
point !  At  first  he  stood  speechless,  as  if  turned  to  stone  ;  his  face  with  an  awe-struck 
look  upon  it.  Could  this,  the  very  counterpart  of  his  queen,  be  a  wondrous  piece  of 
mechanism  ?  Could  art  so  mock  the  life  ?  He  had  seen  her  laid  out  as  dead,  the 
funeral  obsequies  performed  over  her,  with  her  dear  son  beside  her.  Thus  absorbed 
in  wonder,  he  remained  until  Paulina  said,  ‘Nay,  present  your  hand.’  Trem¬ 
blingly  he  advanced,  and  touched  gently  the  hand  held  out  to  him.  Then  what  a 
cry  came  with,  ‘  O,  she’s  warm  !’  It  is  impossible  to  describe  Mr  Macready  here. 
He  was  Leontes’  very  self!  His  passionate  joy  at  finding  Hermione  really  alive 
seemed  beyond  control.  Now  he  was  prostrate  at  her  feet,  then  enfolding  her  in 
his  arms.  I  had  a  slight  veil  or  covering  over  my  head  and  neck,  supposed  to  make 
the  statue  look  older.  This  fell  off  in  an  instant.  The  hair,  which  came  unbound, 
and  fell  on  my  shoulders,  was  reverently  kissed  and  caressed.  The  whole  change 
was  so  sudden,  so  overwhelming,  that  I  suppose  I  cried  out  hysterically,  for  he  whis¬ 
pered  to  me,  ‘  Don’t  be  frightened,  my  child  !  don’t  be  frightened  !  Control  yourself!’ 
All  this  went  on  during  a  tumult  of  applause  that  sounded  like  a  storm  of  hail.  Oh, 
how  glad  I  was  to  be  released,  when,  as  soon  as  a  lull  came,  Paulina,  advancing  with 
Perdita,  said,  ‘  Turn,  good  lady,  our  Perdita  is  found.’  A  broken  trembling  voice,  I 
am  very  sure,  was  mine,  as  I  said,  ‘  You  gods,  look  down,’  etc.  It  was  such  a  com¬ 
fort  to  me,  as  well  as  true  to  natural  feeling,  that  Shakespeare  gives  Hermione  no 
words  to  say  to  Leontes,  but  leaves  her  to  assure  him  of  her  joy  and  forgiveness  by 
look  and  manner  only,  as  in  his  arms  she  feels  the  old  life,  so  long  suspended,  come 
back  to  her  again.  [See  Appendix  for  additional  extracts  from  these  invaluable, 

illuminating  Commentaries,  which  are  beyond  all  praise. _ Ed.] 

139.  She  embraces  him]  Mrs  Jameson  (ii,  20) :  The  effect  produced  on  the 
different  persons  of  the  drama  by  this  living  statue,— an  effect  which  at  the  same 
moment  is,  and  is  not  an  illusion,— the  manner  in  which  the  feelings  of  the  spectators 
become  entangled  between  the  conviction  of  death  and  the  impression  of  life,  the  idea 
of  a  deception  and  the  feeling  of  a  reality ;  and  the  exquisite  colouring  of  poetry  and 
touches  of  natural  feeling  with  which  the  whole  is  wrought  up,  till  wonder,  expecta¬ 
tion,  and  intense  pleasure,  hold  our  pulse  and  breath  suspended  on  the  event  —are 
quite  inimitable.  .  .  . 

The  moment  when  Hermione  descends  from  her  pedestal  to  the  sound  of  soft 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


301 


Cam.  She  hangs  about  his  necke,  140 

If  fhe  pertaine  to  life,  let  her  fpeake  too. 

Pol.  I ,  and  make  it  manifeft  where  fhe  ha’s  liu’d, 

Or  how  ftolne  from  the  dead  ? 

Paul.  That  fhe  is  liuing, 

Were  it  but  told  you,fhould  be  hooted  at  145 

Like  an  old  Tale  :  but  it  appeares  fhe  hues, 

Though  yet  fhe  fpeake  not.  Marke  a  little  while  : 

Pleafe  you  to  interpofe  (faire  Madam)  kneele, 

And  pray  your  Mothers  bleffmg  :  turne  good  Lady, 

Our  Perdita  is  found.  1 50 

Her.  You  Gods  looke  downe, 

And  from  your  facred  Viols  poure  your  graces 
Vpon  my  daughters  head  :  Tell  me  (mine  owne) 

Where  haft  thou  bin  preferu’d  ?  Where  liu’d?How  found 

Thy  Fathers  Court?  For  thou  fhalt  heare  that  I  1 5 5 

Knowing  by  Paulina ,  that  rhe  Oracle 

Gaue  hope  thou  waft  in  being,  haue  preferu’d 

My  felfe,  to  fee  the  yffue . 

Paid.  There’s  ttme  enough  for  that, 

Leaft  they  defire  (vpon  this  pufh)  to  trouble  1 60 


140,  141.  She... pertaine]  One  line, 
Walker  ( Crit .  iii,  Ii6). 

142.  make  it]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Coll.  Sing. 
Wh.  i,  Ktly.  make  Han.  make't  Cap. 
et  cet. 

143.  dead ?]  dead.  Cap.  dead !  Sta. 
150.  [Presenting  Perd.,  who  kneels  to 

Herm.  Rowe. 


152.  Viols]  vials  Pope. 

154.  bin]  been  F3F4. 

156.  rhe]  Fj. 

157,  158.  Gaue. ..My  felfe]  One  line, 
Steev. 

159.  There's]  There  is  F4,  Rowe  i. 
ttme]  Fx. 

160.  Leaf]  Lef  F3F4< 


music,  and  throws  herself  without  speaking  into  her  husband’s  arms,  is  one  of  inex¬ 
pressible  interest.  It  appears  to  me  that  her  silence  during  the  whole  of  this  scene 
(except  when  she  invokes  a  blessing  on  her  daughter’s  head)  is  in  the  finest  taste  as 
a  poetical  beauty,  besides  being  an  admirable  trait  of  character.  The  misfortunes  of 
Hermione,  her  long  religious  seclusion,  the  wonderful  and  almost  supernatural  part 
she  has  just  enacted,  have  invested  her  with  such  a  sacred  and  awful  charm,  that  any 
words  put  into  her  mouth,  must,  I  think,  have  injured  the  solemn  and  profound 
pathos  of  the  situation. 

160.  vpon  this  push]  Delius:  Were  Perdita  to  give,  here  and  now,  a  full  re¬ 
port  of  her  previous  life,  all  the  others  there  present,  incited  by  the  same  impulse, 
would  wish  to  make  and  answer  similar  enquiries.  [Hence  Schmidt  (Lex.),  follow¬ 
ing  Delius,  defines  ‘  push  ’  by  an  impulse  given,  a  setting  in  motion.  Rev.  John 
Hunter  defines  it  by  excitement.  The  Cowden-Clarkes  say  that  it  is  used  for 
emergency,  special  occasion.  This  last  seems  to  be  the  best.  It  is  in  this  sense  that 


302 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  iiu 
161 


Your  ioyes,  with  like  Relation.  Go  together 
You  precious  winners  all  :  your  exultation 
Partake  to  euery  one  :  I  (an  old  Turtle) 

Will  wing  me  to  fome  wither’d  bough,  and  there 
My  Mate  (that’s  neuer  to  be  found  againe)  165 

Lament,  till  I  am  loft. 

Leo.  O  peace  Paulina  : 

Thou  fhouldft  a  husband  take  by  my  confent, 

As  I  by  thine  a  Wife.  This  is  a  Match, 

And  made  betweene’s  by  Vowes.  Thou  haft  found  mine,  170 

But  how,  is  to  be  queftion’d  :  for  I  faw  her 

(As  I  thought)  dead  :  and  haue  (in  vaine)  faid  many 

A  prayer  vpon  her  graue.  lie  not  feeke  farre 

(For  him,  I  partly  know  his  minde)  to  finde  thee 

An  honourable  husband.  Come  Camillo  y  17  j 

And  take  her  by  the  hand  :  whofe  worth,  and  honefty 

164.  bough]  bow  F4,  Rowe.  176.  by  the]  Om.  Coll,  ii  (MS). 


Macbeth  uses  it  when  he  says :  ‘  This  push  Will  cheer  me  ever,  or  dis-seize  me  now/ 
— V,  iii,  20. — Ed.] 

162.  winners]  Johnson:  That  is,  You  who  by  this  discovery  have  gained  what 
you  desired,  may  join  in  festivity,  in  which  I,  who  have  lost  what  never  can  be 
recovered,  can  have  no  part. 

i63-  Partake]  Malone:  This  means  participate. — Schmidt  (Lex.)  :  To  commu¬ 
nicate.  Cf.  ‘  our  mind  partakes  her  private  actions  to  your  secrecy.’ _ Per.  I,  i,  153. 

163.  Turtle]  Schmidt  (Translation,  p.  285):  Even  as  early  as  in  the’  Gesta 
Romanorum,  a  young  widow  says  to  her  father-in-law :  donee  audiam  de  sponso  meo 
dulcissimo,  ad  instar  turturis  manebo  tecum. 

164.  withered]  Malone:  So,  Orpheus,  in  the  exclamation  which  Johannes 
Secundus  has  written  for  him,  speaking  of  his  grief  for  the  loss  of  Eurydice,  says : 
Sic  gemit  arenti  viduatus  ab  arbore  turtur.  So,  in  Lodge’s  Rosalynde,  1592:  A 
turtle  sat  upon  a  leaveless  tree,’  etc.  [See  As  You  Like  It,  Appendix,  p.  366 
of  this  ed.] 

166.  till  I  am  lost]  That  is,  till  I,  too,  am  lost.  The  word  ‘lost,’  albeit  used  in 
a  different  sense,  was  probably  suggested  by  the  fate  of  Antigonus,  referred  to  in  the 

preceding  line.  It  is  well  that  the  martyr,  Antigonus,  should  be  remembered, _ but 

where  is  the  little  Mamillius?  Possibly  the  omission  was  intentional.  Any  allusion, 
to  him  might  have  proved  too  much  for  Hermione’s  self-control. _ Ed 

176.  take  her  by  the  hand]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  The  line  is  ruined  by  the  need¬ 
less  insertion  of  two  particles.  We  may  be  confident  that  they  had  in  some  way  been 
foisted  into  the  text,  almost  without  the  assurance  of  the  MS  Corrector,  who  puts  his 
pen  through  ‘  by  the.’  v 

176.  whose  worth]  M.  Mason  (p.  139) :  ‘Whose’  evidently  refers  to  Camillo 
though  Paulina  is  the  immediate  antecedent. 


ACT  v,  sc.  iii.]  THE  WINTERS  TALE 

Is  richly  noted  :  and  heere  iuftified 
By  Vs,  a  paire  of  Kings.  Let’s  from  this  place. 
What?  looke  vpon  my  Brother  :  both  your  pardons, 
That  ere  I  put  betweene  your  holy  lookes 
My  ill  fufpition  :  This  your  Son-in-law, 

And  Sonne  vnto  the  King,  whom  heauens  diredling 
Is  troth-plight  to  your  daughter.  Good  Paulina , 
Leade  vs  from  hence,  where  we  may  leyfurely 
Each  one  demand,  and  anfwere  to  his  part 


303 

177 


180 


185 


177.  A]  It  Var.  ’21  (misprint). 

179.  [To  Herm.  Han. 

181.  This ]  This  is  Ktly,  Huds.  Rife, 
Wh.  ii.  This'  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

182.  whom  heauens  diverting]  Ff. 
whom,  Heav'ns  directing,  Rowe  i.  whom 


Heav'ns  directing,  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  Rife,  from  heav'n's  directing, 
Han.  who,  heavens  directing,  Cap.  Var. 
’73)  ’78,  ’85,  Rann,  Ktly,  Huds.  Dtn. 
( whom  heavens  directing ,)  Mai.  et  cet. 


179.  What?  looke  vpon  my  Brother]  Staunton:  This  unfolds  a  charming 
and  delicate  trait  in  Hermione ;  remembering  how  sixteen  sad  years  agone  her  inno¬ 
cent  freedoms  with  Polixenes  had  been  misconstrued,  and  keenly  sensible,  even 
amidst  the  joy  of  her  restoration  to  child  and  husband,  of  the  bitter  penalty  they  had 
involved,  she  now  turns  from  him,  when  they  meet,  with  feelings  of  mingled  modesty 
and  apprehension. 

181.  This  your]  Walker  (Vers.  81):  The  construction  will  be  expedited  by 
reading,  ‘  This’  your  son-in-law,’  etc.  We  might  indeed  read  This  is  without  any 
violation  of  metre,  but  I  prefer  the  other.  For  the  construction,  ‘  whom  heavens 
directing,’  etc.,  one  may  compare  Ven.  dr5  Ad.  1033,  ‘  as  the  snail,  whose  tender 
horns  being  bit  [!  read  hit],  Shrinks  backward  in  his  shelly  cave  with  pain.’ — Cym. 
IV,  ii,  I  think,  ‘  no  nor  The  leaf  of  eglantine,  whom  not  to  slander  Outsweeten’d  not 
thy  breath.’  Compare,  too,  Temp.  I,  ii,  ‘  Some  food  we  had,  and  some  fresh  water, 
which  A  noble  Neapolitan,  Gonzalo,  Out  of  his  charity  (who  being  then  appointed 
Master  of  this  design)  did  give  us,’  etc.  Also  Merry  Wives,  IV,  vi,  ‘  I  have  a  letter 
from  her  Of  such  contents  as  you  will  wonder  at ;  The  mirth  whereof  so  larded  with 
my  matter,  That  neither  singly  can  be  manifested  Without  the  shew  of  both.’  [Dyce 
evidently  did  not  verify  Walker’s  quotations;  in  quoting  from  Walker  the  line  from 
Ven.  &°  Ad.  he  repeated  bit ;  a  fatality  seems  to  attend  the  word;  Malone  prints 
it  hurt.  Abbott  (§  410)  gives  two  examples  which,  I  think,  are  more  exactly 
parallel  in  construction  to  the  present  passage  than  any  of  those  cited  by  Walker, 
viz.:  ‘Young  Ferdinand  whom  they  suppose  is  drown’d,’ — Temp.  Ill,  iii,  92;  and 
‘  0f  Arthur  whom  they  say  is  killed  to-night.’— King  John,  IV,  ii,  165.  In  both 
of  these  cases,  as  in  ‘  whom  heauens  directing  Is  troth-plight,’  there  is  a  confu¬ 
sion  of  two  constructions.  It  is  also  possible,  that  in  the  present  passage  the  com¬ 
positor  supplied  the  m  of  ‘  whom  ’  for  the  sake  of  euphony.  For  This  is  see  V,  i, 
134.— Ed.] 

184,  185.  Leade  vs  from  hence  .  .  .  demand  .  .  .  answere]  Cf.  the  last  lines 
of  Mer.  of  Ven.  :  ‘  Let  us  go  in,  And  charge  us  there  upoD  interrogatories,  And  we 
will  answer  all  things  faithfully.’ — Ed. 


3°4 


THE  WINTERS  TALE 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Perform’d  in  this  wide  gap  of  Time,  fince  firft  186 

We  were  diffeuer’d  :  Haftily  lead  away.  Exeunt. 

187 .  We  werc~\  WereYfi^.  187.  Exeunt.]  Exeunt  omnes.  Rowe. 

187.  Exeunt]  Warburton  :  This  play,  throughout,  is  written  in  the  very  spirit 
of  its  author.  And  in  telling  this  homely  and  simple,  tho’  agreeable,  country  tale, 
‘  Our  sweetest  Shakespeare,  fancy’s  child,  Warbles  his  native  wood-notes  wild.’  This 
was  necessary  to  observe  in  mere  justice  to  the  Play,  as  the  meanness  of  the  fable, 
and  the  extravagant  conduct  of  it,  had  misled  some  of  great  name  into  a  wrong 
judgement  of  its  merit:  which,  as  far  as  it  regards  sentiment  and  character,  is  scarce 
inferior  to  any  in  the  whole  collection. — Dr  Johnson  :  This  play,  as  Dr  Warburton 
justly  observes,  is,  with  all  its  absurdities,  very  entertaining.  The  character  of 
Autolycus  is  naturally  conceived,  and  strongly  represented.  [By  ‘  some  of  great 
name  ’  Warburton  refers  to  Pope  and  Dryden,  for  whose  remarks  see  Appendix, 
Unity  of  Time,  etc. — Ed.] 


APPENDIX 


20 


APPENDIX 


THE  TEXT 


The  Winter’s  Tale  was  first  published  in  the  Folio  of  1623,  wherein  it  appears 
as  the  last  of  the  series  of  The  Comedies.  It  was  never  printed  in  Quarto,  although 
in  a  list  of  the  editions  of  Shakespeare’s  plays,  inserted  in  The  British  Theatre, 
Dublin,  175°)  there  appears :  ‘A  winter  Nighte  Tale,  an  excellent  Comedie,  1606.’ 
This  list  was  compiled,  so  the  editor  of  The  British  Theatre  says,  from  the  papers  of 
one  Chetwood,  a  bookseller,  and  also  prompter  for  twenty  years  in  Drury  Lane 
Theatre.*  Of  many  of  the  Quartos  in  this  list,  there  is  no  record  of  their  having 
been  seen  elsewhere,  and  the  whole  list  is  regarded  as  spurious. f 

When  the  license  to  publish  the  First  Folio  was  obtained,  the  following  entry  was 
made  in  The  Registers  of  the  Stationers'  Company  J  : — 


Master  Blounte 
Isaak  Jaggard 


8°  Uommbris  1623 

Entred  for  their  Copie  vnder  the  hands  of  Master  Doctor  Worrall 
and  Master  Cole  warden  Master  William  Shakspeers  Comedyes 
Histories,  and  Tragedyes  soe  manie  of  the  said  Copies  as  are  not 
formerly  entred  to  other  men.  vizi  viis. 

The  Tempest 

The  two  gentlemen  of  Verona 
Measure  for  Measure 

Comedyes  Tht  Comedy  °f  Errors 

As  you  like  it 
AIF  s  well  that  ends  well 
Twelfe  night 
The  winters  tale 


Histories 


The  thirde  parte  of  Henry  ye  Sixr 
Henr  y  the  Eight 


Tragedies 


Coriolanus 
Timon  of  Athens 
Julius  Caesar 
Mackbeth 

Anthonie  and  Cleopatra 
Cymbeline 


*  Malone’s  Inquiry,  1796,  p.  350. 

T  See  Midsummer  Night's  Dream ,  p.  247,  of  this  edition. 

t  Arber’s  Transcript,  iv,  107.  This  entry,  with  slight  variations  in  spelling  and 
substance,  is  given  in  The  Variorum  of  1821,  ii,  641. 

3°7 


308 


APPENDIX 


In  the  Folio  the  play  is  divided  into  Acts  and  Scenes.  This  division  has  been 
followed  in  all  subsequent  editions,  except  in  the  allotment  of  the  Chorus,  which 
Theobald,  Warburton,  and  Johnson  place  at  the  end  of  the  Third  Act,  and  do 
not  regard  as  a  separate  Scene. 

Twelfth  Night,  which  immediately  precedes  The  Winter’s  Tale,  ends  in  the 
Folio  on  p.  275.  Page  276  is  left  blank  and  The  Winter's  Tale  begins  on  p.  277. 
This  leads  Hunter  ( New  Illust.  i,  417)  to  suppose  that  ‘  we  had  been  in  some 
‘  danger  of  losing  ’  The  Winter's  Tale.  The  blank  page  gives  colour,  he  thinks,  to 
the  inference  that  Twelfth  Night  ended  The  Comedies,  and  The  Histories  were  about 
to  begin,  ‘  and,’  he  adds,  ‘  my  copy  of  the  First  Folio  actually  wants  The  Winters 

*  Tale,  the  play  of  King  John  following  immediately  on  the  Twelfth  Night.'  The 
pagination  does  not  help  us.  A  new  pagination  begins  with  King  John.  Nor  do 
the  signatures  give  us  any  aid.  Twelfth  Night  ends  with  the  alphabet  Z  3 ;  The 
Winter's  Tale  begins  a  new  series,  A  a,  which,  however,  lasts  only  through  this  play. 
A  different  series  of  signatures  begins  with  King  John.  R.  Grant  White  (ed.  i,  p. 
275)  concedes  the  possibility  of  Hunter’s  suggestion  that  this  play  may  have  been 
overlooked  and  inserted  only  at  the  last  minute,  but  thinks  it  more  probable  that, 
‘  finding  it  no  more  tragical  in  its  course,  or  its  catastrophe,  than  Cymbeline,  [Heminge 

*  and  Condell]  at  first  intended  to  class  it  with  the  Tragedies,  and  after  it  was  ready 
‘  to  be  struck  off  restored  it  to  its  proper  place  among  the  Comedies.’  If  The  Win¬ 
ter's  T ale  was  restored  from  The  Tragedies  to  The  Comedies,  it  is  not  clear  why  the 
same  restoration  was  not  bestowed  on  Cymbeline.  The  best  explanation  of  this  blank 
page  which  I  am  able  to  offer  is  given  in  the  Preface  to  this  volume. 

Whenever  an  opinion  has  been  expressed  in  regard  to  the  general  accuracy  of  the 
text  of  this  play  in  the  Folio,  it  has  been,  with  two  exceptions,  favourable. 

‘  The  original  text,’  says  Knight,  ‘  is  remarkably  correct ;  and  although  the  in- 
‘  volved  construction,  which  is  peculiar  to  Shakespeare’s  later  writings,  and  the  free- 
‘  dom  of  versification,  which  contrasts  with  the  regularity  of  his  earlier  works,  have 

*  occasionally  tempted  the  commentators  to  try  their  hands  at  emendation,  the  ordi- 

*  nary  text  is  upon  the  whole  pretty  accurate.’ 

‘  The  corruptions  of  the  text,’  remarks  R.  G.  White  (ed.  i,  p.  274),  *  are  com- 

*  paratively  few,  far  fewer  than  we  might  reasonably  expect  from  the  style  of  the  play, 

*  which  is  more  open  to  the  charge  of  obscurity  than  any  other  of  Shakespeare’s 
1  works.  It  abounds  in  elliptical  passages,  in  which  the  gap  to  be  bridged  is  unpre- 

*  cedently  great ;  parentheses  within  parentheses,  even  to  the  third  and  fourth  degree, 

*  require  sustained  attention  and  a  clear  head  to  unravel  their  involutions  ;  thoughts 

*  incompletely  stated,  or  only  suggested,  tantalize  and  bewilder  the  untrained  or  super- 
‘  ficial  reader.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  is  rather  surprising  that  the  text  has 

*  come  down  to  us  in  so  pure  a  state  ;  and  the  absolute  incomprehensibility  of  one  or 

*  two  passages  may  safely  be  attributed  to  the  attempt,  on  the  part  of  the  printers,  to 
‘  correct  that  which  they  thought  corrupt  in  their  copy,  but  which  was  only  obscure.’ 
In  the  same  paragraph,  White,  still  speaking  of  the  text,  says  that  ‘  it  is  printed  with 
‘  unusual  care ;  the  very  punctuation,  w’hich  throughout  that  volume  [the  First 

*  Folio]  is  extremely  irregular  and  careless,  being  in  a  great  measure  reliable.’  In 
his  Second  Edition  he  is  still  of  the  same  mind, — and  in  Second  Editions  editors  do 
not  always  adhere  to  the  opinions  expressed  in  their  First ;  he  there  remarks  :  ‘  in  the 
‘  Folio  its  text  appears  in  noteworthy  purity,  notwithstanding  a  few  very  doubtful 

passages.’ 

The  first  of  the  two  exceptions  to  this  favourable  judgement  is  W.  Sidney 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


309 


Walker,  who  observes  ( Crit .  i,  87)  that  the  ‘text  of  this  play  in  the  Folio  is  printed, 
‘  by  the  way,  with  rather  more  than  usual  inaccuracy.’  Walker’s  opinions  are  at  all 
times  worthy  of  respect,  but  in  the  present  instance,  having  before  him  two  examples 
of  what  he  held  to  be  misprints,  I  think  that  on  the  spur  of  the  moment  his  general¬ 
isation  was  hasty.  It  was  given,  as  we  see,  *  by  the  way,’  and,  on  more  thought,  he 
would  probably  have  modified  it, — possibly,  reversed  it. 

The  second  dissenting  voice  is  that  of  my  excellent  and  lamented  friend,  Staun¬ 
ton,  who  ( Athenceum ,  4  April,  1874)  quotes  Walker,  with  approval,  to  the  effect  that 
the  text  is  more  than  usually  inaccurate.  But  be  it  borne  in  mind  that,  at  the  outset 
of  an  undertaking  confessedly  to  detect  ‘  unsuspected  corruptions  ’  in  Shakespeare’s, 
text,  Staunton  assumed  somewhat  the  position  of  a  special  pleader  who  was  bound  fi> 
find  numerous  flaws,  and  wished  us  to  accede  in  advance  to  the  existence  of  errors 
which  he  was  about  to  emend.  In  his  previous  admirable  edition  he  had  made  no 
such  charge  against  this  text. 

In  the  logical  and  metrical  structure,  and  diction  of  the  play,  W.  W.  Lloyd 
( Singer's  Second  Edition ,  p.  131)  finds  a  sympathy  with  the  temper  of  the  leading 
characters  and  incidents.  ‘  The  versification  starts,  breaks,  and  divides  as  in  no  other 
‘  play  of  Shakespeare’s,  and  is  in  most  marked  contrast  to  that  of  The  Two  Gentle- 
‘  men  of  Verona,  which  shuns  a  cadence  unless  at  the  end  of  a  line,  the  very  position; 
1  where  it  is  here  more  constantly  avoided.’ 

For  what  may  be  fairly  termed  a  peculiar  excellence  in  the  printing  of  the  text  of 
this  play,  see  II,  i,  18,  where  a  list  is  given  of  the  instances  where  an  apostrophe 
indicates  the  absorption  of  one  syllable,  or  sound,  by  another.  This  absorption  is  of 
frequent  occurrence  throughout  all  the  plays  (of  more  frequent  occurrence  than  is. 
commonly  supposed).  Here,  in  The  Winter's  Tale,  more  than  in  any  other,  it  has- 
been  indicated  by  the  printers. 

The  text  of  the  Four  Folios  is  substantially  the  same.  When  a  variation  occurs,, 
the  Second  as  a  rule  follows  the  First  and  the  Fourth  follows  the  Third.  The  spell¬ 
ing  in  the  Fourth  Folio  shows,  as  is  natural,  the  effect  of  the  sixty-two  years  which 
separate  it  from  the  First.  Of  the  metrical  improvements  attempted  in  the  Second 
Folio  I  have  spoken  in  the  Preface. 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 

In  a  work  like  the  present,  where  there  is  an  endeavour  to  make  each  volume- 
independent  and  self-contained,  a  certain  amount  of  repetition  is  inevitable  when 
treating  of  the  same  subject.  In  one  regard,  however,  when  dealing  with  the  Date 
of  Composition,  repetition  is  needless.  It  is  not  needful  that  in  each  successive  play 
the  Editor  should  set  forth  in  full  his  own  individual  opinion.  It  is  sufficient  briefly' 
to  state  his  indifference  to  the  present  subject,  and  his  mistrust  of  the  literary  value1 
of  any  investigations  of  the  dates  when  the  plays  were  written,  as  far  as  concerns  any 
help  to  be  thereby  gained  in  comprehending  their  meaning  or  their  charm.  Let  these- 
investigations  be  relegated  to  their  proper  department,  Biography,  where  the  fullest 
scope  may  well  be  allotted  to  them,  especially  since  the  authentic  facts  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  Life  are  so  meagre  (most  happily  !)  that  these  investigations  must  needs  com¬ 
prise  the  largest  share  of  the  duties  of  his  biographer. 


3io 


APPENDIX 


All  evidence  as  to  the  date  of  a  play  must  be  found  either  within  the  play  itself 
or  without  it,  that  is,  it  must  be  either  internal  or  external.  Of  these,  the  internal 
proofs  are,  in  general,  less  important  and  less  trustworthy  than  the  external.  They 
are  to  be  detected  in  allusions  in  the  play  itself  to  contemporaneous  or  to  past  events. 
They  are,  however,  not  only  open  to  the  suspicion  of  being  later  insertions  to  catch 
the  passing  hour,  either  by  the  author  or  by  actors,  but  are  also  subject  to  ‘  every  gale 
and  vary  ’  of  learned,  unlearned,  or  fanciful  commentators,  who  may  set  their  imag¬ 
inations  at  work  to  discover  an  allusion  where  none  exists,  and  thereby  see  Helen’s 
beauty  in  a  brow  of  Egypt.  These  internal  proofs  are  to  be  detected  also,  it  is 
alleged,  in  the  structure  of  the  verse,  in  ‘  end-stopped  ’  lines,  in  ‘  feminine  endings  ’ 
in  the  use  of  rhymes,  Alexandrines,  etc.  This  method  is  but  approximate,  and  only 
then  receives  full  confirmation  when  it  agrees  with  external  allusions,  which  are  gen¬ 
erally  documentary,  and  consist  of  references  to  the  play  or  quotations  from  it.  There 
is  no  gainsaying  these  external  proofs,  whereof  the  dates  are  fixed,  and  that  provide 
a  limit  before  which  the  play  referred  to,  or  quoted  from,  must  have  existed. 

Capell  was  the  earliest  to  attempt  an  arrangement  of  the  plays  in  chronological 
succession.  The  Winter’s  Tale  he  places  between  Henry  VIII.  and  The  Tempest 
(which  he  holds  to  be  Shakespeare’s  last  play),  and  from  one  item  of  internal  evi¬ 
dence  and  another  of  external  evidence,  infers  that  it  was  written  in  1613,  probably 
after  Shakespeare  retired  to  Stratford.  His  internal  evidence  (Notes,  ii,  176)  is  in 
the  Song,  beginning  ‘  Get  you  hence,  for  I  must  go,’  etc. — IV,  iv,  324.  ‘  From  what 

‘is  said  of  it,’  he  remarks,  ‘in  that  speech  of  Autolicus  which  begins,  [“Why,  this  is 
“‘  a  passing  merry  one,  and  goes  to  the  tune  of  two  maids  wooing  a  man:  there’s 
‘  “  scarse  a  Maide  westward  but  she  sings  it  ”],  from  parts  of  the  song  itself  (its  men¬ 
tion  of  “grange  &  mill”),  and  from  a  stroke  upon  “ usurers ”  [line  290],  which 
‘  John-a-Combe  might  give  birth  to,  a  writing  for  Stratford,  or  a  -writing  at  it,  of  this 
‘simple  and  irregular  play,  is  no  unlikely  conjecture;  the  matter  of  the  speech  first 
‘  refer’d-to  seems  a  banter  on  that  town’s  lasses,  that  would  have  great  relish  there, 

‘  upon  a  London  stage  little : — And  yet  it  should  have  come  there  too,  and  that  a 
‘  small  matter  earlier  than  a  play  which  Jonson  connects  it  with,  [This  is  Capell’s 
‘  item  of  external  evidence.]  if  a  passage  of  his  has  been  rightly  seen  into  which  a 
‘  former  note  speaks  of  [viz  :  Jonson’s  allusion  to  “  those  who  beget  Tales,  Tempests, 
“‘and  such  like  Drolleries  ”],  in  which  case  the  Poet’s  “Henry  the  eighth ”  will 
‘  have  been  its  fore-runner,  and  at  no  greater  distance,  and  that  play  the  occasion  of 
‘  his  setting  down  to  the  present.’  Jonson’s  allusion,  referred  to  above,  is  in  the  In¬ 
duction  to  his  Bartholomew  Fair,  and  will  be  discussed  further  on  by  Halliwell  and 
Fleay.  It  is  sufficient  here  to  mention  that  the  belief  dates  from  Theobald  that  Jon¬ 
son  there  refers  to  The  Tempest,  and  that  it  was  Whalley,  I  think,  who  first  sug¬ 
gested  that  in  ‘  the  nest  of  antiques  ’  lies  an  allusion  to  the  rustic  dance  of  Satyrs  in 
The  Winter’s  Tale.  (For  Gifford’s  note  on  this  subject  see  also  The  Tempest,  pp. 
282,  283  of  this  edition.) 

Horace  Walpole  (Historic  Doubts  on  the  life  and  Reign  of  King  Richard  the 
Third,  1768,  p.  114)  was  the  next  to  propose  a  date  for  the  composition  of  The 
Winter's  Tale ;  this  he  did  vaguely,  not  specifying  any  particular  year,  but  merely 
placing  it  during  Queen  Elizabeth’s  lifetime,  that  is,  before  1603.  ‘It  may  not  be 
‘  unentertaining  to  observe,’  he  says,  ‘  that  there  is  another  of  Shakespeare’s  plays, 

‘  that  may  be  ranked  among  the  historic,  though  not  one  of  his  numerous  critics  and 
‘commentators  have  discovered  the  drift  of  it;  I  mean  The  Winter  Evening’s  Tale, 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


3*1 

«  which  was  certainly  intended  (in  compliment  to  queen  Elizabeth)  as  an  indirect 
•  apology  for  her  mother,  Anne  Boleyn.  The  address  of  the  poet  appears  nowhere  to 

<  more  advantage.  The  subject  was  too  delicate  to  be  exhibited  on  the  stage  without 
«  a  veil ;  and  it  was  too  recent,  and  touched  the  queen  too  nearly,  for  the  bard  to  have 
«  ventured  so  homely  an  allusion  on  any  other  ground  than  compliment.  The  un- 
«  reasonable  jealousy  of  Leontes,  and  his  violent  conduct  in  consequence,  form  a  true 

<  portrait  of  Henry  the  Eighth,  who  generally  made  the  law  the  engine  of  his  boister- 
«  ous  passions.  Not  only  the  general  plan  of  the  story  is  most  applicable,  but  several 

<  passages  are  so  marked,  that  they  touch  the  real  history  nearer  than  the  fable. 

‘  Hermione  on  her  trial  says,  <  — “  for  honour,  ’Tis  a  derivative  from  me  to  mine, 

«  «  And  only  that  I  stand  for.”  This  seems  to  be  taken  from  the  very  letter  of  Anne 

<  Boleyn  to  the  king  before  her  execution,  where  she  pleads  for  the  infant  princess, 

<  his  daughter.  Mamillius,  the  young  prince,  an  unnecessary  character,  dies  in  his 
< infancy ;  but  it  confirms  the  allusion,  as  queen  Anne,  before  Elizabeth,  bore  a  still- 
‘  born  son.  But  the  most  striking  passage,  and  which  had  nothing  to  do  in  the 
‘  tragedy  but  as  it  pictured  Elizabeth,  is,  where  Paulina,  describing  the  new-born 
«  princess,  and  her  likeness  to  her  father,  says :  “  she  has  the  very  trick  of  his  frown.” 

«  There  is  one  sentence  indeed  so  applicable,  both  to  Elizabeth  and  her  father,  that  I 
«  should  suspect  the  poet  inserted  it  after  her  death.  Paulina,  speaking  of  the  child, 
t  tells  the  king  :  “  ’Tis  yours  ;  And  might  we  lay  the  old  proverb  to  your  charge,  So 
*  «  like  you,  ’tis  the  worse.”  The  Winter  Evening's  Tale  was  therefore  in  reality  a 
‘  second  part  of  Henry  the  Eighth 

In  the  Variorum  of  1778  Malone  published  his  first  Attempt  to  Ascertain  the 
Order  in  which  the  Plays  attributed  to  Shakespeare  were  Written  ;  in  it  he  gives, 
with  hesitation,  the  date  of  the  present  play  as  1594,  on  the  ground  that  ‘it  was, per- 
«  haps,  entered  on  the  Stationers’  books,  May  22,  1594,  under  the  name  of  A  Wynter 

<  Nyght's  Pastime l  He  adds,  however,  in  reference  to  the  theory  of  Horace  Walpole, 

« that  his  ‘  respect  for  that  very  judicious  and  ingenious  writer,  [together  with]  the 
t  silence  of  Meres,  and  the  circumstance  of  there  not  being  one  rhyming  couplet 

<  throughout  this  piece  [see  IV,  iv,  832,  833],  except  in  the  Chorus,’  made  him  doubt 
whether  it  ought  not  to  be  ascribed  to  the  year  160 1  or  1602. 

In  his  own  edition  of  1790,  Malone  republished  his  Attempt,  and,  abandoning 
the  date  1594,  proposed  the  year  1604.  ‘The  doubts  which  I  then  entertained  [in 
‘  1778],’  he  says,  ‘  a  more  attentive  examination  of  this  play  has  confirmed ;  and  I  am 
‘  now  persuaded  that  it  was  not  near  so  early  a  composition  as  the  entry  [in  the 
Stationers’  books]  led  me  to  suppose.  .  .  . 

‘  Sir  William  Blackstone  has  pointed  out  a  passage  in  the  first  Act  of  this  play, 

‘  which  had  escaped  my  observation,  and  which,  as  he  justly  observes,  furnishes  a 
‘  proof  that  it  was  not  written  till  after  the  death  of  queen  Elizabeth :  “  If  I  could 
‘  “  find  example  Of  thousands  that  had  struck  anointed  kings,  And  flourished  after, 

‘  “  I’d  not  do  it.”  These  lines  could  never  have  been  intended  for  the  ear  of  her  who 

<  had  deprived  the  queen  of  Scots  of  her  life.  To  the  son  of  Mary  they  could  not 
‘  but  have  been  agreeable.  .  .  .  Perhaps  our  author  laid  the  scheme  of  the  play  in 

‘  the  very  year  the  queen  died,  and  finished  it  in  the  next.  ...  I  have  therefore- 
‘  attributed  it  to  1604. 

‘  In  that  year  was  entered  on  the  Stationers’  books :  “  A  strange  reporte  of  a  mon- 
1  «  strous  fish,  that  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  woman  from  the  waist  upward,  seene 
‘  “  in  the  sea.”  To  this  perhaps  the  poet  alludes  in  [IV,  iv,  3°3]-  There  is,  says 
‘  one  of  the  characters  in  this  piece,  “  but  one  Puritan  among  them,  and  he  sings 


312 


APPENDIX 


1  “  psalms  to  horn-pipes.”  The  precise  manners  of  the  Puritans  were  at  this  time 
1  much  ridiculed  by  Protestants ;  and  the  principal  matters  in  dispute  between  them 
‘  (whether  the  surplice  should  be  used  in  the  celebration  of  divine  service,  the  cross 
‘  in  baptism,  and  the  ring  in  marriage)  were  gravely  discussed  at  Hampton  Court 
‘before  the  king,  who  acted  as  Moderator,  in  the  beginning  of  1604.  .  .  .  Every 
*  stroke  at  the  Puritans,  for  whom  king  James  had  a  hearty  detestation,  must  have 
‘  been  very  agreeable  to  him  as  well  as  to  the  frequenters  of  the  theatres,  against 
‘  which  that  sect  inveighed  in  the  bitterest  terms.’ 

Malone  did  not  long  remain  of  the  opinion  that  the  date  was  1604.  Before  his 
edition  ( 1 790)  was  through  the  press,  in  the  Emendations  and  Additions  (vol.  i,  pt.  ii, 
p.  286),  he  acknowledges  the  force  of  the  argument  derived  from  Ben  Jonson’s  ridi¬ 
cule  of  The  Tempest  and  Winter's  Tale,  and  is  now  ‘inclined  to  think  that  Jonson 
‘  joined  these  plays  in  the  same  censure,  in  consequence  of  their  having  been  pro- 
‘duced  at  no  great  distance  of  time  from  each  other;  and  that  The  Winter's  Tale 
‘  ought  to  have  been  ascribed  to  the  year  1613.’ 

Two  years  after  the  publication  of  Malone’s  edition  the  Rev.  James  Hurdis 
issued  a  mild  little  treatise,  wherein  he  gave  an  entirely  different  Order  of  Succession. 
The  condensed,  heavily  freighted  style,  and  lack  of  rhymes  in  The  Winter’s  Tale, 
which  are  deemed  by  other  commentators  proofs  of  Shakespeare’s  maturity,  are  held 
by  Hurdis  to  be  proofs  of  the  ‘  earliest  efforts  of  our  poet’s  muse.’  Accordingly,  in 
Hurdis’s  Order  the  present  play  stands  second,  preceded  by  Anthony  and  Cleopatra 
only ;  no  year  is  assigned  to  it.  The  passage  which  Blackstone  thinks  could  not  have 
been  written  till  after  the  death  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  Hurdis  suggests  might  have 
been  inserted  after  the  accession  of  James.  Inasmuch  as  Hurdis  displays  neither 
learning  nor  research,  but  merely  a  weak  preference,  it  is  not  surprising  that  his  book¬ 
let  made  but  little  impression  at  the  time  it  was  published,  and  has  made  none  since. 

In  1799;  George  Chalmers  published  his  Supplemental  Apology  for  the  Believers 
in  the  Supposititious  Shakspeare- Papers.  He  appears  to  have  been  an  Ishmael  among 
commentators, — his  hand  was  against  every  man  and  every  man’s  hand  was  against 
him.  This  Supplemental  Apology  was  avowedly  written  in  answer  to  Steevens’s  re¬ 
iterated  sneer  that  Chalmers  ‘  could  not  possibly  know  anything  of  Shakespeare,’  and 
although  from  beginning  to  end  it  is  marred  by  its  belligerent  tone,  it  displays  unusual 
learning,  and  indicated  many  sources,  unthought  of  by  Malone  and  Steevens,  where 
external  evidence  concerning  the  chronology  of  the  plays  might  be  found.  Chalmers 
conceded  the  utter  falseness  of  the  Ireland  forgeries,  but  cavilled  at  Malone’s  method 
of  refuting  them.  Malone  never  answered  him,  although,  it  is  said,  he  frequently 
threatened  to  do  so. 

In  regard  to  the  date  of  The  Winter's  Tale,  Chalmers  (p.  396)  addresses  himself 
chiefly  to  the  refutation  of  the  argument  founded  on  Blackstone’s  remark  that  the 
allusion  to  those  who  had  ‘struck  anointed  kings’  could  not  have  been  made  in 
Elizabeth  s  life-time.  ‘  Now,  mark,’  says  Chalmers,  exultingly,  ‘  how  a  plain  tale 
‘  shall  put  down  a  confident  assumption.’  But  after  this  roaring  so  loud  and  thundering 
in  the  index  the  ‘plain  tale  ’  amounts  to  nothing  more  than  quoting  from  Strype  [An. 
Reform,  iv,  354)  certain  passages  wherein  ‘  anointed  Magistrates  ’  are  mentioned  in 
certain  prayers  which  were  to  be  used  in  the  churches  ‘  after  the  rebellion  of  the 
‘  Earl  of  Essex.’  ‘  Shakespeare,  then,’  Chalmers  continues,  ‘  seems  to  have  merely 
‘  translated  the  sentiments  of  those  public  prayers  into  dramatic  poetry,  ...  and  to 
‘  have  adopted  the  emphatical  expression,  anointed  Kings,  instead  of  anointed  Mag¬ 
istrates.  .  .  .  During  that  momentous  period,  neither  Elizabeth  nor  her  people  enter- 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


313 


‘  tained  one  thought  of  Mary  Stuart,  who  fell  by  the  stroke  of  a  legal  instrument,  at 
‘  least ;  which  was  used  in  consequence  of  an  address  of  Parliament,  and  of  a  popular 
‘  call.  .  .  .  Blackstone’s  remark  discovers,  then,  a  mind  which  was  not  very  amply 
‘  stored  with  historical  knowledge  relating  to  that  eventful  age.  There  is  in  the  first 
‘  Act  a  passage  which  was  much  more  likely  to  tent  Elizabeth  to  the  quick :  “  Thou 
‘  “  mightst  bespice  a  cup,  To  give  mine  enemy  a  lasting  wink  ...  I  could  do  this, 
‘  “  and  that  with  no  rash  potion,  But  with  a  lingering  dram,”  etc.  It  is  an  historical 
‘  fact,  which  is  incontrovertibly  certain,  that  Elizabeth  employed  agents  to  take  off  her 
‘  hated  rival  by  a  lingering  dram.'  Malone’s  allusion  to  the  Puritans  Chalmers  takes 
as  an  additional  proof  that  the  play  was  written  about  the  period  of  Essex’s  conspir¬ 
acy.  *  History,’  he  says,  1  has  recorded  the  popular  tricks  of  that  ambitious  anarchist ; 
‘  how  he  courted  the  Puritans;  how  he  had  psalm-singing  in  Essex-house.  .  .  .  There 
‘  is  another  note  of  time,  in  the  first  Scene  of  the  fifth  Act,  which  furnishes  a  decisive 
‘  proof  against  the  theory  of  the  commentators.  Leontes  laments  the  wrong  he  did 
‘  himself:  “  which  was  so  much,  that  heirless  it  hath  made  my  kingdom.”  Dion  re- 
‘  monstrates  to  Paulina  that  “  you  consider  little  What  dangers  by  his  highness’  fail 
*  “  of  issue,  May  drop  upon  his  kingdom,  and  devour  Incertain  lookers  on.”  .  .  .  The 
‘  whole  allusion  was  finely  adapted  to  the  state  of  the  public  mind ;  wrhich  had  been 
‘  harassed  by  the  dispute  about  the  succession.  The  suspense,  wherein  the  whim  of 
‘  Elizabeth  kept  incertain  lookers  on,  to  the  last,  about  her  successor,  no  longer  ex- 
‘  isted  after  the  accession  of  James,  who  was  far  from  heirless.  After  this  event,  the 
‘  audience  would  have  disdained  that  fine  passage  as  idle  declamation.  The  crown 
‘  had  now  found  an  heir.  And,  to  have  longer  talked  about  the  dangers  of  uncer- 
'  tainty,  when  none  were  felt,  nor  foreseen,  would  have  been  rejected  by  the  audience 
1  as  senseless  fiction.  ...  I  presume  to  think  that  the  proofs  which  I  have  adduced 
‘  are  quite  sufficient  to  satisfy  any  reasonable  mind  that  The  Winter’s  Tale  was  writ- 
‘  ten  in  the  troublous  year  1601.’ 

‘  1^’  says  Douce  (i,  347),  ‘  as  Mr  Blackstone  supposes,  this  [speech  of  Camillo  in 
‘  I,  ii,  414]  be  an  allusion  to  the  death  of  the  queen  of  Scots,  it  exhibits  Shakespeare 
‘  in  the  character  of  a  cringing  flatterer  accommodating  himself  to  existing  circum- 
‘  stances,  and  is  moreover  an  extremely  severe  one.  But  the  perpetrator  of  that 
‘  atrocious  murder  did  flourish  many  years  afterward.  May  it  not  rather  be  designed 
‘  as  a  compliment  to  king  James  on  his  escape  from  the  Gowrie  conspiracy,  an  event 
‘  often  brought  to  the  people’s  recollection  during  his  reign,  from  the  day  on  which  it 
‘  happened  being  made  a  day  of  thanksgiving  ?’ 

While  his  edition  was  going  through  the  press  Malone  obtained  the  use  of  the 
Office-book  of  Sir  Henry  Herbert,  Master  of  the  Revels  to  James  the  First.  Therein 
he  found  an  entry  concerning  The  Winter's  Tale,  but  its  full  bearing  on  the  date  does 
not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  him  until  the  appearance  of  the  Variorum  of  1821, 
when  we  find  that  he  changed  his  date  for  the  fourth  time.  The  entry,  given  by 
Malone  (vol.  i,  pt.  ii,  226,  ed.  1790;  Var.  1821,  iii,  229),  is  as  follows: 

‘  For  the  kings  players.  An  olde  playe  called  Winters  Tale,  formerly  allowed  of 
‘  by  Sir  George  Bucke  and  likewyse  by  mee  on  Mr  Hemminges  his  worde  that  there 
‘  was  nothing  prophane  added  or  reformed,  thogh  the  allowed  boolce  was  missinge : 

‘  and  I  therefore  returned  it  without  a  fee  this  19  of  August  1623.’ 

Whereupon  Malone  remarks  (Var.  1821,  ii,  463):  ‘Though  Sir  George  Buck 
‘  obtained  a  reversionary  grant  of  the  office  of  Master  of  the  Revels  in  1603,  ...  it 
‘  appears  .  .  .  that  he  did  not  get  complete  possession  of  his  place  till  August,  1610. 

‘  I,  therefore,  suppose  The  Winter's  Tale  to  have  been  originally  licensed  by  him  in 


APPENDIX 


314 

‘  the  latter  part  of  that  year  or  the  beginning  of  the  next.  The  allowed  manuscript 
‘ was  probably  destroyed  by  the  fire  which  consumed  the  Globe  Theatre  in  June, 
‘  1613.  ...  It  was  acted  at  Court  in  16x3.’ 

In  1603,  Sir  George  Buc  received  a  reversionary  grant  of  the  Office  of  Master  of  the 
Revels,  expectant  on  the  death  of  Sir  Edward  Tylney.  Tylney  died  in  October,  1610. 
Malone  and  other  editors  after  him  lay  stress  on  the  fact  that  Sir  George  Buc  did  not 
get  possession  of  his  office  until  August,  1610,  only  a  month  or  two  before  Tylney’s 
death,  and  their  argument  founded  thereon  for  the  date  of  The  Winter's  Tale  is 
clear :  that  if  Sir  George  Buc  licensed  it  he  could  not  have  done  so  before  he  assumed 
office  in  1610.  But  Chalmers  ( Supplement .  Apol.  p.  200)  shows  from  The  Stationers' 
Registers  that  Buc  began  to  license  plays  only  two  or  three  years  after  he  received  his 
reversionary  grant ;  and  quotes  twenty-six  titles  from  the  Stationers’  Registers  thus 
licensed  between  the  twenty-first  of  November,  1606,  and  the  sixth  of  October,  1608. 
I  have  verified  by  Arber’s  Reprint  half  a  dozen  of  these  entries,  and,  except  trivial 
mistakes  of  the  day  of  the  month  here  and  there,  they  are  correctly  given ;  there  is 
no  reason  to  suppose  that  they  are  not  all  substantially  correct, — two  or  three  are 
enough  to  prove  Chalmers’s  assertion.  Among  these  entries  is  that  of  King  Lear, 
on  the  26  November,  1607.  (See  King  Lear,  p.  354,  of  this  edition.)  There  is  no 
mention  of  The  Winter’s  T ale-,  all  that  Chalmers  proves  is  that  Malone  is  not  justified 
in  founding  any  argument  on  the  date  of  Sir  George  Buc’s  assumption  of  office.  In 
connection  with  this  subject  Halliwell  remarks :  ‘  In  the  absence  of  any  direct 
‘  evidence  to  the  contrary,  it  seems,  however,  unnecessary  to  suggest  that  The  Winters 
‘  Tale  may  have  been  one  of  the  dramas  that  passed  under  Buck’s  review  during  the 
‘  tenancy  of  Tylney  in  the  office ;  and  it  may  fairly,  at  present,  be  taken  for  granted 
‘that  the  comedy  was  not  produced  until  after  the  month  of  August,  1610.’ 

Malone’s  final  sentence  is:  ‘  It  was  acted  at  Court  in  1613.’  This  is  clearly  a 
reference  to  what  is  known  as  the  *  Vertue  MSS.’  For  an  account  of  these  MSS,  see 
The  Tempest,  p.  275,  of  this  edition.  It  suffices  to  state  here  that  among  these  MSS 
there  is  a  list  of  ‘  Plaies  acted  at  Court,  Anno  1613  (from  the  Accounts  of  Lord 
‘  Harrington,  Treasurer  of  the  Chamber  to  King  James  I.).’  This  list  was  printed 
for  The  Shakespeare  Society  ( Papers ,  ii,  123)  by  Peter  Cunningham;  the  items  re¬ 
lating  to  the  several  plays  are  given  separately  in  the  Introductions  to  the  plays  by 
Halliwell ;  and,  lastly,  they  are  collectively  reprinted  in  the  New  Shakspeare  Society's 
Transactions,  1875,  p.  419.  These  reprints,  supposed  to  be  exact  copies  of  the  orig¬ 
inal,  vary,  however,  in  words  and  in  spelling;  Cunningham  does  not  agree  with  Halli¬ 
well  (there  is  even  a  pound’s  difference  in  the  sum  disbursed  by  the  Treasurer), 
Halliwell  not  only  does  not  agree  with  the  New  Sh.  Soc.,  but  he  does  not  agree  even’ 
with  himself;  the  extract  given  in  his  Introduction  to  The  Tempest  varies  in  die  spell¬ 
ing  of  some  words  from  that  given  in  his  Introduction  to  The  Winter's  Tale.  I  think 
it  safest  to  follow  the  New  Sh.  Soc.  except  in  the  use  of  Italics  for  the  titles  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  plays, -a  practice  which  has  little  to  commend  it.  The  item  relating  to  The 
Winter's  Tale  is  as  follows :  « Item  paid  to  John  Heminges  vppon  the  Cowncells 
‘  WarraW/  dated  att  Whitehall  xx°  die  Maij  1613,  for  presentinge  before  the  Princes 
‘  Highnes  [Hignes  ap.  Nall]  the  La dy  Elizabeth  and  the  Prince  Pallatyne  Elector 
‘  fowerteene  severall  playes,  viz. :  one  playe  called  ffilaster,  One  other  called  the 
‘  Knott  of  ffooles>  0ne  other  Much  adoe  abowte  nothinge,  The  Mayeds  Tragedy,  The 
‘  merye  dyvell  of  Edmonton,  The  Tempest,  A  kinge  and  no  kinge  /  The  Twins 
‘  Tragedie/  The  Winters  Tale,  Sir  John  ffalstaffe,  The  Moore  of  Venice,  The  Noble- 
‘  man,  Csesars  Tragedye/ And  one  other  called  Love  lyes  a  bleedinge,  All  w/Hch 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


315 

‘  Playes  weare  played  wz'th-in  the  tyme  of  this  Accompte,  viz. :  pzzz'd  the  some  of 
‘  iiij«  xiij  li  vj  s  viij  d  [,£93  :  6  :  8]  /.’ 

Capell,  as  we  have  seen,  suggests  that  Ben  Jonson  in  his  Induction  to  Bartholomew 
Fair  may  have  alluded  to  the  present  play  in  the  following  passage  (wherein,  as  Hal- 
liwell  says,  ‘  the  distinction  of  italics  and  capital  letters  [in  the  original  edition],  not 
‘  being  peculiar  to  this  quotation,  is  of  little  value  in  the  consideration  of  the  opinion 
‘  respecting  the  allusion  ’) :  ‘If  there  be  never  a  Servant-monster  i’  the  Fair,  who  can 
‘  help  it,  he  says  ?  nor  a  nest  of  Anticks  ?  He  is  loth  to  make  nature  afraid  in  his 
‘  Playes,  like  those  that  beget  Tales,  Tempests,  and  such-like  Drolleries.'  Whereon 
Halliwell  sensibly  remarks:  ‘As  The  Tempest  and  the  Winter’s  Tale  were  both 
‘  acted  at  Court  shortly  before  the  production  of  Bartholomew  Fair,  and  were  then 
‘  in  great  estimation  with  the  public,  there  would  be  some  grounds  for  the  conjecture 
‘  that  Shakespeare’s  plays  are  here  alluded  to,  were  it  not  for  the  circumstance  that 
‘  Jonson  can  hardly  be  considered  to  refer  to  regular  dramas.  In  the  comedy  of  Bar- 
‘  tholomew  Fair  he  ridicules  those  primitive  dramatic  exhibitions,  which,  known  as 
‘  motions  or  puppet-shows,  were  peculiar  favourites  with  the  public  at  that  festival. 
‘  In  some  of  these,  tempests  and  monsters  were  introduced,  as  in  the  motion  of  Jonah 
‘  and  the  Whale.  The  “  nest  of  anticks,”  which  is  supposed  to  allude  to  the  twelve 
‘  satyrs  who  are  introduced  at  the  sheep-shearing  festival,  does  not  necessarily  refer 
‘  even  to  the  spurious  kind  of  drama  here  mentioned.  The  “  servant- monster  ”  and 
‘  the  “  nest  of  anticks  ”  may  merely  mean  individual  exhibitions.  If  the  latter  really 
‘  does  relate  to  a  dramatic  representation,  it  may  very  likely  be  in  allusion  to  the  fan- 
‘  tastic  characters  so  often  introduced  in  the  masques  of  that  period ;  but  the  context 
‘  seems  to  imply  that  Jonson  is  referring  to  devices  exhibited  at  the  fair.’ 

Fleay  ( Life  of  Shakespeare,  p.  65)  says  that  ‘Winter’s  Tale  was  certainly  pro- 
‘  duced  early  this  year  [1610],  before  Jonson’s  Alchemist.  .  .  .  The  “Address  to  the 
‘  “  Reader”  [in  the  latter]  (no  doubt  dating  in  1610)  contains  one  of  Jonson’s  numer- 
‘  ous  allusions  to  the  “dance  of  antics”  in  Winter’s  Tale.'  Jonson’s  ‘allusion’  is 
not  complimentary.  May  we  venture  to  ask  if  it  be  likely  that,  at  a  time  when  he  was 
one  of  the  King’s  Players,  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  Shakespeare,  he  would  be  will¬ 
ing,  even  were  it  permitted,  to  sneer  at  a  play  acted  by  his  own  company  ?  Fleay 
pronounces  (p.  164)  Malone’s  ‘hypothesis’  formed  on  the  actual  date  of  the  entrance 
of  Sir  George  Buck  on  the  Mastership  of  the  Revels  ‘worthless,’  because  (p.  247) 
Buck  had  full  power  to  ‘  allow’  plays  from  1607  onwards.  ‘We  are,’  he  proceeds, 
*  after  all,  left  in  great  measure  to  internal  evidence.  One  really  helpful  fact  is  Jon- 
‘  son’s  allusion  in  Bartholomew  Fair  to  a  “  nest  of  ninnies  ”  and  “  those  that  beget 
‘  “  Tales,  Tempests  and  such-like  drolleries.”  This  was  written  in  1614,  and  at  that 
‘  date  he  would  of  course  allude  to  the  latest  productions  of  Shakespeare,  if  to  any.’ 

Halliwell  has  conclusively  shown,  I  think,  how  weak  is  the  support  which  any 
argument  can  derive  from  this  allusion  in  Bartholomew  Fair.  In  addition,  there  are 
two  other  reasons  against  accepting  this  allusion,  which  have  weight,  at  least  with  me 
First,  to  assume  that  Jonson  would  give  public  utterance  to  such  a  sneer  is  to  debase 
his  character  as  a  man  (it  is  a  covert  blow),  as  a  friend  (he  loved  Shakespeare  to 
idolatry),  and  as  a  poet,  with  an  aim  in  his  art  far  too  lofty  to  stoop  to  such  petty  mean¬ 
ness.  Secondly,  unless  an  allusion  be  appreciated  by  the  audience  it  falls  flat.  To 
give  point  to  this  present  allusion,  then,  we  must  assume  that  the  audience  at  the 
Hope  Theatre  in  16x4  was  not  only  substantially  the  same  as  that  at  the  Globe 
Theatre  in  1611,  but  that  they  were  all  of  so  intellectual  a  stamp  and  of  so  tenacious 


316 


APPENDIX 


a  memory  that  they  instantly  chuckled  over  a  sneering  reference  to  what  they  had 
heard  three  years  before.  And  as  for  reading  it — that  they  could  not  do  till  1631-41, 
when  Bartholomew  Fair  first  appeared  in  print. 

In  his  Introduction  to  the  Reprint  of  Dorastus  and  Fawnia,  Collier  gives  a  fine¬ 
drawn  reason  why  The  Winter' s  Tale  should  have  been  written  after  The  Tempest „ 
In  the  novel,  Fawnia  (Shakespeare’s  Perdita)  is  turned  adrift  at  sea  in  a  boat,  ‘  very 
‘  much  in  the  same  manner  as  Prospero  describes  what  had  happened  to  himself  and 
‘  Miranda  under  similar  circumstances.  Shakespeare  having  already  employed  this 
‘  species  of  incident  in  The  Tempest  was  obliged  to  vary  it  in  The  Winter's  Tale ,  or 
‘  he  would  probably  have  followed  Greene’s  description,  which  is  certainly  one  of  the 
‘  prettiest  and  most  natural  portions  of  his  narrative.’ 

To  Halliwell  this  reason  appears  too  finely  drawn.  ‘  Indications  of  this  kind,’  he 
says  ( Introd .  p.  44)  ‘are  clearly  insufficient  in  themselves,  even  to  be  useful  as  pieces 
‘  of  corroborative  evidence.  The  incident  of  the  exposure  of  the  child  in  an  open 
‘  boat  is  a  very  common  one  in  early  English  romances,  and  as  Shakespeare  has 
‘  made  other  variations  from  [Dorastus  and  Fawnia]  in  The  Winter's  Tale,  it  is  an 
‘  unnecessary  assumption  to  presume  that  the  alteration  was  effected  with  reference 
‘ t0  any  other  play.  With  equal  probability,  it  might  be  conjectured  that  Shakespeare 
having  omitted  the  incident  in  the  construction  of  The  Winter' s  Tale ,  introduced  it 
‘  'n  The  Tempest  as  one  especially  suited  to  a  romantic  drama  of  that  description.’ 


Thus  far  we  have  been  dealing,  as  exclusively  as  is  possible,  with  evidence  drawn 
from  internal  allusions  or  inferences.  We  now  turn  to  the  second  division  of  internal 
evidence, — namely,  that  derived  from  rhythm ,  now  called  ‘  The  Metrical  Tests.’  I 
believe  the  credit  of  first  calling  attention  to  certain  peculiarities  of  rhythm  and  of 
verse,  as  characteristics  of  a  certain  play,  belongs  to  Roderick,  who,  however,  did 
not  cite  this  peculiarity  as  a  means  of  determining  the  Date  of  Composition,  but 
merely  noted  the  fact  as  strange.  It  is  quite  possible  that  Capell  has  somewhere  in 
his  ‘  Notes  ’  alluded  to  the  bearing  of  style  on  the  question  of  date,  but  flesh  recoils 
from  delving  in  that  ‘  rudis  indigestaque  moles,’  merely  to  award  historical  priority 
to  any  one. 

In  his  Remarks  on  Henry  the  Eighth  Mr  Roderick  (Edwards,  Canons  of  Crit¬ 
icism,  1765)  p.  263,  Seventh  Ed.)  calls  attention  to  the  ‘number  of  verses  in  that 
‘  play,  many  more  than  in  any  other,  which  end  with  a  redundant  syllable  ;’  also  to  the 
‘  great  number  of  verses  which  have  the  pause  on  the  seventh  syllable  and,  lastly,  to. 
the  fact  that  the  ‘  emphasis,  arising  from  the  sense  of  the  verse,  very  often  clashes  with 
‘  the  cadence  that  would  naturally  result  from  the  metre,  i.  e.  syllables  that  have  an 
emphasis  in  the  sentence  upon  the  account  of  the  sense  or  meaning  of  it,  are  put  in 
‘  the  uneven  places  of  the  verse ;  and  are  in  the  scansion  made  the  first  syllable  of  the 
'  b°ot>  an(i  consequently  short.’  Roderick,  however,  pursued  the  subject  no  further. 

Malone  was  the  earliest  to  call  attention  to  the  metre  as  an  element  in  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  the  Date  of  Composition.  In  the  Variorum  of  iyy8  (i,  280)  he  con¬ 
jectured  that  Love's  Labour  Lost  was  Shakespeare’s  earliest  play  from  the  frequent 
rhymes  therein,  and  in  a  foot-note  he  further  explains  his  theory,  which  is  that  it  is 
not  ‘  merely  the  use  of  rhymes,  mingled  with  blank  verse,  but  their  frequency ,  that  is 
‘  here  urged,  as  a  circumstance  which  seems  to  characterise  and  distinguish  our  poet’s 
‘  earliest  performances.  In  the  whole  number  of  pieces  which  were  written  ante- 
’  cedent  to  the  year  1600,  and  which,  for  the  sake  of  perspicuity,  have  been  called  his- 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


317 


*  early  compositions,  more  rhyming  couplets  are  found  than  in  all  the  plays  composed 
‘subsequently  to  that  year;  which  have  been  named  his  late  productions.  Whether, 
‘  in  process  of  time,  Shakespeare  grew  weary  of  the  bondage  of  rhyme,  or  whether 
‘  he  became  convinced  of  its  impropriety  in  a  dramatic  dialogue,  his  neglect  of  rhym- 
‘  ing  (for  he  never  wholly  disused  it)  seems  to  have  been  gradual.' 

In  Remarks  on  the  Differetices  in  Shakespeare' s  Versification  in  different  Periods 
of  his  Life,  1857,  the  author,  Charles  Bathurst,  attempted  to  divide  the  plays 
into  four  periods,  following  each  other  chronologically,  indicated  by  the  use  of  the 
‘  unbroken  ’  and  of  the  ‘  interrupted  ’  verse.  By  ‘  unbroken  ’  Bathurst  means  a  verse 
where  the  sense  is  not  broken  by  the  ending  of  the  line ;  by  ‘  interrupted,’  where  the 
sense  is  broken  to  such  an  extent  that  ‘  you  cannot  dwell  on  the  end,’  that  is,  where 
the  verses  end  with  what  are  called  ‘  weak  endings,’  such  as  monosyllables,  and,  if, 
as,  etc.  His  four  periods  he  thus,  not  very  clearly,  defines  (indeed,  his  little  volume, 
valuable  as  it  is,  lacks  clearness  of  outline,  which  is,  perhaps,  no  more  than  to  be  ex¬ 
pected  in  one  who  enters  a  path  where  all  is  misty  and  vague)  :  ‘The  first  is  not  so 
‘  much  distinguished  from  the  second  in  the  nature  of  the  verse,  as  in  the  general  in- 
‘  completeness  of  the  style,  or,  at  least,  however  beautiful  many  passages  may  be,  the 
‘  absence  of  that  entire  boldness  and  freedom,  which  so  singularly,  according  to  com- 
‘  mon  ideas,  goes  with  quite  unbroken  passages,  not  unfrequently,  in  what  I  have 
‘  marked  as  his  second  style.  To  this  last  King  John,  for  instance,  and  Romeo  and 
‘  Juliet  belong.  In  what  I  call  the  third  style,  his  peculiar  manner  of  unbroken 
‘  verse  is  altered,  but  without  as  yet  falling  into  the  opposite  peculiarity  of  his  later 
‘  plays,  which  will  form  his  fourth  style.  Measure  for  Measure  will  serve  for  a 
‘  specimen  of  the  third ;  Anthony  and  Cleopatra,  and  The  Winter' s  Tale  remarkably, 
‘  of  the  fourth  style.’  Having  thus  laid  down  his  Periods,  Bathurst  analyses  each 
play  in  turn  and  remarks  as  follows  on  The  Winter's  Tale,  after  accepting  Collier’s 
decisive  proof  that  it  was  brought  out  in  1610  or  1611:  ‘It  is  very  overloaded  in 
‘  thought,  and  strained  language ;  and  very  obscure.  Parenthetical.  The  metre  in 
‘  the  fourth  style,  to  an  excessive  degree.  Double  endings.  The  breaks  between 
‘  the  speeches  regular  and  stiff;  especially  in  the  (extraneous)  scene,  between  Cleom- 
‘  enes  and  Dion.  It  is  a  play  of  immense  force ;  and  in  some  parts,  according  to 
‘  the  subject,  of  most  delightful  tenderness,  and  pleasant,  natural,  simplicity  of  feel- 
‘  ing ;  though  not  quite  of  ideas  and  language.  But  the  verse  is  the  same  in  all. 

*  This  enables  us  to  see,  how  two  plays,  unlike  in  matter  and  turn  of  feeling,  might 
‘  be  of  the  same  date.  As  Coriolanus  and  The  Tempest ;  Othello  and  Twelfth  Night. 
‘  The  versification,  then,  is  a  still  better  internal  guide  than  any  other,  to  the  chro- 
‘  nology.  The  rhyming  Chorus  is  remarkable ;  still  in  the  same  verse.  It  ranks 
‘  very  much  with  Cymbeline,  but  has  much  more  of  the  strong,  not  to  say  harsh,  in 
‘  the  serious  parts.  It  has  more  good  comedy  than  any  other  play,  I  think,  of  this 
‘  class.’ 

In  the  Transactions  of  The  New  Shakspere  Society  (1874,  vol.  i,  p.  442)  there  is 
an  excellent  account  of  ‘the  History  of  the  Verse-Tests  in  General,’  by  Dr  J.  K. 
Ingram,  and  a  tabulated  result  of  Dr  Ingram’s  own  application  to  all  the  Plays  of 
the  test  involved  in  the  number  of  Light  Endings,  such  as  am,  are,  art,  ere,  is,  like , 
may,  etc.,  and  of  Weak  Endings,  such  as  and,  as,  at,  by,  in,  of,  than,  etc.  His  valu¬ 
able  Table  gives  an  ascending  series  from  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  wherein  there  are  but 
three  Light  Endings,  up  to  The  Winter's  Tale,  wherein  out  of  1825  lines  of  verse  in 
the  play,  57  have  a  Light  Ending  and  43  a  Weak  Ending,  or  a  percentage  of  both 
together,  of  5.48.  This,  with  the  exception  of  portions  of  Henry  VIII.,  is  the 


318 


APPENDIX 


highest  percentage  reached  by  any  play,  and  would  indicate  a  date  of  composition  of 
the  very  latest. 

Thus  much  of  internal  evidence.  We  now  turn  to  an  item  of  external  evidence, 
which,  inconclusive  as  it  may  be  of  the  very  earliest  date,  is  incontrovertible  as  to  one 
limit,  at  least,  before  which  the  play  must  have  been  written.  From  this  time  on¬ 
ward  an  unparalleled  harmony  reigns  over  editors.  The  discussion  is  practically 
closed.  Hereafter,  with  one  exception,  there  is  a  divergence  of  views  as  to  date 
of  no  greater  amount  than  from  Spring  to  Autumn,  from  Summer  to  Winter. 

In  1836,  Collier  printed  a  small  book,  entitled:  New  Particulars  regarding  the 
Works  of  Shakespeare.  These  ‘  new  particulars  ’  were  obtained  from  a  MS  (No.  208, 
in  the  Ashmolean  Museum  at  Oxford)  bearing  the  following  title :  ‘  The  Booke  of 
‘  Plaies  and  Notes  thereof,  p  Formans,  for  common  Pollicie,’  and  written  by  Dr 
Simon  Forman,  a  notorious  Astrologer  and  Physician ;  possibly  he  was  what  would 
be  now  called  a  ‘  Spiritual  Medium  ’ ;  several  stories  are  told  of  his  ‘  clairvoyance  ’ ; 
he  prophesied,  for  instance,  the  day  of  his  own  death  and  had  the  grace  to  fulfil  the 
prophecy;  he  was  implicated  in  that  insoluble  mystery,  the  murder  of  Sir  Thomas 
Overbury,  but  died  before  the  trial  of  Somerset.  The  last  date  in  his  Booke  of  Plaies, 
Collier  says,  is  the  15th  of  May,  1611,  shortly  before  his  death.  ‘The  words  “for 
‘  common  Pollicie  ”  mean  that  he  made  these  remarks  upon  plays  he  saw  represented, 

‘  because  they  afforded  a  useful  lesson  of  prudence  or  “  policy  ”  for  the  “  common  ” 

‘  affairs  of  life.’  The  extract  from  Forman’s  diary  relating  to  the  present  play,  which 
is  here  given,  is  taken  from  the  Facsimile  by  Plalliwell  ( Introd .  p.  41).  I  have  merely 
transliterated  the  badly  written  court-hand.  Neither  Halliwell  nor  The  New  Shak- 
spere  Society  {Trans.  1875-6,  p.  416)  gives  what  may  be  termed  an  absolutely  faith¬ 
ful  transliteration  of  this  Facsimile.  The  g  which  follows  ‘  Maye  ’  in  the  superscrip¬ 
tion  is  interpreted  Wednesday  by  the  former  without  comment,  and  the  latter  gives  it 
not  at  all.  Moreover,  both  are  liberal  in  punctuation,  where  there  is  none  in  the 
original.  In  the  Facsimile  the  date  looks  very  much  more  like  1612  than  1611. 
But  Collier  says  that  the  Register  of  Forman’s  death  states  that  he  died  in  Septem¬ 
ber,  1 61 1. 

‘  In  the  Winters  Talle  at  the  glob 
1611  the  15  of  Maye  g 

‘  Obserue  ther  howe  Lyontes  the  Kinge  of  Cicillia  was  overcom  w  Ielosy  of  his 
wife  with  the  Kinge  of  Bohemia  his  frind  that  came  to  se  him.  and  howe  he  con- 
triued  his  death  and  wold  haue  had  his  cup  berer  to  haue  poisoned,  who  gaue  the 
King  of  bohemia  warning  therof  &  fled  with  him  to  bohemia  /  Remeber  also  howe 
he  sent  to  the  Orakell  of  appollo  &  the  Aunswer  of  apollo.  that  she  was  giltles.  and 
that  the  king  was  Ielouse  &c  and  howe  Except  the  child  was  found  Agane  that  was 
loste  the  Kinge  should  die  with  out  yssue.  for  the  child  was  caried  into  bohemia  & 
ther  laid  in  a  forrest  &  brought  vp  by  a  sheppard  And  the  kinge  of  bohemia  his 
sonn  maried  that  wentch  &  howe  they  fled  into  Cicillia  to  Leontes  and  the  sheppard 
hauing  showed  the  letter  of  the  nobleman  by  whom  Leontes  sent  a  [rfc]  was  that 
child  and  the  Iewells  found  about  her.  she  was  knowen  to  be  Leontes  daughter  and 
was  then  16  yers  old 

‘  Remember  also  the  Rog  that  cam  in  all  tottered  like  coll  pixci  /  *  and  howe  he 
feyned  him  sicke  &  to  haue  bin  Robbed  of  all  that  he  had  and  howe  he  cosoned  the 

*  Staunton  thinks  that  this  was  ‘  some  noted  vagabond,  whose  nickname  has  not 
come  down  to  us  correctly.  ’  Halliwell  gives  it  ‘  roll  pixci  ’  and  Collier  *  Coll  Pipci.’ 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 


3X9 


por  man  of  all  his  money,  and  after  cam  to  the  shep  sher  *  with  a  pedlers  packe  & 
there  cosoned  them  Again  of  all  their  money  And  howe  he  changed  apparrell  wt 
the  Kinge  of  bomia  his  sonn.  and  then  howe  he  turned  Courtiar  &c  /  beware  of  trust- 
inge  feined  beggars  or  fawninge  fellouse.’ 

The  task  is  practically  finished.  There  is  but  one  voice,  Hunter’s,  which  will  not 
join  in  assent.  All  but  he  agree  in  the  belief  that  The  Winter's  Tale  is  one  of 
Shakespeare’s  latest  plays  and  that  Forman  gives  us  the  earliest,  positive,  downward 
limit.  But  before  turning  to  Hunter,  it  is  necessary  to  refer  to  a  contribution  to  the 
discussion  which  bore  its  influence  for  over  forty  years,  until  in  1 868  it  was  pronounced 
in  whole  or  in  part,  a  forgery. 

In  1842,  Peter  Cunningham  edited,  for  The  Shakespeare  Society,  Extracts  from 
the  Accounts  of  the  Revels  at  Court  during  the  reigns  of  Elizabeth  and  James. 
Selections  from  these  ‘Accounts,’  made  by  Malone,  were  published  in  the  Vari¬ 
orum  of  1821  (iii,  360-409),  and  at  the  close  of  the  list,  which  was  restricted  to  the 
titles  of  plays  only,  and  did  not  include  the  sundry  expenses,  and  furthermore  ended 
with  the  year  1588,  Malone  remarks :  ‘  There  is  no  subsequent  Revels  Account  in 
‘  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth  now  extant.’  Cunningham  reprinted  the  entire  Ac¬ 
counts,  and,  moreover,  alleged  that  he  had  discovered  two  additional  books,  Book 
XII.  and  Book  XIII.  covering  the  years  1604  and  1611-12  respectively.  In  Book 
XII.  there  are  the  records  of  no  less  than  eight  performances  of  Shakespeare’s  plays, 
and  in  Book  XIII.  there  are  two,  whereof  one  states  that  there  was  acted  by  ‘  The 
‘  King’s  players’  ’  on  ‘  The  5th  of  Nouember  [1611]  :  A  play  called  ye  winters  nighte 
‘  Tayle.’  The  original  MS  from  which  Cunningham  printed  his  Book  XII.  has  been 
pronounced  a  forgery. f  But  in  regard  to  that  from  which  Book  XIII.  was  printed, 
opinions  seem  to  vary;  Halliwell-Phillipps,  in  his  Outlines  (p.  194, ’5th  ed.), 
accepts  as  genuine  the  item  in  regard  to  the  performance  of  The  Winter’s  Tale,  just 
quoted,  while  Dycf.  and  Fleay  reject  the  whole  list  as  spurious,  the  latter  [Hist,  of 
the  Stage,  p.  1 74)  maintains,  by  dates  and  companies  of  Players,  that  the  record  of 
the  performances  is  utterly  false.  Luckily  a  performance  of  The  Winter's  Tale  in 
November,  1611,  has  no  bearing,  in  the  present  instance,  on  the  date  of  composition, 
inasmuch  as  Dr  Forman  witnessed  a  performance  of  it  six  months  previously. 

So  much  for  this  unsavory  subject.  We  now  turn  to  Hunter,  whose  remarks  are 
always  entitled  to  respect. 

Joseph  Hunter  [New  Illust.  i,  413)  is  ‘very  much  inclined’  to  give  an  early 
date  to  the  present  play.  ‘  Nothing  can  be  clearer,’  he  says,  ‘  than  that  the  mere  fact 
‘  that  Forman  witnessed  the  performance  in  1611  is  no  proof  whatever  that  the  play 
‘  had  not  been  written  and  performed  many  years  before.  He  saw  also  about  the 
‘  same  time  Macbeth,  King  Richard  the  Second,  and  Cymbeline  ;  and  yet  no  person 
‘  will,  I  conceive,  be  disposed  to  contend  that  these  plays  were  written  and  first  per- 
‘  formed  in  1610  or  1611.  .  .  .  We  do  not  know  from  anything  else  that  Forman  has 
*  written  that  he  was  one  of  those  who  never  visit  the  theatre  except  on  first  nights ; 
‘  but  we  do  know  that  plays  which  were  not  new  were  performed  at  Court  .  .  .  there- 
‘  fore,  that  A  Winter's  Tale  was  performed  at  Court  on  November  5,  1611  [This  was 
‘  written  before  Cunningham’s  forgery  had  been  detected]  is  no  proof  whatever  that 


*  Sheep-shearing. 

f  For  a  full  account  of  these  forged  Revels  Books  and  the  attendant  mystery,  see 
Othello,  pp.  351-355,  and  The  Tempest,  pp.  280,  295,  of  the  present  edition. 


320 


APPENDIX 


‘  it  was  then  a  new  play,  nor  does  it  raise  the  slightest  probability  in  that  direction. 

.  The  internal  evidence  for  date  is,  indeed,  exceedingly  slight;  of  which  no 
‘  better  proof  can  be  given  than  the  great  discordancy  of  the  commentators  on  this 
‘  point.’  The  reason  for  a  late  date  (drawn  from  Sir  Henry  Herbert’s  Register)  by 
Malone,  viz. :  that  Sir  George  Buck  was  Master  of  the  Revels  from  October,  1610, 
until  May,  1622;  and  that  Sir  George  Buck  must,  therefore,  have  licensed  The  Win¬ 
ter’s  Tale  between  October,  16x0,  when  he  was  appointed  to  office,  and  May,  1611, 
when  Forman  saw  it,  ‘  appears  decisive,’  says  Hunter,  ‘  but  it  only  appears  so,’  for 
from  the  Stationers’  Registers  we  have  proof  that  Sir  George  Buck  began  to  license 
long  before  October,  1610 ;  thus  he  licensed  The  Fleire  on  or  before  May  6,  1606; 
in  June,  1607,  Chapman’s  Pussy  Dambotse ,  etc.  ‘The  argument  for  the  late  date  of 
‘  The  Winter’s  T Ae  drawn  from  the  date  of  Sir  George  Buck’s  appointment  to  office 
‘  is>  I  submit,  untenable.  [See  Halliwell’s  remarks  on  this  subject,  given  above.] 

‘  On  the  whole  I  should  incline  very  much  to  Chalmers’s  opinion,  slight  as  the 
‘  indications  are,  and  place  this  play  in  near  succession  to  Twelfth  Night ,  and  not 
later  than  1601  or  1602.  If  its  having  been  licensed  by  Sir  George  Buck  compel 
‘  us  to  look  for  a  later  date,  I  should  place  it  about  the  time  of  the  Gunpowder  Plot, 

‘  l6°6  (a  year  in  which  we  know  that  Sir  George  Buck  did  license  plays),  the  passage 
‘  about  striking  anointed  kings  admitting  so  easily  of  being  construed  into  an  intended 
‘  allusion  to  that  dreadful  conspiracy.’ 

By  way  of  recapitulation,  the  various  items  of  internal  evidence  are  as  follows : 

Walpole  :  veiled  compliment  to  Queen  Elizabeth. 

Capell  :  Song  :  ‘  Get  you  hence,  for  I  must  go.’ 

Blackstone:  ‘If  I  could  find  example 

Of  thousands,  that  had  struck  anointed  kings,’  etc. 

Malone:  ‘but  one  Puritan  amongst  them,’  etc. 

Chalmers  :  ‘  Thou  might’st  bespice  a  cup,’  etc.  Leontes  heirless. 

Collier  :  Different  treatment  in  The  Tempest  in  reference  to  the  Exposure  to  the 
Sea. 

Among  the  items  of  internal  evidence  are  to  be  included  the  general  belief  that 
the  condensed,  parenthetical,  involved  style  of  the  play  points  to  late  composition, 
and  the  Metrical  Tests. 

The  external  evidence  is  as  follows  : 

Ben  Jonson’s  ridicule  in  his  Bartholomew  Fair. 

Sir  Henry  Herbert’s  Office-book. 

Dr  Simon  Forman’s  Note-book. 


To  recapitulate,  chronologically 
Capell  (1 7Q7 )  . 

Walpole  (1768)  . 

Malone  (1778)  . 

“  (1790)  . 

<<  « 

Chalmers  (1799)  . 

Drake  (1817)  . 

Malone  (1821)  . 

Campbell  (1838)  . 

Knight  (1840)  . 


between  Hen.  VIII.  and  The  Tempest, 

before 


written  at  close  of  1610,  performed 
.  end  of  1610,  or  beginning  of 


1613 

1603 

1594 

1604 
1613 
1601 
1611 
161 1 
1611 
1611 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


321 


Collier  i,  ii 

(1842-58) 

.  autumn  and  winter  of  1610-1611 

Hunter 

(1845)  • 

.  not  later  than  1601  or  1602 

Gervinus 

(1849)  . 

. 1 61 1 

Singer  ed.  ii 

(1856)  . 

. i6ii 

R.  G.  White 

vo 

00 

. 1611 

Halliwell 

(1859)  . 

.  .  .  winter  of  1610-1611 

Staunton 

(1864)  . 

.  autumn  and  winter  of  1610-1611 

Dyce 

(1866)  . 

.  cannot  be 

assigned 

to  a  much  earlier  period  than  1611 

Keightley 

(1867)  . 

.  .  .  not  earlier  than  1610 

Ward 

(1875)  • 

. 1610 

Furnivall 

(1877)  • 

. 1611 

Stokes 

(1878)  . 

. 1610,  1611 

Rolfe 

(1880)  . 

. 1611 

Hudson 

(1880)  . 

. 1611 

Fleay 

(1886)  . 

.  .  .  .  early  in  1610 

Deighton 

(1889)  . 

. 1611 

SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 

At  this  late  day  it  is  quite  impossible  to  decide  to  whom  the  credit  is  to  be  given 
of  having  first  detected  the  source  whence  Shakespeare  derived  the  plot  of  The  Win¬ 
ter' s  Tale.  Gildon,  in  his  Remarks  on  the  Plays  of  Shakespeare  (p.  336),  observes 
that  this  ‘  Tale  is  taken  from  an  old  story  book  of  Dorastus  and  Fawnia.'  Rowe,  in 
his  Account  of  the  Life  of  Shakespeare  (p.  xxvii),  says:  ‘‘The  Winter’s  Tale  ...  is 
‘  taken  from  an  old  Book,  called  The  Delectable  History  of  Dorastus  and  Fawnia.' 
Both  of  these  remarks  were  printed  in  the  same  year,  1 709 ;  the  question  of  priority, 
therefore,  if  it  be  of  the  slightest  interest,  must  be  left  undecided. 

Collier  :  ‘  As  early  as  the  year  1588,  Robert  Greene  printed  a  tract  called  Pan- 
‘  dosto  :  The  Triumph  of  Time,  better  known  as  The  History  of  Dorastus  and  Faw- 
‘  nia,  the  title  it  bore  in  some  of  the  later  copies.  As  far  as  we  now  know,  it  was 
‘not  reprinted  until  1607,  and  a  third  impression  appeared  in  1609;  it  afterwards 
‘  went  through  many  editions ;  but  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  Shakespeare  was  di- 
‘  rected  to  it,  as  a  proper  subject  for  dramatic  representation,  by  the  third  impression, 
‘  which  came  out  the  year  before  we  suppose  him  to  have  commenced  writing  his 
‘  Winter’s  Tale.  How  long  [the  Novel]  continued  popular  may  be  judged  from  the 
‘  fact  that  it  was  printed  as  a  chap-book  as  recently  as  the  year  1735,  when  it  was 
‘  called  The  Fortunate  Lovers  ;  or  the  History  of  Dorastus,  Prince  of  Sicily,  and  of 
‘  Fawnia,  only  daughter  and  heir  to  the  King  of  Bohemia.' 

Dyce  (Greene’s  Works,  ed.  1831,  p.  liii) :  ‘  To  those  who  may  read  the  Novel  for 
‘  the  first  time,  having  a  previous  acquaintance  with  the  play  of  Shakespeare, — and 
‘  to  what  reader  is  it  altogether  unknown  ? — the  former  will  appear  cold  and  uninter- 
‘  esting  on  a  recollection  of  the  marvellous  truth  and  reality  of  the  latter.  But  Pan- 
‘  dosto  is  far  from  a  contemptible  production ;  if  portions  of  it  are  disfigured  by  bad 
‘  taste  and  coarseness  of  feeling,  there  are  also  portions  composed  in  a  very  pleasing 
‘  and  affecting  manner.  The  story,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe,  was  the  inven- 
‘  tion  of  Greene.’  [See  Caro,  infra. — Ed.] 

Inasmuch  as  the  Novel  of  Dorastus  and  Fawnia  is  reprinted  on  the  following 


21 


322 


APPENDIX 


pages,  a  comparison  of  it  with  The  Winter’s  Tale  is  needless.  Words  or  phrases 
in  it  which  seem  to  have  remained  in  Shakespeare’s  memory  are  frequently  re¬ 
ferred  to  in  the  foregoing  Commentary;  more  copious  references  are  placed  in  the 
margin  of  the  Reprint,  whereby  the  student  can  see  for  himself  the  extent  to  which 
Shakespeare  was  indebted  to  Greene, — an  interesting  and  not  unprofitable  exam¬ 
ination.  Delius,  in  many  words  which  somewhat  darken  counsel,  has  made  a 
comparison  of  the  Novel  and  the  drama ;  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  Shakespeare  Jahr- 
buch ,  xv,  22-43. 

It  is  nowhere  denied  that  Greene’s  Novel  is  the  direct  source  of  The  Winter’s 
Tale.  One  indirect  source  has  been  brought  forward,  however,  which,  not  impossibly, 
supplied  the  germ  of  this  story,  hitherto  supposed  to  be  entirely  of  Greene’s  own 
invention.  (See  Dyce,  supra.) 

J.  Caro  ( Englische  Studien,  1878,  Bd.  ii,  hft.  i,  s.  167)  gives  a  tragic  narrative  from 
a  Lithuanian  MS  of  the  16th  century,  of  which  I  here  give  briefly  the  outlines  as 
follows :  Semovit,  the  Elder,  duke  of  Masovia,  some  time  after  the  death  of  his  wife, 
fell  desperately  in  love  with  a  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Mtinsterberg,  the  beautiful 
Ludomila,  and  married  her.  She  was  a  paragon  of  every  virtue,  and  their  happi¬ 
ness  was  unbounded.  In  an  evil  hour,  a  wicked,  lying  woman  slanderously  told 
Ludomila’s  sister  and  her  sister’s  husband  that  Ludomila  had  been  unfaithful,  and 
named,  as  her  guilty  partner,  a  highly  honoured  courtier  and  cup-bearer,  named 
Dobek.  This  story  finally  reached  the  ears  of  Semovit,  who,  in  a  fit  of  desperate 
frenzy,  threw  his  wife  into  prison ;  but  when  he  dispatched  officers  for  Dobek  it  was 
found  that  Dobek  had  gone  on  a  pilgrimage  with  an  aged  priest.  While  in  prison 
Ludomila  gave  birth  to  a  son,  whom  Semovit  commanded  one  of  his  old  retainers  to 
kill  secretly.  Shortly  after  Ludomila  was  suffocated  with  fumes  of  charcoal.  A 
daughter  of  Semovit  by  his  first  wife  having  learned  that  the  infant  had  not  been 
killed  by  the  old  retainer,  but  had  been  entrusted  to  an  old  woman,  succeeded  in 
stealing  the  child,  and  brought  him  up  secretly  in  her  own  castle,  in  Stettin,  in  a 
style  befitting  his  rank.  About  seven  years  after  the  death  of  Ludomila,  word  was 
brought  to  Semovit  that  the  cup-bearer,  Dobek,  had  returned  from  the  Holy  Land  and 
was  living  in  Prussia.  Semovit  succeeded  in  enticing  him  to  Masovia,  and  he  was 
brought  in  chains  into  the  presence  of  the  Duke,  who,  beside  himself  with  rage  at  the 
sight,  struck  the  ill-starred  youth  on  the  head  with  a  mace ;  executioners  hurried  him 
from  the  spot  and  he  was  immediately  torn  asunder  by  horses.  But  this  cruel  deed 
revealed,  not  only  the  innocence  of  Ludomila,  but  also  that  of  the  cup-bearer;  it  was 
discovered  that  Dobek  had  been  a  woman  in  disguise.  Further  investigations  revealed 
that  the  poor  young  girl  was  the  daughter  of  a  divine,  who  had  brought  her  up  as  a 
boy,  and  in  his  old  age  had  taken  her  with  him  to  the  Holy  Land,  where  he  died,  and 
his  daughter  had  returned  to  her  home  only  to  meet  with  a  horrible  and  unmerited 
death. 

The  shock  of  this  discovery  proved  almost  fatal  to  Semovit’s  health  and  his 
reason.  To  add,  if  possible,  to  his  bitter  repentance,  a  monk  disclosed  to  him  that 
the  wicked  author  of  the  original  slander  had,  on  the  news  of  the  death  of  Ludomila 
fallen  into  a  lethargy  from  which  she  had  just  awakened  (as  Caro  remarks,  the  syn¬ 
cope  must  have  lasted  seven  years),  and  on  her  death-bed  had  begged  the  monk  to 
make  known  to  Semovit  the  baseless  falsehood  she  had  knowingly  uttered.  Semovit 
erected  a  magnificent  tomb  to  his  wife  and  enriched  all  churches.  To  calm  his  grief 
he  paid  a  visit  to  his  daughter  in  Stettin.  At  the  entrance  to  his  daughter’s  palace,  he 
was  met  by  a  boy  of  dazzling  beauty,  who  bade  him  welcome  in  a  charming  speech. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


32  3 


Before  he  could  recover  from  his  astonishment,  his  daughter  took  the  young  Henry 
by  the  hand,  and  falling  at  her  father’s  feet  disclosed  the  whole  story  of  Henry’s  birth 
and  abduction.  The  duke,  deeply  moved,  recognised  his  own  features  in  those  of  the 
boy,  and  from  that  moment  Henry  became  his  favorite  child.  To  show  to  Heaven 
his  deep  repentance  for  his  unparalleled  cruelty  to  Ludomila  and  to  Dobek,  he  destined 
Henry  for  the  church. 

Caro  is  moderate  in  his  claims  for  this  story  as  the  prototype  of  The  Winter's  Tale. 
He  finds  in  the  Delphic  oracle  a  reminiscence  of  the  priestly  revelation  of  Ludomila’s 
chastity ;  that  both  Dobek  and  Camillo  were  cup-bearers  he  considers  noteworthy, 
and  that  the  tearing  to  pieces  of  Antigonus  by  the  bear  reminds  us  of  the  tearing  of 
Dobek  to  pieces  by  the  horses,  and,  finally,  that  the  zeal  and  actions  of  Semovit’s 
daughter  irresistibly  recall  Paulina.  However  weak  we  may  find  these  parallels,  in 
his  general  conclusions  we  can  all  agree  with  the  learned  historian.  It  is  by  no 
means  his  intention  to  deny  that  Greene’s  story  is  the  source  whence  Shakespeare 
borrowed  his  materials ;  he  wishes  merely  to  suggest  that  the  tragic  and  romantic 
story  of  Semovit  might  have  found  its  way  to  England  and  been  told  by  some  of  the 
followers  of  Anne  of  Bohemia,  Richard  the  Second’s  Queen,  to  whom  it  must  have 
been  familiar,  or  it  might  have  been  learned  in  the  intercourse  with  Russia  and  North¬ 
ern  Prussia,  which  sprang  up  in  Richard’s  reign,  and  might  thus  eventually  form  the 
germ  of  Greene’s  Novel. 

It  has  been  asserted  (most  stoutly,  I  think,  by  J.  L.  Klein)  that  there  is  ant 
affinity  between  The  Winter’s  Tale  and  Lope’s  El  Marmot  de  Felisardo.  Kleins 
( Geschichte  des  Dr.,  x,  494)  affirms  that  there  is  a  remarkable  similarity  between  the 
two  dramas. 

Let  the  reader  judge  :  Felisardo,  who  passes  as  the  son  of  noble  parents,  and  is  at 
student,  wins  the  love  of  Elisa,  the  daughter  of  an  Alcalde,  and,  at  last,  the  consent 
of  her  father  to  their  marriage.  It  turns  out,  however,  that  Felisardo  is  a  natural  son 
of  the  king,  who,  by  the  death  of  his  lawful  heir,  is  obliged  either  to  recall  Felisardoi 
or  to  die  heirless.  Accordingly  the  King  sends  an  Admiral  to  bring  the  young  man 
to  Court.  It  now  appears  that  Elisa  has  a  twin  brother,  Celio ;  and  the  resemblance 
of  these  twins  to  each  other  is  so  exact  that  when  the  Alcalde  wished  to  fit  out  Celio 
as  a  page  to  the  Court,  he  takes  Elisa  by  mistake,  and  dispatches  her,  dressed  in  boy’s 
clothes,  as  a  page  to  Felisardo.  A  marriage  is  arranged  between  Felisardo  and  the 
daughter  of  the  Admiral,  but  the  young  prince  will  not  listen  to  it,  and,  on  the  advice 
of  his  merry  servant,  Tristan,  feigns  himself  in  love  with  a  marble  statue  in  the  gar¬ 
den,  and  to  such  an  extreme  did  he  carry  this  feigned  fascination  that  at  last,  to  save 
him  from  drooping  into  his  tomb,  the  King  consented  that  he  should  wed  the  statue- 
Of  course,  Elisa  was  dressed  up  as  the  statue ;  whereupon  the  King  was  obliged  to 
keep  his  word  and  sanction  the  marriage. 

After  listening  to  this,  we  may  assuredly  say,  in  Johnsonian  phrase,  ‘  let  us  hear 
‘  no  more  ’  of  El  Marmol  de  Felisardo  as  a  source  of  The  Winter's  Tale. 

W.  CAREW  Hazlitt,  in  his  Reprint  of  Collier’s  Shakespeare' s  Library,  observes 
that  ‘  there  is  little  doubt  that,  in  writing  the  Winter’s  Tale,  the  author  had  also  an 
1  eye  to  Gascoigne’s  paraphrase  of  the  Phoenissce  of  Euripides,  presented  at  Gray’s 
•  Inn  in  1566,  and  printed  in  the  works  of  that  interesting  old  Maker,  1573,  1575, 

‘  1587,  and  as  edited  in  1869-70.  As  regards  the  character  of  Autolycus,  it  is  a 
‘  matter  for  speculation  whether  Shakespeare  had  not  in  his  recollection  that  extra- 
‘  ordinarily  curious  production  by  Thomas  Newbery,  The  Book  of  Dives  Pragmaticus, 

‘  1563,  repeated  in  Mr  Huth’s  Fugitive  Tracts,  1875.’ 


324 


APPENDIX 


The  ‘  copy  ’  used  for  the  following  Reprint  of  Greene’s  Novel  is  W.  Carew 
Hazditt’s  Reprint  of  Collier’s  Shakespeare  Library.  The  original  is  dated  1588; 
‘  the  only  known  copy  of  this  edition,’  says  Collier,  ‘  is  in  the  British  Museum ;  but  it 
‘  is  defective  in  one  place,  and  we  have  necessarily  been  compelled  to  complete  our 
‘  impression  from  a  later  copy.  Whether  the  story  were  the  invention  of  Greene,  or 
‘  whether,  as  was  not  unusual  with  him,  he  adopted  it  from  a  foreign  language,  can- 
*  not  be  now  ascertained  ;  but  it  is  not  known  abroad  in  any  other  form  than  that  in 
‘  which  it  has  been  received  from  this  country.’  ‘  Robert  Greene,’  says  Collier  else¬ 
where,  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Reprint,  1  was  a  man  who  possessed  all  the  advan- 
‘  tages  of  education ;  he  was  a  graduate  of  both  Universities,  he  was  skilled  in  ancient 
‘  learning  and  in  modern  languages,  he  had,  besides,  a  prolific  imagination,  a  lively 
‘  and  elegant  fancy,  and  a  grace  of  expression  rarely  exceeded ;  yet  let  any  person 
‘  well  acquainted  with  The  Winter's  Tale  read  the  novel  of  Pandosto,  upon  which  it 
‘  was  founded,  and  he  will  be  struck  at  once  with  the  vast  pre-eminence  of  Shake- 
‘  speare,  and  with  the  admirable  manner  in  which  he  has  converted  materials  supplied 
‘  by  another  to  his  own  use.’ 

To  save  space  the  Address  ‘  to  the  Gentlemen  Readers,’  and  The  Epistle  Dedi- 
catorie  have  been  omitted.  The  Title  reads  as  follows : — 

PANDOSTO.  |  TITHE  TRIUMPH  |  OF  TIME.  !  WHEREIN  IS  DISCOVERED  [ 
by  a  pleafant  Hiltorie,  that  although  by  the  meanes  |  of  sinifler  fortune,  Truth  may 
be  concea  |  led  yet  by  Time  in  fpight  of  fortune  it  |  is  mojl  manifeflly  reuealed.  \ 
Pleafant  for  age  to  auoyde  drowfie  thoughtes,  |  profitable  for  youth  to  eschue  other 
wanton  |  pastimes,  and  bringing  to  both  a  de  \  fired  content.  |  Temporis  filia  veritas.  | 
If  By  Robert  Greene,  Maister  of  Artes  |  in  Cambridge.  |  Omne  tulit  punctual  qui 
miscuit  vtile  dulci.  |  Imprinted  at  London  by  Thomas  Orwin  for  Thomas  |  Cadman, 
dwelling  at  the  Signe  of  the  Bible,  \  neere  vnto  the  North  doore  of  Paules,  |  1588. 


The  Historie  of  Dorastus  and  Fawnia. 

- 0 - 

AMONG  al  the  passions  wherewith  humane  mindes  are  perplexed,  there  is  none 
that  so  galleth  with  restlesse  despight,  as  the  infectious  soare  of  Iealousie  :  for 
all  other  griefes  are  eyther  to  bee  appeased  with  sensible  perswasions,  to  be  cured  with 
wholesome  counsel,  to  be  relieved  in  want,  or  by  tract  of  time  to  be  wTome  out,  (Ieal¬ 
ousie  only  excepted)  which  is  so  sawsed  with  suspitious  doubtes,  and  pinching  mis¬ 
trust,  that  whoso  seekes  by  friendly  counsaile  to  rase  out  this  hellish  passion,  it  foorth- 
with  suspecteth  that  he  geveth  this  advise  to  cover  his  owne  guiltinesse.  Yea,  who  so 
is  payned  with  this  restlesse  torment  doubteth  all,  dystrusteth  him-selfe,  is  alwayes 
frosen  with  feare,  and  fired  with  suspition,  having  that  wherein  consisteth  all  his  joy 
to  be  the  breeder  of  his  miserie.  Yea,  it  is  such  a  heavy  enemy  to  that  holy  estate 
of  matrimony,  sowing  betweene  the  married  couples  such  deadly  seeds  of  secret 
hatred,  as  Love  being  once  rased  out  by  spightful  distrust,  there  oft  ensueth  bloudy 
revenge,  as  this  ensuing  Hystorie  manifestly  prooveth :  wherein  Pandosto  (furiously 
incensed  by  causelesse  Iealousie)  procured  the  death  of  his  most  loving  and  loyall 
wife,  and  his  owne  endlesse  sorrow  and  misery. 

In  the  Countrey  of  Bohemia  there  raygned  a  King  called  Pandosto,  whose  for¬ 
tunate  successe  in  warres  against  his  foes,  and  bountifull  curtesie  towardes  his  friendes 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


325 


in  peace,  made  him  to  be  greatly  feared  and  loved  of  all  men.  This  Pandosto  had 
to  Wife  a  Ladie  called  Bellaria,  by  birth  royall,  learned  by  education,  faire  by  nature, 
by  vertues  famous,  so  that  it  was  hard  to  judge  whether  her  beautie,  fortune,  or  vertue, 
wanne  the  greatest  commendations.  These  two  lincked  together  in  perfect  love,  led 
their  lives  with  such  fortunate  content,  that  their  Subjects  greatly  rejoyced  to  see  their 
quiet  disposition.  They  had  not  beene  married  long,  but  Fortune  (willing  to  increase 
their  happines)  lent  them  a  sonne,  so  adorned  with  the  gifts  of  nature,  as  the  perfec¬ 
tion  of  the  Childe  greatly  augmented  the  love  of  the  parentes,  and  the  joys  of  their 
commons ;  in  so  much  that  the  Bohemians,  to  shewe  their  inward  joyes  by  outwarde 
actions,  made  Bone-fires  and  triumphs  throughout  all  the  Kingdome,  appointing  Justes 
and  Turneyes  for  the  honour  of  their  young  Prince :  whether  resorted  not  onely  his 
Nobles,  but  also  divers  Kings  and  Princes  which  were  his  neighbours,  willing  to 
shewe  their  friendship  they  ought  to  Pandosto,  and  to  win  fame  and  glory  by  their 
prowesse  and  valour.  Pandosto,  whose  minde  was  fraught  with  princely  liberality, 
entertayned  the  Kings,  Princes,  and  noble  men  with  such  submisse  curtesie  and  mag- 
nifical  bounty,  that  they  all  sawe  how  willing  he  was  to  gratifie  their  good  wils,  mak¬ 
ing  a  feast  for  Subjects,  which  continued  by  the  space  of  twentie  dayes ;  all  which 
time  the  Justes  and  Turneys  were  kept  to  the  great  content  both  of  the  Lordes  and 
Ladies  there  present.  This  solemne  tryumph  being  once  ended,  the  assembly,  taking 
their  leave  of  Pandosto  and  Bellaria :  the  young  sonne  (who  was  called  Garinter) 
was  nursed  up  in  the  house  to  the  great  joy  and  content  of  the  parents. 

Fortune  envious  of  such  happy  successe,  willing  to  shewe  some  signe  of  her  in- 
constancie,  turned  her  wheele,  and  darkned  their  bright  sunne  of  prosperitie,  with  the 
mistie  cloudes  of  mishap  and  misery.  For  it  so  happened  that  Egistus,  King  of 
Sycilia,  who  in  his  youth  had  bene  brought  up  with  Pandosto,  desirous  to  shewe  that 
neither  tracte  of  time,  nor  distance  of  place  could  diminish  their  former  friendship, 
provided  a  navie  of  ships,  and  sayled  into  Bohemia  to  visite  his  old  friend  and  com¬ 
panion,  who  hearing  of  his  arrivall,  went  himselfe  in  person,  and  his  wife  Bellaria, 
accompanied  with  a  great  traine  of  Lords  and  Ladies,  to  meet  Egistus :  and  espying 
him,  alighted  from  his  horse,  embraced  him  very  lovingly,  protesting  that  nothing  in 
the  world  could  have  happened  more  acceptable  to  him  then  his  comming,  wish¬ 
ing  his  wife  to  welcome  his  olde  friend  and  acquaintance :  who  (to  shewe  how 
she  liked  him  whom  her  husband  loved)  intertayned  him  with  such  familiar  curtesie, 
as  Egistus  perceived  himselfe  to  bee  verie  well  welcome.  After  they  had  thus  saluted 
and  embraced  eche  other,  they  mounted  againe  on  horsebacke  and  rode  towards  the 
the  Citie,  devising  and  recounting,  howe  being  children  they  had  passed 
their  youth  in  friendely  pastimes :  where,  by  the  meanes  of  the  Citizens,  ’  75‘ 

Egistus  was  receyved  with  triumphs  and  showes  in  such  sort,  that  he  marvelled  how 
on  so  small  a  warning  they  coulde  make  such  preparation. 

Passing  the  streetes  thus  with  such  rare  sightes,  they  rode  on  to  the  Pallace,  where 
Pandosto  entertained  Egistus  and  his  Sycilians  with  such  banqueting  and  sumptuous 
cheare,  so  royally,  as  they  all  had  cause  to  commend  his  princely  liberality ;  yea,  the 
verie  basest  slave  that  was  knowne  to  come  from  Sycilia  was  used  with  such  curtesie, 
that  Egistus  might  easily  perceive  how  both  hee  and  his  were  honored  for  his  friendes 
sake.  Bellaria  (who  in  her  time  was  the  flower  of  curtesie),  willing  to  show  how 
unfaynedly  shee  looved  her  husband  by  his  friends  intertainement,  used  him  likewise 
so  familiarly  that  her  countenance  bewraied  how  her  minde  was  affected  towardes 
him  :  oftentimes  comming  her  selfe  into  his  bed  chamber,  to  see  that  nothing  should 
be  amis  to  mislike  him.  This  honest  familiarity  increased  dayly  more  and  more  be- 


APPENDIX 


326 

twixt  them ;  for  Bellaria,  noting  in  Egistus  a  princely  and  bountifull  minde,  adorned 
with  sundrie  and  excellent  qualities,  and  Egistus,  finding  in  her  a  vertuous  and  cur- 
teous  disposition,  there  grew  such  a  secret  uniting  of  their  affections,  that  the  one 
could  not  well  be  without  the  company  of  the  other :  in  so  much  that  when  Pandosto 
was  busied  with  such  urgent  affaires,  that  hee  could  not  bee  present  with  his  friend 
Egistus,  Bellaria  would  walke  with  him  into  the  Garden,  where  they 

’  ’  ’  two  in  privat  and  pleasant  devises  would  passe  away  the  time  to  both 

their  contents.  This  custome  still  continuing  betwixt  them,  a  certaine  melancholy 
passion  entring  the  minde  of  Pandosto  drave  him  into  sundry  and  doubtfull  thoughts. 
First,  he  called  to  minde  the  beauty  of  his  wife  Bellaria,  the  comelines  and  braverie 
of  his  friend  Egistus,  thinking  that  Love  was  above  all  Lawes  and  therefore  to 
be  staied  with  no  Law ;  that  it  was  hard  to  put  fire  and  flaxe  together  without  burn¬ 
ing  ;  that  their  open  pleasures  might  breede  his  secrete  displeasures.  He  considered 
with  himselfe  that  Egistus  was  a  man,  and  must  needes  love :  that  his  wife  was 
a  woman,  and  therefore  subject  unto  love,  and  that  where  fancy  forced,  friendship 
was  of  no  force. 

These  and  such  like  doubtfull  thoughtes  a  long  time  smoothering  in  his  stomacke, 
beganne  at  last  to  kindle  in  his  minde  a  secret  mistrust,  which  increased  by  suspition, 
grewe  at  last  to  be  a  flaming  Iealousie,  that  so  tormented  him  as  he  could  take  no 
rest.  He  then  began  to  measure  all  their  actions,  and  to  misconstrue  of  their  too 
private  familiarite,  judging  that  it  was  not  for  honest  affection,  but  for  disordinate 
fancy,  so  that  hee  began  to  watch  them  more  narrowely  to  see  if  hee  coulde  gette  any 
true  or  certaine  proofe  to  confirme  his  doubtfull  suspition.  While  thus  he  noted  their 
lookes  and  gestures,  and  suspected  their  thoughtes  and  meaninges,  they  two  seely 
soules  who  doubted  nothing  of  this  his  treacherous  intent,  frequented  daily  eache 
others  companie,  which  drave  him  into  such  a  franticke  passion,  that  he  beganne  to 
beare  a  secret  hate  to  Egistus,  and  a  lowring  countenance  to  Bellaria,  who  marveiling 
at  such  unaccustomed  frowns,  began  to  cast  beeyond  the  Moone,  and  to  enter  into  a 
thousand  sundrie  thoughtes,  which  way  she  should  offend  her  husband :  but  finding 
in  her  selfe  a  cleare  conscience,  ceassed  to  muse,  until  such  time  as  she  might  find  fit 
opportunitie  to  demaund  the  cause  of  his  dumps.  In  the  meane  time  Pandostoes 
minde  was  so  farre  charged  with  Iealously,  that  he  did  no  longer  doubt,  but  was 
assured  (as  he  thought)  that  his  Friend  Egistus  had  entered  a  wrong  pointe  in  his 
tables,  and  so  had  played  him  false  play :  wherupon  desirous  to  revenge  so  great  an 
injury,  he  thought  best  to  dissemble  the  grudge  with  a  faire  and  friendly  countenance  : 
and  so  under  the  shape  of  a  friend,  to  shew  him  the  tricke  of  a  foe.  Devising  with 
himself  a  long  time  how  he  might  best  put  away  Egistus  without  suspition  of  treach¬ 
erous  murder,  hee  concluded  at  last  to  poyson  him :  which  opinion  pleasing  his 
I  ii  363  humour,  he  became  resolute  in  his  determination,  and  the  better  to 
bring  the  matter  to  passe  he  called  unto  him  his  cupbearer,  with  whom 
in  secret  he  brake  the  matter :  promising  to  him  for  the  performance  thereof  to 
geve  him  a  thousande  crownes  of  yearely  revenues ;  his  cupbearer,  eyther  being  of 
a  good  conscience,  or  willing  for  fashion  sake,  to  deny  such  a  bloudy  request,  began 
with  great  reasons  to  perswade  Pandosto  from  his  determinate  mischief:  shewing  him 
what  an  offence  murther  was  to  the  Gods :  how  such  unnaturall  actions  did  more  dis¬ 
please  the  heavens,  than  men,  and  that  causelesse  cruelty  did  seldome  or  never  escape 
without  revenge  :  he  layd  before  his  face,  that  Egistus  was  his  friend,  a  King,  and 
one  that  was  come  into  his  Kingdome,  to  confirme  a  league  of  perpetuall  amitie  be¬ 
twixt  them ;  that  he  had,  and  did  shew  him  a  most  friendly  countenance :  how 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


327 


III,  ii,  176. 


Egistus  was  not  onely  honoured  of  his  owne  people  by  obedience,  but  also  loved  of 
the  Bohemians  for  his  curtesie.  And  that  if  he  now  should,  without  any  just  or 
manifest  cause,  poyson  him,  it  would  not  onely  be  a  great  dishonour  to  his  Majestie, 
and  a  meanes  to  sow  perpetuall  enmity  between  the  Sycilians  and  the  Bohemians, 
but  also  his  owne  subjects  would  repine  at  such  treacherous  cruelty.  These  and  such 
like  perswasions  of  Franion  (for  so  was  his  Cup-bearer  called)  could  no  whit  prevaile 
to  disswade  him  from  his  divellish  enterprize  :  but  remaining  resolute  in  his  deter¬ 
mination  (his  fury  so  fired  with  rage,  as  it  could  not  be  appeased  with  reason)  he 
began  with  bitter  taunts  to  take  up  his  man,  and  to  lay  before  him  two 
baites ;  preferment  and  death :  saying  that  if  he  would  poyson  Egis¬ 
tus,  he  would  advance  him  to  high  dignities :  if  he  refused  to  doe  it  of  an  obsti¬ 
nate  minde,  no  torture  should  be  too  great  to  requite  his  disobedience.  Franion, 
seeing  that  to  perswade  Pandosto  any  more,  was  but  to  strive  against  the  streame, 
consented,  as  soone  as  an  opportunity  would  give  him  leave,  to  dispatch  Egistus : 
wherewith  Pandosto  remained  somewhat  satisfied,  hoping  now  he  should  be  fully 
revenged  of  such  mistrusted  injuries,  intending  also  as  soon  as  Egistus  was  dead,  to 
give  his  wife  a  sop  of  the  same  sawce,  and  so  be  rid  of  those  which  were  the  cause 
of  his  restles  sorrow.  While  thus  be  lived  in  this  hope,  Franion  being  secret  in  his 
chamber,  began  to  meditate  with  himselfe  in  these  terms. 

Ah  Franion,  treason  is  loved  of  many,  but  the  Traitor  hated  of  all;  unjust  offences 
may  for  a  time  escape  without  danger,  but  never  without  revenge.  Thou  art  servant 
to  a  King,  and  must  obey  at  command ;  yet  Franion,  against  law  and  conscience,  it 
is  not  good  to  resist  a  tyrant  with  armes,  nor  to  please  an  unjust  King  with  obedience. 
What  shalt  thou  doe  ?  Folly  refused  gold,  and  frenzie  preferment :  wisdome  seeketh 
after  dignity,  and  counsell  keepeth  for  gaine.  Egistus  is  a  stranger  to  thee,  and  Pan¬ 
dosto  thy  Soveraigne :  thou  hast  little  cause  to  respect  the  one,  and  oughtest  to  have 
great  care  to  obey  the  other.  Thinke  this  Franion,  that  a  pound  of  gold  is  worth  a 
tunne  of  Lead,  great  gifts  are  little  Gods :  and  preferment  to  a  meane  man  is  a  whet¬ 
stone  to  courage ;  there  is  nothing  sweeter  than  promotion,  nor  lighter  then  report : 
care  not  then  though  most  count  thee  a  traitor,  so  all  call  thee  rich.  Dignity  (Franion) 
advaunceth  thy  posteritie,  and  evil  report  can  but  hurt  thy  selfe.  Know  this,  where 
Eagles  builde,  Falcons  may  prey;  where  Lyons  haunt,  Foxes  may  steale.  Kings  are 
knowne  to  commaund,  servants  are  blamelesse  to  consent :  feare  not  thou  then  to  lift 
at  Egistus,  Pandosto  shall  beare  the  burthen.  Yea  but  Franion,  conscience  is  a  worme 
that  ever  biteth,  but  never  ceaseth  :  that  which  is  rubbed  with  the  stone  Galactites 
will  never  bee  hot.  Flesh  dipped  in  the  Sea  ^Egeum  will  never  bee  sweete :  the 
hearbe  Trigion  beeing  once  bit  with  an  Aspis,  never  groweth,  and  con¬ 
science  once  stayned  with  innocent  blood,  is  alwaies  tyed  to  a  guiltie  re-  ***’ x^*’ 
morse.  Prefer  thy  content  before  riches,  and  a  cleare  minde  before  dignity ;  so 
beeing  poore,  thou  shalt  have  rich  peace,  or  else  rich,  thou  shalt  enjoy  disquiet. 

Franion  having  muttered  out  these  or  such  like  words,  seeing  either  he  must  die 
with  a  cleare  minde,  or  live  with  a  spotted  conscience,  he  was  so  cumbred  with  divers 
cogitations  that  hee  could  take  no  rest :  untill  at  last  he  determined  to  breake  the 
matter  to  Egistus ;  but  fearing  that  the  King  should  eyther  suspect  or  heare  of  such 
matters,  he  concealed  the  device  till  opportunitie  would  permit  him  to  reveale  it. 
Lingring  thus  in  doubtfull  feare,  in  an  evening  he  went  to  Egistus  lodging,  and  de¬ 
sirous  to  breake  with  him  of  certaine  affaires  that  touched  the  King,  after  all  were 
commaunded  out  of  the  Chamber,  Franion  made  manifest  the  whole  conspiracie 
which  Pandosto  had  devised  against  him,  desiring  Egistus  not  to  account  him  a 


328 


APPENDIX 


Traytor  for  bewraying  bis  Maisters  counsaile,  but  to  tbinke  that  he  did  it  for  con¬ 
science  :  hoping  that  although  his  Maister  inflamed  with  rage,  or  incensed  by  some 
sinister  reportes,  or  slanderous  speeches,  had  imagined  such  causelesse  mischiefe :  yet 
when  time  should  pacifie  his  anger,  and  try  those  talebearers  but  flattering  Parasites, 
then  he  would  count  him  as  a  faithfull  Seruant  that  with  such  care  had  kept  his  Mais¬ 
ters  credite.  Egistus  had  not  fully  heard  Franion  tell  forth  his  tale,  but  a  quaking 
feare  possessed  all  his  limmes,  thinking  that  there  was  some  treason  wrought,  and 
that  Franion  did  but  shaddow  his  craft  with  these  false  colours :  wherefore  he  began 
to  waxe  in  choller,  and  saide  that  he  doubted  not  Pandosto,  sith  he  was  his  friend, 
and  there  had  never  as  yet  beene  any  breach  of  amity :  he  had  not  sought  to  invade 
his  lands,  to  conspire  with  his  enemies,  to  disswade  his  Subjects  from  their  allegeance  ; 
but  in  word  and  thought  he  rested  his  at  all  times :  he  knew  not  therefore  any  cause 
that  should  moove  Pandosto  to  seeke  his  death,  but  suspected  it  to  be  a  compacted 
knavery  of  the  Bohemians  to  bring  the  King  and  him  to  oddes. 

Franion  staying  him  the  middst  of  his  talke,  told  him,  that  to  dally  with  Princes 
was  with  the  swannes  to  sing  against  their  death,  and  that  if  the  Bohemians  had  in¬ 
tended  any  such  mischiefe,  it  might  have  beene  better  brought  to  passe  then  by  re¬ 
vealing  the  conspiracie :  therefore  his  Majesty  did  ill  to  misconstrue  of  his  good 
meaning,  sith  his  intent  was  to  hinder  treason,  not  to  become  a  traytor;  and  to  con- 
firme  his  promises,  if  it  pleased  his  Majestie  to  fly  into  Sicilia  for  the  safegarde  of  his 
life,  hee  would  goe  with  him,  and  if  then  he  found  not  such  a  practise  to  be  pre¬ 
tended,  let  his  imagined  treacherie  be  repayed  with  most  monstrous  torments.  Egis¬ 
tus  hearing  the  solemne  protestation  of  Franion,  beganne  to  consider,  that  in  Fove 
and  Kingdomes,  neither  faith,  nor  lawe  is  to  bee  respected  :  doubting  that  Pandosto 
thought  by  his  death  to  destroy  his  men,  and  with  speedy  warre  to  invade  Sycilia. 
These  and  such  doubtes  throughly  weyghed,  he  gave  great  thankes  to  Franion,  prom¬ 
ising  if  hee  might  with  life  returne  to  Syracusa,  that  hee  would  create  him  a  Duke  in 
Sycilia :  craving  his  Counsell  how  hee  might  escape  out  of  the  Countrie.  Franion, 
who  having  some  small  skill  in  Navigation,  was  well  acquainted  with  the  Ports  and 
havens,  and  knew  every  daunger  in  the  Sea,  joyning  in  counsell  with  the  Maister  of 
Egistus  Navie,  rigged  all  their  ships,  and  setting  them  a  flote,  let  them  lie  at  anchor, 
to  be  in  the  more  readines,  when  time  and  winde  should  serve. 

Fortune  although  blind,  yet  by  chaunce  favouring  this  just  cause,  sent  them  within 
six  dayes  a  good  gale  of  winde ;  which  Franion  seeing  fit  for  their  purpose,  to  put 
Pandosto  out  of  suspition,  the  night  before  they  should  sayle,  he  went  to  him,  and 
promised,  that  the  next  day  he  wold  put  the  device  in  practise,  for  he  had  got  such 
a  forcible  poyson,  as  the  very  smell  thereof  wold  procure  suddain  death.  Pandosto 
was  joyfull  to  heare  this  good  newes,  and  thought  every  houre  a  day,  till  he  might  be 
glutted  with  bloudy  revenge ;  but  his  suit  had  but  ill  successe.  For  Egistus  fearing 
that  delay  might  breede  danger,  and  willing  that  the  grass  should  not  be  cut  from 
II,  i  67  un^er  his  feete,  taking  bagge  and  baggage,  by  the  helpe  of  Franion, 
conveied  himselfe  and  his  men  out  of  a  posterne  gate  of  the  Cittie, 
so  secretly  and  speedily  that  without  any  suspition  they  got  to  the  Sea  shoare ; 
where,  with  many  a  bitter  curse  taking  their  leave  of  Bohemia,  they  went  aboord. 
Weighing  their  Anchors  and  hoisting  sayle,  they  passed  as  fast  as  wind  and  sea  would 
permit  towards  Sycilia :  Egistus  being  a  joyfull  man  that  he  had  safely  past  such 
treacherous  perils.  But  as  they  were  quietly  floating  on  the  sea,  so  Pandosto  and  his 
Cittizens  were  in  an  oproare ;  for  seeing  that  the  Sycilians  without  taking  their  leave, 
Were  fled  away  by  night,  the  Bohemians  feared  some  treason,  and  the  King  thought 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


329 


II,  i,  in. 


II,  i,  1. 


II,  iii,  9. 


Ill,  ii,  108. 


that  without  question  his  suspition  was  true,  seeing  the  Cup-bearer  had  bewrayed 
the  sum  of  his  secret  pretence.  Whereupon  he  began  to  imagine  that 
Franion  and  his  wife  Bellaria  had  conspired  with  Egistus,  and  that 
the  fervent  affection  shee  bare  him,  was  the  onely  meanes  of  his  secret  departure ;  in 
so  much  that  incensed  with  rage,  he  commaunded  that  his  wife  should  be  carried 
straight  to  prison,  untill  they  heard  further  of  his  pleasure.  The  Guarde  unwilling  to 
lay  their  hands  one  such  a  vertuous  Princesse,  and  yet  fearing  the  Kings  fury,  went 
very  sorrowfull  to  fulfill  their  charge :  comming  to  the  Queenes  lodg¬ 
ing,  they  found  her  playing  with  her  yong  sonne  Garinter :  unto  whom 
with  teares  doing  the  message,  Bellaria  astonished  at  such  a  hard  censure,  and  find¬ 
ing  her  cleere  conscience  a  sure  advocate  to  pleade  in  her  cause,  went  to  the  prison 
most  willingly :  where  with  sighes  and  teares  shee  past  away  the  time,  till  she  might 
come  to  her  triall. 

But  Pandosto  whose  reason  was  suppressed  with  rage,  and  whose  unbridled  follie 
was  incensed  with  fury:  seeing  Franion  had  bewrayed  his  secrets,  and  that  Egistus 
might  well  be  rayled  on,  but  not  revenged :  determined  to  wreake  all 
his  wrath  on  poore  Bellaria.  He  therefore  caused  a  generall  procla¬ 
mation  to  be  made  through  all  his  Realme,  that  the  Queene  and  Egistus  had  by 
the  helpe  of  Franion,  not  onely  committed  most  incestuous  adultery,  but  also  had 
conspired  the  Kings  death;  whereupon  the  Traitor  Franion  was  fled  away  with 
Egistus,  and  Bellaria  was  most  justly  imprisoned.  This  proclamation 
being  once  blazed  through  the  country,  although  the  vertuous  disposi¬ 
tion  of  the  Queene  did  halfe  discredit  the  contents,  yet  the  suddaine  and  speedy 
passage  of  Egistus,  and  the  secret  departure  of  Franion,  induced  them  (the  circum¬ 
stances  throughly  considered)  to  thinke  that  both  the  proclamation  was  true,  and  the 
King  greatly  injured :  yet  they  pityed  her  case,  as  sorrowful  that  so  good  a  Lady 
should  be  crossed  with  such  adverse  fortune.  But  the  King,  whose  restlesse  rage 
would  remit  no  pitty,  thought  that  although  he  might  sufficiently  requite  his  wives 
falshood  with  the  bitter  plague  of  pinching  penury,  yet  his  minde  should  never  be 
glutted  with  revenge,  till  he  might  have  fit  time  and  opportunity  to  repay  the  treach¬ 
ery  of  Egistus  with  a  totall  injury.  But  a  curst  Cow  hath  oftentimes  short  hornes, 
and  a  willing  minde  but  a  weake  arm.  For  Pandosto  although  he  felt  that  revenge 
was  a  spurre  to  warre,  and  that  envy  alwaies  proffereth  steele,  yet  he  saw,  that 
Egistus  was  not  onely  of  great  puissance  and  prowesse  to  withstand  him, 
but  had  also  many  Kings  of  his  alliance  to  ayde  him,  if  neede  should 
serve  :  for  he  married  the  Emperours  daughter  of  Russia.  These  and  the  like  con¬ 
siderations  something  daunted  Pandosto  his  courage,  so  that  hee  was 
content  rather  to  put  up  a  manifest  injurie  with  peace,  then  hunt  after 
revenge,  dishonor  and  losse ;  determining  since  Egistus  had  escaped 
scot-free,  that  Bellaria  should  pay  for  all  at  an  unreasonable  price. 

Remayning  thus  resolute  in  his  determination,  Bellaria  continuing  still  in  prison 
and  hearing  the  contents  of  the  Proclamation,  knowing  that  her  minde  was  never 
touched  with  such  affection,  nor  that  Egistus  had  ever  offered  her  such  discurtesie, 
would  gladly  have  come  to  her  answere,  that  both  shee  might  have  knowne  her  just 
accusers,  and  cleared  her  selfe  of  that  guiltlesse  crime. 

But  Pandosto  was  so  inflamed  with  rage,  and  infected  with  Jelousie,  as  he  would 
not  vouchsafe  to  heare  her,  nor  admit  any  just  excuse ;  so  that  shee  was  faine  to  make 
a  vertue  of  her  neede  and  with  patience  to  beare  those  lieavie  injuries.  As  thus  shee 
lay  crossed  with  calamities  (a  great  cause  to  increase  her  griefe)  she  found  her  selfe 


II,  iii,  26. 


Ill,  ii,  127. 


II,  iii,  8. 


330 


APPENDIX 


quicke  with  childe :  which  as  soone  as  she  felt  stirre  in  her  body,  she  burst  forth  into 
bitter  teares,  exclayming  against  fortune  in  these  termes. 

Alas,  Bellaria,  how  infortunate  art  thou,  because  fortunate :  Better  thou  hadst 
beene  borne  a  beggar,  then  a  Prince,  so  shouldest  thou  have  bridled  Fortune  with 
want,  where  now  shee  sporteth  her  selfe  with  thy  plentie.  Ah  happy  life,  where 
poore  thoughts,  and  meane  desires  live  in  secure  content,  not  fearing  Fortune  because 
too  low  for  Fortune.  Thou  seest  now,  Bellaria  that  care  is  a  companion  to  honor, 
not  to  povertie;  that  high  Cedars  are  crushed  with  tempests,  when  low  shrubs  are 
not  touched  with  the  winde;  pretious  Diamonds  are  cut  with  the  file,  when  despised 
pibbles  lye  safe  in  the  sand.  Delphos  is  sought  to  by  Princes,  not  beggers :  and  For¬ 
tunes  Altars  smoke  with  kings  presents,  not  with  poore  mens  gifts.  Happie  are  such 
Bellaria,  that  curse  Fortune  for  contempt,  not  feare :  and  may  wish  they  were,  not 
sorrow  they  have  beene.  Thou  art  a  Princesse  Bellaria,  and  yet  a  prisoner ;  borne  to 
the  one  by  descent,  assigned  to  the  other  by  dispite :  accused  without  cause,  and 
therefore  oughtest  to  dye  without  care  :  for  patience  is  a  shield  against  Fortune,  and 
a  guiltlesse  minde  yeeldeth  not  to  sorrow.  Ah  but  infamy  galleth  unto  death,  and 
liveth  after  death :  Report  is  plumed  with  times  feathers,  and  Envie  oftentimes 
soundeth  Fames  trumpet :  the  suspected  adultery  shall  fly  in  the  ayre,  and  thy 
knowne  vertues  shall  lye  hid  in  the  Earth ;  one  Moale  staineth  a  whole  Face :  and 
what  is  'once  spotted  with  infamy  can  hardly  be  worne  out  with  time.  Die  then 
Bellaria,  Bellaria  die :  for  if  the  Gods  should  say  thou  art  guiltlesse,  yet  envie  would 
heare  the  Gods,  but  never  beleeve  the  Gods.  Ah  haplesse  wretch,  cease  these 
tearmes :  desperate  thoughtes  are  fit  for  them  that  feare  shame,  not  for  such  as  hope 
for  credite.  Pandosto  hath  darkened  thy  fame,  but  shall  never  discredite  thy  vertues. 
Suspition  may  enter  a  false  action,  but  proofe  shall  never  put  in  his  plea :  care  not 
then  for  envie,  sith  report  hath  a  blister  on  her  tongue :  and  let  sorrow  baite  them 
which  offend,  not  touch  thee  that  art  faultlesse.  But  alas  poore  soule,  how  canst  thou 
but  sorrow  ?  Thou  art  with  childe,  and  by  him,  that  in  steed  of  kind  pittie,  pincheth 
thee  in  cold  prison. 

And  with  that,  such  gasping  sighes  so  stopping  her  breath,  that  shee  could  not 
utter  more  words,  but  wringing  her  hands,  and  gushing  forth  streames  of  teares,  shee 
passed  away  the  time  with  bitter  complaints.  The  Jaylor  pitying  those  her  heavie 
passions,  thinking  that  if  the  King  knew  she  were  with  childe,  he  would  somewhat 
appease  his  fury  and  release  her  from  prison,  went  in  al  hast,  and  certified  Pandosto, 
what  the  effect  of  Bellarias  complaint  was;  who  no  sooner  heard  the  Jailor  say  she 
was  with  childe,  but  as  one  possessed  with  a  phranzie,  he  rose  up  in  a  rage,  swearing 
that  shee  and  the  basterd  brat  she  was  [big]  withall  should  die,  if  the  Gods  them¬ 
selves  said  no ;  thinking  that  surely  by  computation  of  time,  that  Egistus  and  not  he 
was  father  to  the  childe.  This  suspitious  thought  galled  a  fresh  this  halfe  healed 
...  sore,  in  so  much  as  he  could  take  no  rest,  untill  he  might  mittigate 

his  choller  with  a  just  revenge,  which  happened  presently  after.  For 
Bellaria  was  brought  to  bed  of  a  faire  and  beautifull  daughter :  which  no  sooner 
Pandosto  hearde,  but  he  determined  that  both  Bellaria  and  the  young  infant 
should  be  burnt  with  fire.  His  Nobles,  hearing  of  the  kings  cruell  sentence, 

...  sought  by  perswasions  to  divert  him  from  his  bloodie  determination  : 

j  Illy  1  r  i*  •  * 

laying  before  his  face  the  innocencie  of  the  childe,  and  vertuous 
disposition  of  his  wife,  how  she  had  continually  loved  and  honoured  him  so  ten¬ 
derly,  that  without  due  proofe  he  could  not,  nor  ought  not  to  appeach  her  of  that 

crime.  And  if  she  had  faulted,  yet  it  were  more  honourable  to  pardon  with  mercy, 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


331 


then  to  punish  with  extremity,  and  more  kingly,  to  be  commended  of  pitty,  than 
accused  of  rigour :  and  as  for  the  childe,  if  he  should  punish  it  for  the  mothers 
offence,  it  were  to  strive  against  nature  and  justice ;  and  that  unnatural  actions  doe 
more  offend  the  Gods  then  men :  how  causelesse  cruelty,  nor  innocent  blood  never 
scapes  without  revenge.  These  and  such  like  reasons  could  not  appease  his  rage, 
but  he  rested  resolute  in  this,  that  Bellaria  beeing  an  Adultresse,  the  childe  was  a 
Bastard,  and  he  would  not  suffer  that  such  an  infamous  brat  should  call  him  Father. 
Yet  at  last  (seeing  his  Noble  men  were  importunate  upon  him)  he  was  content  to 
spare  the  childes  life,  and  yet  to  put  it  to  a  worse  death.  For  he  found  out  this 
devise,  that  seeing  (as  he  thought)  it  came  by  fortune,  so  he  would  com-  ... 
mit  it  to  the  charge  of  Fortune,  and  therefore  caused  a  little  cock-boat 
to  be  provided,  wherein  he  meant  to  put  the  babe,  and  then  send  it  to  the  mercies 
of  the  Seas  and  the  destenies.  From  this  his  Peeres  in  no  wise  could  perswade  him, 
but  that  he  sent  presently  two  of  his  guard  to  fetch  the  childe  :  who  being  come  to 
the  prison,  and  with  weeping  teares  recounting  their  Maisters  message  :  Bellaria  no 
sooner  heard  the  rigorious  resolution  of  her  mercilesse  husband,  but  she  fell  downe 
in  a  swound,  so  that  all  thought  she  had  bin  dead  :  yet  at  last  being  come  to  her  selfe, 
shee  cryed  and  screeched  out  in  this  wise. 

Alas  sweete  infortunate  babe,  scarce  borne,  before  envied  by  fortune,  would  the 
day  of  thy  birth  had  beene  the  terme  of  thy  life  :  then  shouldest  thou  have  made  an 
ende  to  care  and  prevented  thy  Fathers  rigour.  Thy  faults  cannot  yet  deserve  such 
hatefull  revenge,  thy  dayes  are  too  short  for  so  sharpe  a  doome,  but  thy  untimely 
death  must  pay  thy  Mothers  Debts,  and  her  guiltlesse  crime  must  bee  thy  gastly 
curse.  And  shalt  thou,  sweete  babe  be  committed  to  Fortune,  when  thou  art  already 
spited  by  Fortune  ?  Shall  the  Seas  be  thy  harbour,  and  the  hard  boate  thy  cradle  ? 
Shall  thy  tender  Mouth,  in  steede  of  sweete  kisses,  be  nipped  with  bitter  stormes  ? 
Shalt  thou  have  the  whistling  windes  for  thy  Lullabie,  and  the  Salt  ... 

•  •  11  Illy  lily  02. 

Sea  fome  in  steede  of  sweete  milke  ?  Alas,  what  destinies  would  as- 
signe  such  hard  hap?  What  Father  would  be  so  cruell  ?  or  what  Gods  will  not 
revenge  such  rigor?  Let  me  kisse  thy  lippes  (sweete  Infant)  and  wet  thy  tender 
cheekes  with  my  teares,  and  put  this  chayne  about  thy  necke,  that  if  fortune  save 
thee,  it  may  helpe  to  succour  thee.  This,  since  thou  must  goe  to  surge  in  the  gastfull 
Seas,  with  a  sorrowfull  kisse  I  bid  thee  farewell,  and  I  pray  the  Gods  thou  maist  fare 
well. 

Such,  and  so  great  was  her  griefe,  that  her  vitall  spirits  being  suppressed  with 
sorrow,  she  fell  againe  down  into  a  trance,  having  her  sences  so  sotted  with  care,  that 
after  she  was  revived  yet  shee  lost  her  memorie,  and  lay  for  a  great  time  without 
moving,  as  one  in  a  trance.  The  guard  left  her  in  this  perplexitie,  and  carried  the 
child  to  the  King,  who  quite  devoide  of  pity  commanded  that  without  delay  it  should 
bee  put  in  the  boat,  having  neither  saile  nor  rudder  to  guid  it,  and  so  to  bee  carried 
into  the  midst  of  the  sea,  and  there  left  to  the  wind  and  wave  as  the  destinies  please 
to  appoint.  The  very  shipmen,  seeing  the  sweete  countenance  of  the  yong  babe,  began 
to  accuse  the  King  of  rigor,  and  to  pity  the  childs  hard  fortune  :  but  feare  constrayned 
them  to  that  which  their  nature  did  abhorre ;  so  that  they  placed  it  in  one  of  the  ends 
of  the  boat,  and  with  a  few  green  bows  made  a  homely  cabben  to  shrowd  it  as  they 
could  from  wind  and  weather :  having  thus  trimmed  the  boat  they  tied  it  to  a  ship, 
and  so  haled  it  into  the  mayne  Sea,  and  then  cut  in  sunder  the  coarde,  which  they 
had  no  sooner  done,  but  there  arose  a  mighty  tempest,  which  tossed  the  little  Boate 
so  vehemently  in  the  waves,  that  the  shipmen  thought  it  could  not  long  continue 


332 


APPENDIX 


without  sincking,  yea  the  storme  grewe  so  great,  that  with  much  labour  and  perill 
they  got  to  the  shoare. 

But  leaving  the  Childe  to  her  fortunes.  Againe  to  Pandosto,  who  not  yet  glutted 
with  sufficient  revenge,  devised  which  way  he  should  best  increase  his  Wives  calam- 
itie.  But  first  assembling  his  Nobles  and  Counsellors,  hee  called  her  for  the  more 
reproch  into  open  Court,  where  it  was  objected  against  her,  that  she  had  committed 
adulterie  with  Egistus,  and  conspired  with  Franion  to  poyson  Pandosto  her  husband, 
III  ii  19  but  ttle‘r  Pretence  being  partely  spyed,  she  counselled  them  to  flie  away 
by  night  for  their  better  safety.  Bellaria,  who  standing  like  a  pris¬ 
oner  at  the  Barre,  feeling  in  her  selfe  a  cleare  Conscience  to  withstand  her  false 
accusers :  seeing  that  no  lesse  then  death  could  pacifie  her  husbands  wrath,  waxed 
bolde,  and  desired  that  she  might  have  Lawe  and  Justice,  for  mercy  shee  neyther 
craved  nor  hoped  for;  and  that  those  perjured  wretches,  which  had  falsely  accused 
her  to  the  King,  might  be  brought  before  her  face,  to  give  in  evidence.  But  Pandosto, 
whose  rage  and  Jealousie  was  such,  no  reason,  nor  equitie  could  appease  :  tolde  her, 
that  for  her  accusers  they  were  of  such  credite,  as  their  wordes  were  sufficient  wit- 
nesse,  and  that  the  sodaine  and  secret  flight  of  Egistus  and  Franion  confirmed  that 
which  they  had  confessed :  and  as  for  her,  it  was  her  parte  to  deny  such  a  mon- 
III,  ii,  58.  StmS  crime>  and  t0  be  impudent  in  forswearing  the  fact,  since  shee  had 
past  all  shame  in  committing  the  fault:  but  her  stale  countenance 
should  stand  for  no  coyne,  for  as  the  Bastard  which  she  bare  was  served,  so  she 
should  with  some  cruell  death  be  requited.  Bellaria  no  whit  dismayed  with  this 
rough  reply,  tolde  her  Husband  Pandosto,  that  he  spake  upon  choller,  and  not  con¬ 
science  :  for  her  vertuous  life  had  beene  ever  such,  as  no  spot  of  suspition  could  ever 
staine.  And  if  she  had  borne  a  friendly  countenaunce  to  Egistus,  it  was  in  respect 

III  ii  121  he  WaS  his  friende>  and  not  for  any  lusting  affection :  therefore  if  she 
were  condemned  without  any  further  proofe,  it  was  rigour,  and  not  Law. 

The  noble  men  which  sate  in  judgement,  said  that  Bellaria  spake  reason,  and  in- 
treated  the  king  that  the  accusers  might  be  openly  examined,  and  sworne,  and  if  then 
the  evidence  were  such,  as  the  Jury  might  finde  her  guilty  (for  seeing  she  was  a  Prince 
she  ought  to  be  tryed  by  her  peeres)  then  let  her  have  such  punishment  as  the  ex- 
tremitie  of  the  Law  will  assigne  to  such  malefactors.  The  king  presently  made  an- 

swere,  that  in  this  case  he  might,  and  w'ould  dispence  with  the  Law,  and  that  the 

Jury  being  once  panneld,  they  should  take  his  word  for  sufficient  evidence,  otherwise 
he  would  make  the  proudest  of  them  repent  it.  The  noble  men  seeing  the  king  in 
choler  were  all  whist,  but  Bellaria,  whose  life  then  hung  in  the  ballaunce,  fearing 
more  perpetuall  infamie  then  momentarie  death,  tolde  the  king,  if  his  furie  might 
stand  for  a  Law  that  it  were  vaine  to  have  the  Jury  yeeld  their  verdit;  and  therefore 
she  fell  downe  upon  her  knees,  and  desired  the  king  that  for  the  love  he  bare  to  his 

young  sonne  Garinter,  whome  she  brought  into  the  world,  that  hee  would  graunt 

II,  i,  ai8.  ^er  a  recluest>  which  was  this,  that  it  w’ould  please  his  majestie  to  send 
sixe  of  his  noble  men  whome  he  best  trusted,  to  the  Isle  of  Delphos, 
there  to  enquire  of  the  Oracle  of  Apollo,  whether  she  had  committed  adultery  with 
Egistus,  or  conspired  to  poyson  with  Franion :  and  if  the  God  Apollo,  who  by  his 
devine  essence  knew  al  secrets,  gave  answere  that  she  was  guiltie,  she  were  con¬ 
tent  to  suffer  any  torment,  were  it  never  so  terrible.  The  request  was  so  reasonable, 
that  Pandosto  could  not  for  shame  deny  it,  unlesse  he  would  bee  counted  of  all  his 
subjects  more  wilfull  then  wise,  he  therefore  agreed,  that  with  as  much  speede  as 
might  be  there  should  be  certaine  Embassadores  dispatched  to  the  lie  of  Delphos ; 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


333 


III,  i. 


II,  iii,  238. 


Ill,  i,  13. 


and  in  the  meane  season  he  commanded  that  his  wife  should  be  kept  in  close 
prison. 

Bellaria  having  obtained  this  graunt  was  now  more  carefull  for  her  little  babe  that 
floated  on  the  Seas,  then  sorrowful  for  her  owne  mishap.  For  of  that  she  doubted  : 
of  her  selfe  shee  was  assured,  knowing  if  Apollo  should  give  Oracle  according  to  the 
thoughts  of  the  hart,  yet  the  sentence  should  goe  one  her  side,  such  was  the  clearenes 
of  her  minde  in  this  case.  But  Pandosto  (whose  suspitious  heade  still  remained  in 
one  song)  chose  out  six  of  his  Nobility,  whom  hee  knew  were  scarse  indifferent  men 
in  the  Queenes  behalfe,  and  providing  all  things  fit  for  their  journey,  sent  them 
to  Delphos  :  they  willing  to  fulfill  the  Kinges  commaund,  and  desir¬ 
ous  to  see  the  situation  and  custome  of  the  Hand,  dispatched  their 
affaires  with  as  much  speede  as  might  be,  and  embarked  themselves  to  this  voyage, 
which  (the  wind  and  weather  serving  fit  for  their  purpose)  was  soone 
ended.  For  within  three  weekes  they  arrived  at  Delphos,  where  they 
were  no  sooner  set  on  lande,  but  with  great  devotion  they  went  to  the  Temple  of 
Apollo,  and  there  offring  sacrifice  to  the  GOD,  and  giftes  to  the  Priest,  as  the  cus¬ 
tome  was,  they  humbly  craved  an  aunswere  of  their  demaund :  they 
had  not  long  kneeled  at  the  Altar,  but  Apollo  with  a  loude  voice  saide : 

Bohemians,  what  you  finde  behinde  the  Alter  take  and  depart.  They  forthwith 
obeying  the  Oracle  founde  a  scroule  of  parchment,  wherein  was  written  these  words 
in  letters  of  Golde, — 

The  Oracle. 

Suspition  is  no  proofe :  iealousie  is  an  unequall  iudge :  Bellaria  HI,  ii,  141. 
is  chast;  Egistus  blamelesse ;  Franion  a  true  subject:  Pandosto 
treacherous :  his  babe  an  innocent,  and  the  King  shal  live  with-  ® 
out  an  heirer  if  that  which  is  lost  be  not  founde. 

As  soone  as  they  had  taken  out  this  scroule,  the  Priest  of  the  God  commaunded 
them  that  they  should  not  presume  to  read  it,  before  they  came  in  the  presence  of 
Pandosto :  unlesse  they  would  incurre  the  displeasure  of  Apollo.  The  Bohemian 
Lords  carefully  obeying  his  commaund,  taking  their  leave  of  the  Priest,  with  great 
reverence  departed  out  of  the  Temple,  and  went  to  their  ships,  and  assoone  as  wind 
would  permit  them,  sailed  toward  Bohemia,  whither  in  short  time  they  safely  arrived, 
and  with  great  tryumph  issuing  out  of  their  Ships  went  to  the  Kinges  pallace,  whom 
they  found  in  his  chamber  accompanied  with  other  Noble  men  :  Pandosto  no  sooner 
saw  them,  but  with  a  merrie  countenaunce  he  welcomed  them  home,  asking  what 
newes  :  they  told  his  Majestie  that  they  had  received  an  aunswere  of  the  God 
written  in  a  scroule,  but  with  this  charge,  that  they  should  not  read  the 
contents  before  they  came  in  the  presence  of  the  King,  and  with  that 
they  delivered  him  the  parchment :  but  his  Noble  men  entreated  him  that  sith 
therein  was  contayned  either  the  safetie  of  his  Wives  life,  and  honesty,  or  her  death, 
and  perpetuall  infamy,  that  he  would  have  his  Nobles  and  Commons  assembled  in 
the  judgement  Hall,  where  the  Queene  brought  in  as  prysoner,  should  heare  the  con¬ 
tents  :  if  shee  were  found  guilty  by  the  Oracle  of  the  God,  then  all  should  have  cause 
to  thinke  his  rigour  proceeded  of  due  desert :  if  her  Grace  were  found  faultlesse,  then 
shee  should  bee  cleared  before  all,  sith  she  had  bene  accused  openly.  This  pleased 
the  King  so,  that  he  appointed  the  day,  and  assembled  al  his  Lords  and  Com¬ 
mons,  and  caused  the  Queene  to  be  brought  in  before  the  judgement 
seat,  commaunding  that  the  inditement  shoulde  bee  read,  wherein  she 
was  accused  of  adultery  with  Egistus,  and  of  conspiracy  with  Franion :  Bel- 


III,  ii,  138. 


Ill,  ii,  14. 


334 


APPENDIX 


laria  hearing  the  contentes,  was  no  whit  astonished,  but  made  this  chearefull 
aunswer : 

If  the  devine  powers  bee  privy  to  humane  actions  (as  no  doubt  they  are)  I  hope 
III,  ii,  30.  my  Patience  sha11  make  fortune  blushe,  and  my  unspotted  life  shall 
staine  spightful  discredit.  For  although  lying  Report  hath  sought 
to  appeach  mine  honor,  and  Suspition  hath  intended  to  soyle  my  credit  with 
infamie :  yet  where  Vertue  keepeth  the  Forte,  Report  and  suspition  may  assayle, 
III,  ii,  47.  'JUl;  never  sack :  how  I  have  led  my  life  before  Egistus  comming,  I 
appeale  Pandosto  to  the  Gods  and  to  thy  conscience.  What  hath 
past  betwixt  him  and  me,  the  Gods  only  know,  and  I  hope  will  presently  reveale : 
III,  ii,  66-81.  ^lat  ^  l°ve<i  Egistus  I  can  not  denie :  that  I  honored  him  I  shame 
not  to  confesse :  to  the  one  I  was  forced  by  his  vertues,  to  the  other 
for  his  dignities.  But  as  touching  lascivious  lust,  I  say  Egistus  is  honest,  and  hope 
my  selfe  to  be  found  without  spot:  for  Franion,  I  can  neither  accuse  him  nor 
excuse  him,  for  I  was  not  privie  to  his  departure,  and  that  this  is  true  which  I  have 
heere  rehearsed,  I  referre  myself  to  the  devine  Oracle. 

Bellana  had  no  sooner  sayd,  but  the  King  commaunded  that  one  of  his  Dukes 
III,  ii,  143.  skoidd  read  tke  contentes  of  the  scroule ;  which  after  the  commons 
had  heard,  they  gave  a  great  showt,  rejoysing  and  clapping  their 
hands  that  the  Queene  was  cleare  of  that  false  accusation:  but  the  king  whose 
conscience  was  a  witnesse  against  him  of  his  witlesse  furie,  and  false  suspected  Iea¬ 
lousie,  was  so  ashamed  of  his  rashe  folly,  that  he  entreated  his  nobles  to  perswade 
Bellana  to  forgive,  and  forget  these  injuries :  promising  not  onely  to  shew  himselfe  a 
loyall  and  loving  husband,  but  also  to  reconcile  himselfe  to  Egistus,  and  Franion : 
revealing  then  before  them  all  the  cause  of  their  secrete  flighte,  and  how  treach- 
III,  ii,  170.  ercUSly  hee  thought  t0  have  practised  his  death,  if  the  good  minde  of 
his  Cupbearer  had  not  prevented  his  purpose.  As  thus  he  was  relating 
the  whole  matter,  there  was  worde  brought  him  that  his  young  sonne  Garinter  was 
sodainly  dead,  which  newes  so  soone  as  Bellaria  heard,  surcharged  before  with  ex- 
treame  joy,  and  now  suppressed  with  heavie  sorrowe,  her  vital  spirites  were  so  stopped, 
that  she  fell  downe  presently  dead,  and  could  never  be  revived.  This  sodaine  sight 
so  appalled  the  Kings  Sences,  that  he  sancke  from  his  seat  in  a  sound,  so  as  he  was 
fayne  to  be  carried  by  his  nobles  to  his  Pallace,  where  hee  lay  by  the  space  of  three 
dayes  without  speech :  his  commons  were  as  men  in  dispaire,  so  diversely  distressed: 
there  was  nothing  but  mourning  and  lamentation  to  be  heard  throughout  al  Bohemia : 
their  young  Prince  dead,  their  vertuous  Queene  bereaved  of  her  life,  and  their  King 
and  Soveraigne  in  great  hazard :  this  tragicall  discourse  of  fortune  so  daunted  them, 

II,  Hi,  43.  aS  they  went  like  shad°wes,  not  men;  yet  somewhat  to  comfort  their 
heavie  hearts,  they  heard  that  Pandosto  was  come  to  himselfe,  and  had 
recovered  his  speache,  who  as  in  a  fury  brayed  out  these  bitter  speaches  : 

O  miserable  Pandosto,  what  surer  witnesse  then  conscience  ?  what  thoughts  more 
sower  then  suspition?  What  plague  more  bad  then  Iealousie  ?  Unnaturall  actions 
offend  the  Gods  more  than  men,  and  causelesse  crueltie  never  scapes  without  re¬ 
venge  :  I  have  committed  such  a  bloudy  fact,  as  repent  I  may,  but  recall  I  cannot. 
Ah  Iealousie,  a  hell  to  the  minde,  and  a  horror  to  the  conscience,  suppressing  reason, 
and  inciting  rage ;  a  worse  passion  then  plirenzie,  a  greater  plague  then  madnesse.' 
Are  the  Gods  just  ?  Then  let  them  revenge  such  brutishe  crueltie  :  my  innocent 
Babe  I  have  drowned  in  the  Seas;  my  loving  wife  I  have  slaine  with  slaunderous 
suspition  ;  my  trusty  friend  I  have  sought  to  betray,  and  yet  the  Gods  are  slacke  to- 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


335 


plague  such  offences.  Ah  unjust  Apollo,  Pandosto  is  the  man  that  hath  committed 
the  faulte :  why  should  Garinter,  seely  childe,  abide  the  paine?  Well  sith  the 
Gods  meane  to  prolong  my  dayes,  to  increase  my  dolour,  I  will  offer  my  guiltie  bloud 
a  sacrifice  to  those  sackles  *  soules,  whose  lives  are  lost  by  my  rigorous  folly. 

And  with  that  he  reached  at  a  Rapier,  to  have  murdered  himselfe,  but  his  Peeres 
being  present,  stayed  him  from  such  a  blouay  acte :  perswading  him  to  think,  that 
the  Commonwealth  consisted  on  his  safetie,  and  that  those  sheep  could  not  but  perish, 
that  wanted  a  sheepheard ;  wishing  that  if  hee  would  not  live  for  himselfe,  yet  he 

should  have  care  of  his  subjects,  and  to  put  such  fancies  out  of  his  .. 

,  ,  HI)  11,  241. 

minde,  sith  in  sores  past  help,  salves  do  not  heale,  but  hurt :  and 
in  things  past  cure,  care  is  a  corrosive :  with  these  and  such  like  perswasions  the 
Kinge  was  overcome,  and  began  somewhat  to  quiet  his  minde :  so  that  assoone  as  he 
could  goe  abroad,  hee  caused  his  wife  to  be  embalmed,  and  wrapt  in  lead  with  her 
young  sonne  Garinter  :  erecting  a  rich  and  famous  Sepulchre,  wherein  hee  intombed 
them  both,  making  such  solemn  obsequies  at  her  funeral,  as  al  Bohemia  might  per¬ 
ceive  he  did  greatly  repent  him  of  his  forepassed  folly :  causing  this  epitaph  to  be 
ingraven  on  her  Tombe  in  letters  of  Gold : 

T[  The  Epitaph. 

HERE  LYES  ENTOMBDE  BELLARIA  FAIRE, 

FALSLY  ACCUSED  TO  BE  UNCHASTE: 

CLEARED  BY  APPOLLOS  SACRED  DOOME, 

YET  SLAINE  BY  JEALOUSIE  AT  LAST. 

WHAT  ERE  THOU  BE  THAT  PASSEST  BY, 

CURSSE  HIM,  THAT  CAUSDE  THIS  QUEENE  TO  DIE. 


This  epitaph  being  ingraven,  Pandosto  would  once  a  day  repaire  to  the  Tombe, 
and  there  with  watry  plaintes  bewaile  his  misfortune :  coveting  no 

III,  11,  258- 


IV,  i,  ig- 


other  companion  but  sorrowe,  nor  no  other  harmonie,  but  repentance. 

But  leaving  him  to  his  dolorous  passions,  at  last  let  us  come  to  shewe 
the  tragicall  discourse  of  the  young  infant. 

Who  being  tossed  with  Winde,  and  Wave,  floated  two  whole  daies  without  suc¬ 
cour,  readie  at  every  puffe  to  bee  drowned  in  the  Sea,  till  at  last  the  Tempest  ceassed 
and  the  little  boate  was  driven  with  the  tyde  into  the  Coast  of  Sycilia,  where  sticking 
uppon  the  sandes  it  rested.  Fortune  minding  to  be  wanton,  willing  to  shewe  that  as 
she  hath  wrinckles  on  her  browes :  so  shee  hath  dimples  in  her  cheekes ;  thought 
after  so  many  sower  lookes,  to  lend  a  fayned  smile,  and  after  a  puffing  storme,  to 
bring  a  pretty  calme :  shee  began  thus  to  dally.  It  fortuned  a  poore  mercenary 
Sheepheard,  that  dwelled  in  Sycilia,  who  got  his  living  by  other  mens  flockes,  missed 
one  of  his  sheepe,  and  thinking  it  had  strayed  into  the  covert,  that  was  hard  by, 
sought  very  diligently  to  find  that  which  he  could  not  see,  fearing 
either  that  the  Wolves  or  Eagles  had  undone  him  (for  hee  was  so  poore, 
as  a  sheepe  was  halfe  his  substauncej,  wandered  downe  toward  the  Sea  cliffes, 
to  see  if  perchaunce  the  sheepe  was  browsing  on  the  sea  Ivy,  whereon  they  greatly 
doe  feede,  but  not  finding  her  there,  as  he  was  ready  to  returne  to  his  flocke,  hee 
heard  a  child  crie ;  but  knowing  there  was  no  house  nere,  he  thought  he  had  mis¬ 
taken  the  sound,  and  that  it  was  the  bleatyng  of  his  Sheepe.  Wherefore  looking 
more  narrowely,  as  he  cast  his  eye  to  the  Sea,  he  spyed  a  little  boate,  from  whence 


III,  iii,  75. 


*  [Guiltless.] 


336 


APPENDIX 


as  he  attentively  listened,  he  might  heare  the  cry  to  come  :  standing  a  good  while  in 
a  maze,  at  last  he  went  to  the  shoare,  and  wading  to  the  boate,  as  he  looked  in,  he 
saw  the  little  babe  lying  al  alone,  ready  to  die  for  hunger  and  colde,  wrapped  in  a 

Mantle  of  Scarlet,  richely  imbrodered  with  Golde,  and  having  a  chayne 
III,  iii,  no.  ,  ,  ,  ’  1  ’  & 

about  the  necke. 

The  Sheepeheard,  who  before  had  never  seene  so  faire  a  Babe,  nor  so  riche 
Iewels,  thought  assuredly,  that  it  was  some  little  God,  and  began  with  great  devocion 
to  knock  on  his  breast.  The  Babe,  who  wrythed  with  the  head,  to  seeke  for  the  pap, 
began  againe  to  cry  a  fresh,  whereby  the  poore  man  knew  that  it  was  a  Childe,  which 
by  some  sinister  meanes  was  driven  thither  by  distresse  of  weather;  marvailing  how 
such  a  seely  infant,  which  by  the  Mantle,  and  the  Chayne,  could  not  be  but  borne  of 
Noble  Parentage,  should  be  so  hardly  crossed  with  deadly  mishap.  The  poore  sheep- 
heard  perplexed  thus  with  divers  thoughts,  tooke  pitty  of  the  childe,  and  determined 
with  himselfe  to  carry  it  to  the  King,  that  there  it  might  be  brought  up,  according  to 
the  worthinesse  of  birth ;  for  his  ability  coulde  not  afforde  to  foster  it,  though  his 
good  minde  was  willing  to  further  it.  Taking  therefore  the  Chylde  in  his  armes,  as 
he  foulded  the  mantle  together,  the  better  to  defend  it  from  colde,  there  fell  downe 
at  his  foote  a  very  faire  and  riche  purse,  wherein  he  founde  a  great  summe  of  golde  : 
which  sight  so  revived  the  shepheards  spirits,  as  he  was  greatly  ravished  with  joy, 
III  iii  n8  an<^  daunted  w‘lh  feare '»  Ioyfull  to  see  such  a  summe  in  his  power,  and 
feareful  if  it  should  be  knowne,  that  it  might  breede  bis  further  daunger. 
Necessitie  wisht  him  at  the  least,  to  retaine  the  Golde,  though  he  would  not  keepe 
the  childe  :  the  simplicity  of  his  conscience  scared  him  from  such  deceiptfull  briberie. 
Thus  was  the  poore  manne  perplexed  with  a  doubtfull  Dilemma,  until  at  last  the 
covetousnesse  of  the  coyne  overcame  him :  for  what  will  not  the  greedy  desire  of 
Golde  cause  a  man  to  doe  ?  So  that  he  was  resolved  in  himselfe  to  foster  the  child, 
and  with  the  summe  to  relieve  his  want :  resting  thus  resolute  in  this  point  he  left 
seeking  of  bis  sheepe,  and  as  covertly,  and  secretly  as  he  could,  went  by  a  by  way  to 
his  house,  least  any  of  his  neighbours  should  perceave  his  carriage :  as  soone  as  he 
was  got  home,  entring  in  at  the  doore,  the  childe  began  to  crie,  which  his  wife  hear¬ 
ing,  and  seeing  her  husband  with  a  yong  babe  in  his  armes,  began  to  bee  somewhat 
jelousse,  yet  marveiling  that  her  husband  should  be  so  wanton  abroad,  sith  he  was  so 
quiet  at  home :  but  as  women  are  naturally  given  to  beleeve  the  worste,  so  his  wife 
thinking  it  was  some  bastard  :  beganne  to  crowe  against  her  goodman,  and  taking  up 
a  cudgel  (for  the  most  maister  went  breechles)  sware  solemnly  that  shee  would  make 
clubs  trumps,  if  hee  brought  any  bastard  brat  within  her  dores.  The  goodman,  see¬ 
ing  his  wife  in  her  majestie  with  her  mace  in  her  hand,  thought  it  was  time  to  bowe 
for  feare  of  blowes,  and  desired  her  to  be  quiet,  for  there  was  non  such  matter ;  but 
III  iii  i  S^C  cou^  ^olde  her  peace,  they  were  made  for  ever :  and  with  that  he 

told  her  the  whole  matter,  how  he  had  found  the  childe  in  a  little  boat, 
without  any  succour,  wrapped  in  that  costly  mantle,  and  having  that  rich  chaine 
about  the  neck :  but  at  last  when  he  shewed  her  the  purse  full  of  gold,  she  began  to 
simper  something  sweetely,  and  taking  her  husband  about  the  neck,  kissed  him  after 
her  homely  fashion  :  saying  that  she  hoped  God  had  seene  their  want,  and  now  ment 
to  relieeve  their  poverty,  and  seeing  they  could  get  no  children,  had  sent  them  this 
little  babe  to  be  their  heire.  Take  heede  in  any  case  (quoth  the  shepherd)  that  you 
III  iii  i  secreb  and  blabbe  it  not  out  when  you  meete  with  your  gossippes,  for 

'if  you  doe,  we  are  like  not  only  to  loose  the  Golde  and  Iewels,  but  our 
other  goodes  and  lives.  Tush  (quoth  his  wife),  profit  is  a  good  hatch  before  the 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


33  7 


doore :  feare  not,  I  have  other  things  to  talke  of  then  of  this  ;  but  I  pray  you  let  us 
lay  up  the  money  surely,  and  the  Iewels,  least  by  any  mishap  it  be  spied. 

After  that  they  had  set  all  things  in  order,  the  shepheard  went  to  his  sheepe  with 
a  merry  note,  and  the  good  wife  learned  to  sing  lullaby  at  home  with  her  yong  babe, 
wrapping  it  in  a  homely  blanket  in  sted  of  a  rich  mantle ;  nourishing  it  so  clenly  and 
carefully  as  it  began  to  bee  a  jolly  girle,  in  so  much  that  they  began  both  of  them  to 
be  very  fond  of  it,  seeing,  as  it  waxed  in  age,  so  it  increased  in  beauty.  The  shep¬ 
heard  every  night  at  his  comming  home,  would  sing  and  daunce  it  on  his  knee,  and 
prattle,  that  in  a  short  time  it  began  to  speake,  and  call  him  Dad,  and  her  Mam :  at 
last  when  it  grew  to  ripe  yeeres,  that  it  was  about  seven  yeares  olde,  the  shepheard 
left  keeping  of  other  mens  sheepe,  and  with  the  money  he  found  in  the  purse,  he 
bought  him  the  lease  of  a  pretty  farme,  and  got  a  smal  flocke  of  sheepe,  which  when 
Fawnia  (for  so  they  named  the  child)  came  to  the  age  of  ten  yeres,  hee  set  her  to 
keepe,  and  shee  with  such  diligence  performed  her  charge  as  the  sheepe  prospered 
marveilously  under  her  hand.  Fawnia  thought  Porrus  had  been  her  father,  and 
Mopsa  her  mother,  (for  so  was  the  shepheard  and  his  wife  called)  honoured  and 
obeyed  them  with  such  reverence,  that  all  the  neighbours  praised  the  duetifull  obe¬ 
dience  of  the  child.  Porrus  grewe  in  a  short  time  to  bee  a  man  of  some  wealth,  and 
credite ;  for  fortune  so  favoured  him  in  having  no  charge  but  Fawnia,  that  he  began 
to  purchase  land,  intending  after  his  death  to  give  it  to  his  daughter;  so  that  diverse 
rich  farmers  sonnes  came  as  woers  to  his  house :  for  Fawnia  was  something  clenly 
attired,  beeing  of  such  singular  beautie  and  excellent  witte,  that  whoso  sawe  her, 
would  have  thought  shee  had  bene  some  heavenly  nymph,  and  not  a  mortal  creature : 
in  so  much,  that  when  she  came  to  the  age  of  sixteene  yeeres,  shee  so 
increased  with  exquisite  perfection  both  of  body  and  minde,  as  her 
natural  disposition  did  bewray  that  she  was  borne  of  some  high  parentage ;  but  the 
people  thinking  she  was  daughter  to  the  shephard  Porrus,  rested  only  amazed  at  hir 
beauty  and  wit ;  yea  she  won  such  favour  and  commendations  in  every  mans  eye,  as 
her  beautie  was  not  only  praysed  in  the  countrey,  but  also  spoken  of  in 
the  Court :  yet  such  was  her  submisse  modestie,  that  although  her  praise 
daily  increased,  her  mind  was  no  whit  puffed  lip  with  pride,  but  humbled  her  selfe  as 
became  a  country  mayde  and  the  daughter  of  a  poore  sheepheard.  Every  day  she 
went  forth  with  her  sheepe  to  the  field,  keeping  them  with  such  care  and  diligence, 
as  al  men  thought  she  was  verie  painfull,  defending  her  face  from  the  heat  of  the 
sunne  with  no  other  vale,  but  with  a  garland  made  of  bowes  and  flowers; 
which  attire  became  her  so  gallantly,  as  shee  seemed  to  bee  the  Goddesse  ’  IV’  5' 
Flora  her  selfe  for  beauty. 

Fortune,  who  al  this  while  had  shewed  a  frendly  face,  began  now  to  turne  her 
back,  and  to  shewe  a  lowring  countenance,  intending  as  she  had  given  Fawnia  a 
slender  checke,  so  she  would  give  her  a  harder  mate :  to  bring  which  to  passe,  she 
layd  her  traine  on  this  wise.  Egistus  had  but  one  only  son  called  Dorastus,  about 
the  age  of  twenty  yeeres :  a  prince  so  decked  and  adorned  with  the  gifts  of  nature : 
so  fraught  with  beauty  and  vertuous  qualities,  as  not  onely  his  father  joyed  to  have  so 
good  a  sonne,  and  al  his  commons  rejoyced  that  God  had  lent  them  such  a  noble 
Prince  to  succeede  in  the  Kingdom.  Egistus  placing  al  his  joy  in  the  perfection  of 
his  sonne :  seeing  that  he  was  now  mariage-able,  sent  Embassadors  to  the  king  of 
Denmarke,  to  intreate  a  mariage  betweene  him  and  his  daughter,  who  willingly  con¬ 
senting,  made  answer,  that  the  next  spring,  if  it  please  Egistus  with  his  sonne  to 
come  into  Denmarke,  hee  doubted  not  but  they  should  agree  upon  reasonable  condi- 


IV,  i,  8. 


IV,  li,  44. 


APPENDIX 


338 

tions.  Egistus  resting  satisfied  with  this  friendly  answer,  thought  convenient  in  the 
meane  time  to  breake  with  his  sonne  :  finding  therefore  on  a  day  fit  opportunity,  he 
spake  to  him  in  these  fatherly  tearmes  : 

Dorastus,  thy  youth  wameth  me  to  prevent  the  worst,  and  mine  age  to  provide  the 
best.  Opportunities  neglected,  are  signes  of  folly :  actions  measured  by  time,  are 
seldome  bitten  with  repentance :  thou  art  young,  and  I  olde  :  age  hath  taught  me 
that,  which  thy  youth  cannot  yet  conceive.  I  therefore  will  counsell  thee  as  a  father, 
hoping  thou  wilt  obey  as  a  childe.  Thou  seest  my  white  hayres  are  blossomes  for 
the  grave,  and  thy  freshe  colour  fruite  for  time  and  fortune,  so  that  it  behooveth  me 
to  thinke  how  to  dye,  and  for  thee  to  care  how  to  live.  My  crowne  I  must  leave  by 
death,  and  thou  enjoy  my  Kingdome  by  succession,  wherein  I  hope  thy  vertue  and 
prowesse  shall  bee  such,  as  though  my  subjectes  want  my  person,  yet  they  shall  see 
in  thee  my  perfection.  That  nothing  either  may  faile  to  satisfie  thy  minde,  or  in¬ 
crease  thy  dignities :  the  onely  care  I  have  is  to  see  thee  well  marryed  before  I  die, 
and  thou  become  olde. 

Dorastus,  who  from  his  infancy,  delighted  rather  to  die  with  Mars  in  the  Fielde 
then  to  dally  with  Venus  in  the  Chamber,  fearing  to  displease  his  father,  and  yet  not 
willing  to  be  wed,  made  him  this  reuerent  answere. 

Sir,  there  is  no  greater  bond  then  duetie,  nor  no  straiter  law  then  nature  :  disobe¬ 
dience  in  youth  is  often  galled  with  despight  in  age.  The  commaund  of  the  father 
ought  to  be  a  constraint  to  the  childe :  so  parentes  willes  are  laws,  so  they  passe  not 
all  laws :  may  it  please  your  Grace  therefore  to  appoint  whome  I  shall  love,  rather 
then  by  deniall  I  should  be  appeached  of  disobedience  :  I  rest  content  to  love,  though 
it  bee  the  only  thing  I  hate. 

Egistus  hearing  his  sonne  to  flie  so  farre  from  the  marke,  began  to  be  somewhat 
chollericke,  and  therefore  made  him  his  hasty  aunswere. 

What  Dorastus  canst  thou  not  love?  Commeth  this  cynicall  passion  of  prone 
desires  or  peevish  frowardnesse  ?  What  durst  thou  think  thy  selfe  to  good  for  all,  or 
none  good  inough  for  thee  ?  I  tell  thee,  Dorastus,  there  is  nothing  sweeter  then 
youth,  nor  swifter  decreasing  while  it  is  increasing.  Time  past  with  folly  may  bee 
repented,  but  not  recalled.  If  thou  marrie  in  age,  thy  wives  freshe  couloures  will 
breede  in  thee  dead  thoughtes  and  suspition,  and  thy  white  hayres  her  lothesomnesse 
and  sorrowe.  For  Venus  affections  are  not  fed  with  Kingdomes,  or  treasures,  but 
with  youthfull  conceits  and  sweet  amours.  Vulcan  was  allotted  to  shake  the  tree, 
but  Mars  allowed  to  reape  the  fruite.  Yeelde  Dorastus  to  thy  Fathers  perswasions, 
which  may  prevent  thy  perils.  I  have  chosen  thee  a  Wife,  faire  by  nature,  royall  by 
birth,  by  vertues  famous,  learned  by  education  and  rich  by  possessions,  so  that  it  is 
hard  to  judge  whether  her  bounty,  or  fortune,  her  beauty,  or  vertue  bee  of  greater 
force:  I  mean,  Dorastus,  Euphrania  daughter  and  heire  to  the  King  of  Denmarke. 

Egistus  pausing  here  a  while,  looking  when  his  son  should  make  him  answere, 
and  seeing  that  he  stoode  still  as  one  in  a  trance,  he  shooke  him  up  thus  sharply. 

Well  Dorastus  take  lieede,  the  tree  Alpya  wasteth  not  with  fire,  but  withereth 
with  the  dewe :  that  which  love  nourisheth  not,  perisheth  with  hate :  if  thou  like 
Euphrania,  thou  breedest  my  content,  and  in  loving  her  thou  shalt  have  my  love, 
otherwise  ;  and  with  that  hee  flung  from  his  sonne  in  a  rage,  leaving  him  a  sorrow- 
full  man,  in  that  he  had  by  deniall  displeased  his  Father,  and  halfe  angrie  with  him 
selfe  that  hee  could  not  yeelde  to  that  passion,  whereto  both  reason  and  his  Father 
perswaded  him :  but  see  how  fortune  is  plumed  with  times  feathers,  and  how  shee 
can  minister  strange  causes  to  breede  straunge  effects. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


339 

It  happened  not  long  after  this  that  there  was  a  meeting  of  all  the  Farmers 
Daughters  in  Sycilia,  whither  Fawnia  was  also  bidden  as  the  mistres  of 
the  feast,  who  having  attired  her  selfe  in  her  best  garments,  went  among  *  ’  *v’ 
the  rest  of  her  companions  to  the  merry  meeting :  there  spending  the  day  in  such 
homely  pastimes  as  shepheards  use.  As  the  evening  grew  on,  and  their  sportes 
ceased,  ech  taking  their  leave  at  other,  Fawnia  desiring  one  of  her  companions  to 
beare  her  companie,  went  home  by  the  flocke,  to  see  if  they  were  well  folded,  and  as 
they  returned,  it  fortuned  that  Dorastus  (who  all  that  daye  had  bene 
hawking,  and  kilde  store  of  game)  incountred  by  the  way  these  two  ^ '  *v’  a°' 
mayds,  and  casting  his  eye  sodenly  on  Fawnia,  he  was  halfe  afraid,  fearing  that  with 
Acteon  he  had  seene  Diana ;  for  hee  thought  such  exquisite  perfection  could  not  be 
founde  in  any  mortall  creature.  As  thus  he  stoode  in  a  maze,  one  of  his  Pages  told 
him,  that  the  maide  with  the  garland  on  her  heade  was  Fawnia,  the  faire  shepheard, 
whose  beauty  was  so  much  talked  of  in  the  Court.  Dorastus  desirous  to  see  if  nature 
had  adorned  her  minde  with  any  inward  qualities,  as  she  had  decked  her  body  with 
outward  shape,  began  to  question  with  her  whose  daughter  she  was,  of  what  age  and 
how  she  had  bin  trained  up,  who  answered  him  with  such  modest  reverence  and 
sharpnesse  of  witte,  that  Dorastus  thought  her  outward  beautie  was  but  a  counterfait 
to  darken  her  inward  qualities,  wondring  how  so  courtly  behaviour  could  be  found  in 
so  simple  a  cottage,  and  cursing  fortune  that  had  shadowed  wit  and  beauty  with  such 
hard  fortune.  As  thus  he  held  her  a  long  while  with  chat,  Beauty  seeing  him  at  dis¬ 
covert,  thought  not  to  lose  the  vantage,  but  strooke  him  so  deeply  with  an  invenomed 
shafte,  as  he  wholy  lost  his  libertie,  and  became  a  slave  to  Love,  which  before  con¬ 
temned  love,  glad  now  to  gaze  on  a  poore  shepheard,  who  before  refused  the  offer  of 
a  riche  Princesse ;  for  the  perfection  of  Fawnia  had  so  fired  his  fancie  as  he  felt  his 
minde  greatly  chaunged,  and  his  affections  altered,  cursing  Love  that  had  wrought 
such  a  chaunge,  and  blaming  the  basenesse  of  his  mind,  that  would  make  such  a 
choice  :  but  thinking  these  were  but  passionat  toies  that  might  be  thrust  out  at  pleas¬ 
ure,  to  avoid  the  Syren  that  inchaunted  him,  he  put  spurs  to  his  horse,  and  bad  this 
faire  shepheard  farewell. 

Fawnia  (who  all  this  while  had  marked  the  princely  gesture  of  Dorastus)  seeing 
his  face  so  wel  featured,  and  each  lim  so  perfectly  framed,  began  greatly  to  praise  his 
perfection,  commending  him  so  long,  till  she  found  her  selfe  faultie,  and  perceived 
that  if  she  waded  but  a  little  further,  she  might  slippe  over  her  shooes  :  shee  therefore 
seeking  to  quench  that  fire  which  never  was  put  out,  went  home,  and  faining  her 
selfe  not  well  at  ease,  got  her  to  bed :  where  casting  a  thousand  thoughts  in  her  head, 
she  could  take  no  rest :  for  if  she  waked,  she  began  to  call  to  minde  his  beautie,  and 
thinking  to  beguile  such  thoughts  with  sleepe,  she  then  dreamed  of  his  perfection : 
pestered  thus  with  these  unacquainted  passions,  she  passed  thq  night  as  she  could  in 
short  slumbers. 

Dorastus  (who  all  this  while  rode  with  a  flea  in  his  eare)  could  not  by  any  meanes 
forget  the  sweete  favour  of  Fawnia,  but  rested  so  bewitched  with  her  wit  and  beauty, 
as  hee  could  take  no  rest.  He  felt  fancy  to  give  the  assault,  and  his  wounded  mind 
readie  to  yeeld  as  vanquished  :  yet  he  began  with  divers  considerations  to  suppresse 
this  frantick  affection,  calling  to  minde,  that  Fawnia  was  a  shepheard,  one  not  worthy 
to  bee  looked  at  of  a  Prince,  much  less  to  bee  loved  of  such  a  potentate,  thinking 
what  a  discredite  it  were  to  himself,  and  what  a  griefe  it  would  be  to  his  father, 
blaming  fortune  and  accusing  his  owne  follie,  that  should  bee  so  fond  as  but  once  to 
cast  a  glaunce  at  such  a  country  slut.  As  thus  he  was  raging  against  him  selfe,  Love 


340 


APPENDIX 


fearing  if  shee  dallied  long,  to  loose  her  champion,  stept  more  nigh,  and  gave  him 
such  a  fresh  wounde  as  it  pearst  him  at  the  heart,  that  he  was  faine  to  yeeld,  maugre 
his  face,  and  to  forsake  the  companie  and  gette  him  to  his  chamber :  where  being 
solemnly  set,  hee  burst  into  these  passionate  tearmes. 

Ah,  Dorastus,  art  thou  alone  ?  No  not  alone,  while  thou  art  tired  with  these  un¬ 
acquainted  passions.  Yeld  to  fancy,  thou  canst  not  by  thy  fathers  counsaile,  but  in  a 
frenzie  thou  art  by  just  destinies.  Thy  father  were  content,  if  thou  couldest  love, 
and  thou  therefore  discontent,  because  thou  doest  love.  O  devine  Love,  feared  of 
men  because  honoured  of  the  Gods,  not  to  be  suppressed  by  wisdome,  because  not  to 
be  comprehended  by  reason :  without  Lawe,  and  therefore  above  all  Law.  How 
now  Dorastus,  why  doest  thou  blaze  that  with  praises,  which  thou  hast  cause  to  blas¬ 
pheme  with  curses  ?  yet  why  should  they  curse  Love  that  are  in  Love  ?  Blush  Do¬ 
rastus  at  thy  fortune,  thy  choice,  thy  love :  thy  thoughts  cannot  be  uttered  without 
shame,  nor  thy  affections  without  discredit.  Ah  Fawnia,  sweete  Fawnia,  thy  beautie 
Fawnia.  Shamest  not  thou  Dorastus  to  name  one  unfitte  for  thy  birth,  thy  dignities, 
thy  Kingdomes  ?  Dye  Dorastus,  Dorastus  die.  Better  hadst  thou  perish  with  high 
desires,  then  live  in  base  thoughts.  Yea  but,  beautie  must  be  obeyed,  because  it  is 
beauty,  yet  framed  of  the  Gods  to  feede  the  eye,  not  to  fetter  the  heart.  Ah  but  he 
that  striveth  against  Love,  shooteth  with  them  of  Scyrum  against  the  wind,  and  with 
the  Cockeatrice  pecketh  against  the  Steele.  I  will  therefore  obey,  because  I  must 
.  obey.  Fawnia,  yea  Fawnia  shall  be  my  fortune,  in  spight  of  fortune.  The 

’ 1V’  33'  Gods  above  disdain  not  to  love  women  beneath.  Phoebus  liked  Sibilla, 
Jupiter  Io,  and  why  not  I  then  Fawnia  ?  one  something  inferiour  to  these  in  birth, 
but  farre  superiour  to  them  in  beautie,  borne  to  be  a  Shepheard,  but  worthy  to  be  a 
Goddesse.  Ah  Dorastus,  wilt  thou  so  forget  thy  selfe  as  to  suffer  affection  to  sup- 
presse  wisedome,  and  Love  to  violate  thine  honour?  How  sower  will  thy  choice  be 
to  thy  Father,  sorrowfull  to  thy  Subjects,  to  thy  friends  a  griefe,  most  gladsome  to  thy 
foes  !  Subdue  then  thy  affections,  and  cease  to  love  her  whome  thou  couldst  not  love, 
unlesse  blinded  with  too  much  love.  Tushe  I  talke  to  the  wind,  and  in  seeking  to 
prevent  the  causes,  I  further  the  effectes.  I  will  yet  praise  Fawnia ;  honour,  yea  and 
love  Fawnia,  and  at  this  day  followe  content,  not  counsaile.  Doo  Dorastus,  thou 
canst  but  repent :  and  with  that  his  Page  came  into  the  chamber,  whereupon  hee 
ceased  from  his  complaints,  hoping  that  time  would  weare  out  that  which  fortune  had 
wrought.  As  thus  he  was  pained,  so  poore  Fawnia  was  diversly  perplexed :  for  the 
next  morning  getting  up  very  earely,  she  went  to  her  sheepe,  thinking  with  hard 
labours  to  passe  away  her  new  conceived  amours,  beginning  very  busily  to  drive  them 
to  the  field,  and  then  to  shifte  the  foldes,  at  last  (wearied  with  toile)  she  sate  her 
down,  where  (poore  soule)  she  was  more  tryed  with  fond  affections  :  for  love  beganne 
to  assault  her,  in  so  much  that  as  she  sate  upon  the  side  of  a  hill,  she  began  to  accuse 
her  owne  folly  in  these  tearmes. 

Infortunate  Fawnia,  and  therefore  infortunate  because  Fawnia,  thy  shepherds 
hooke  sheweth  thy  poore  state,  thy  proud  desires  an  aspiring  mind :  the  one  declareth 
thy  want,  the  other  thy  pride.  No  bastard  hauke  must  soare  so  high  as  the  Hobbie, 
no  Fowle  gaze  against  the  Sunne  but  the  Eagle,  actions  wrought  against  nature  reape 
despight,  and  thoughts  above  Fortune  disdaine.  Fawnia,  thou  art  a  shepheard, 
daughter  to  poore  Porrus :  if  thou  rest  content  with  this,  thou  art  like  to  stande,  if 
thou  climbe  thou  art  sure  to  fal.  The  Herb  Anita  growing  higher  then  sixe  ynches 
becommeth  a  weede.  Nylus  flowing  more  then  twelve  cubits  procureth  a  dearth. 
Daring  affections  that  passe  measure,  are  cut  shorte  by  time  or  fortune  :  suppresse 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


341 


then  Fawnia  those  thoughts  which  thou  mayest  shame  to  expresse.  But  ah  Fawnia, 
love  is  a  Lord,  who  will  commaund  by  power,  and  constraine  by  force.  Dorastus,  ah 
Dorastus  is  the  man  I  love,  the  woorse  is  thy  hap,  and  the  lesse  cause  hast  thou  to 
hope.  Will  Eagles  catch  at  flyes,  will  Cedars  stoupe  to  brambles,  or  mighty  Princes 
looke  at  such  homely  trulles  ?  No,  no,  thinke  this,  Dorastus  disdaine  is  greater  then 
thy  desire,  hee  is  a  Prince  respecting  his  honour,  thou  a  beggars  brat  forgetting  thy 
calling.  Cease  then  not  onely  to  say,  but  to  thinke  to  love  Dorastus,  and  dissemble 
thy  love  Fawnia,  for  better  it  were  to  dye  with  griefe,  then  to  live  with  shame  :  yet  in 
despight  of  love  I  will  sigh,  to  see  if  I  can  sigh  out  love. 

Fawnia  somewhat  appeasing  her  griefes  with  these  pithie  perswasions,  began  after 
her  wonted  maner  to  walke  about  her  sheepe,  and  to  keepe  them  from  straying  into 
the  corne,  suppressing  her  affection  with  the  due  consideration  of  her  base  estate,  and 
with  the  impossibilities  of  her  love,  thinking  it  were  frenzy,  not  fancy,  to  covet  that 
which  the  very  destinies  did  deny  her  to  obteine. 

But  Dorastus  was  more  impatient  in  his  passions ;  for  love  so  fiercely  assayled  him, 
that  neither  companie,  nor  musicke  could  mittigate  his  martirdome,  but  did  rather  far 
the  more  increase  his  maladie :  shame  would  not  let  him  crave  counsaile  in  this  case, 
nor  feare  of  his  Fathers  displeasure  reveyle  it  to  any  secrete  friend;  but  hee  was 
faine  to  make  a  Secretarie  of  himselfe,  and  to  participate  his  thoughtes  with  his  owne 
troubled  mind.  Lingring  thus  awhile  in  doubtfull  suspence,  at  last  stealing  secretely 
from  the  court  without  either  men  or  Page,  hee  went  to  see  if  hee  could  espie  Fawnia 
walking  abroade  in  the  field ;  but  as  one  having  a  great  deale  more  skill  to  retrive 
the  partridge  with  his  spaniels,  then  to  hunt  after  such  a  straunge  pray,  he  sought,  but 
was  little  the  better :  which  crosse  lucke  drave  him  into  a  great  choler,  that  he  began 
to  accuse  love  and  fortune.  But  as  he  was  readie  to  retire,  he  sawe  Fawnia  sitting 
all  alone  under  the  side  of  a  hill,  making  a  garland  of  such  homely  flowers  as  the 
fields  did  afoord.  This  sight  so  revived  his  spirites  that  he  drewe  nigh,  with  more- 
judgement  to  take  a  view  of  her  singular  perfection,  which  hee  found  to  bee  such  as 
in  that  countrey  attyre  she  stained  al  the  courtlie  Dames  of  Sicilia.  While  thus  he 
stoode  gazing  with  pearcing  lookes  on  her  surpassing  beautie,  Fawnia  cast  her  eye 
aside,  and  spyed  Dorastus,  with  sudden  sight  made  the  poore  girle  to  blush,  and  to 
die  her  christal  cheeks  with  a  vermilion  red ;  which  gave  her  such  a  grace,  as  she 
seemed  farre  more  beautiful.  And  with  that  she  rose  up,  saluting  the  Prince  with 
such  modest  curtesies,  as  he  wondred  how  a  country  maid  could  afoord  such  courtly 
behaviour.  Dorastus,  repaying  her  curtesie  with  a  smiling  countenance,  began  to- 
parlie  with  her  on  this  manner. 

Faire  maide  (quoth  he)  either  your  want  is  great,  or  a  shepheards  life  very  sweete, 
that  your  delight  is  in  such  country  labors.  I  can  not  conceive  what  pleasure  you 
should  take,  unless  you  meane  to  imitate  the  nymphes,  being  yourself  so  like  a 
Nymph.  To  put  me  out  of  this  doubt,  shew  me  what  is  to  be  commended  in  a  shep- 
herdes  life,  and  what  pleasures  you  have  to  countervaile  these  drudging  laboures. 

Fawnia  with  blushing  face  made  him  this  ready  aunswere.  Sir,  what  richer  state 
then  content,  or  what  sweeter  life  then  quiet  ?  we  shepheards  are  not  borne  to  honor, 
nor  beholding  unto  beautie,  the  less  care  we  have  to  feare  fame  or  fortune  :  we  count 
our  attire  brave  inough  if  warme  inough,  and  our  foode  dainty,  if  to  suffice  nature  1 
our  greatest  enemie  is  the  wolfe  ;  our  onely  care  in  safe  keeping  our  flock  :  in  stead 
of  courtlie  ditties  we  spend  the  daies  with  country  songs :  our  amorous  conceites  are 
homely  thoughtes;  delighting  as  much  to  talke  of  Pan  and  his  countrey  prankes,  as 
Ladies  to  tell  of  Venus  and  her  wanton  toyes.  Our  toyle  is  in  shifting  the  fouldes. 


APPENDIX 


342 

and  looking  to  the  Lambes,  easie  labours  :  oft  singing  and  telling  tales,  homely  pleas¬ 
ures  ;  our  greatest  welth  not  to  covet,  our  honor  not  to  climbe,  our  quiet  not  to  care. 
Envie  looketh  not  so  lowe  as  shepheards :  Shepheards  gaze  not  so  high  as  ambition  : 
we  are  rich  in  that  we  are  poore  with  content,  and  proud  onely  in  this,  that  we  have 
no  cause  to  be  proud. 

This  wittie  aunswer  of  Fawnia  so  inflamed  Dorastus  fancy,  as  he  commended  him 
selfe  for  making  so  good  a  choyce,  thinking,  if  her  birth  were  aunswerable  to  her  wit 
and  beauty,  that  she  were  a  fitte  mate  for  the  most  famous  Prince  in  the  worlde.  He 
therefore  beganne  to  sifte  her  more  narrowely  on  this  manner. 

Fawnia,  I  see  thou  art  content  with  Country  labours,  because  thou  knowest  not 
Courtly  pleasures :  I  commend  thy  wit,  and  pitty  thy  want :  but  wilt  thou  leave  thy 
Fathers  Cottage  and  serve  a  Courtlie  Mistresse  ? 

Sir  (quoth  she)  beggers  ought  not  to  strive  against  fortune,  nor  to  gaze  after 
honour,  least  either  their  fall  be  greater,  or  they  become  blinde.  I  am  borne  to  toile 
for  the  Court,  not  in  the  Court,  my  nature  unfit  for  their  nurture  :  better  live  then  in 
meane  degree,  than  in  high  disdaine. 

Well  saide,  Fawnia  (quoth  Dorastus)  I  gesse  at  thy  thoughtes;  thou  art  in  love 
with  some  Countrey  Shephearde, 

No  sir  (quoth  she)  shepheards  cannot  love,  that  are  so  simple,  and  maides  may  not 
love  that  are  so  young. 

Nay  therefore  (quoth  Dorastus)  maides  must  love,  because  they  are  young,  for 
Cupid  is  a  child,  and  Venus,  though  olde,  is  painted  with  fresh  coloures. 

I  graunt  (quoth  she)  age  may  be  painted  with  new  shadowes,  and  youth  may  have 
imperfect  affections  ;  but  what  arte  concealeth  in  one,  ignorance  revealeth  in  the  other. 
Dorastus  seeing  Fawnia  held  him  so  harde,  thought  it  was  vaine  so  long  to  beate  about 
the  bush :  therefore  he  thought  to  have  given  her  a  fresh  charge  :  but  he  was  pre¬ 
vented  by  certaine  of  his  men,  who  missing  their  maister,  came  posting  to  seeke  him ; 
seeing  that  he  was  gone  foorth  all  alone,  yet  before  they  drewe  so  nie  that  they  might 
heare  their  talke,  he  used  these  speeches. 

Why  Fawnia,  perhappes  I  love  thee,  and  then  thou  must  needes  yeelde,  for  thou 
knowest  I  can  commaunde  and  constraine.  Trueth  sir  (quoth  she)  but  not  to  love ; 
for  constrained  love  is  force,  not  love  :  and  know  this  sir,  mine  honesty  is  such,  as  I 
hadde  rather  dye  then  be  a  concubine  even  to  a  King,  and  my  birth  is  so  base  as  I 
am  unfitte  to  bee  a  wife  to  a  poore  farmer.  Why  then  (quoth  he)  thou  canst  not  love 
Dorastus.  Yes  saide  Fawnia,  when  Dorastus  becomes  a  shepheard,  and  with  that  the 
presence  of  his  men  broke  off  their  parle.  so  that  he  went  with  them  to  the  palace 
and  left  Fawnia  sitting  still  on  the  hill  side,  who  seeing  that  the  night  drewe  on, 
shifted  her  fouldes,  and  busied  her  selfe  about  other  worke  to  drive  away  such  fond 
fancies  as  began  to  trouble  her  braine.  But  all  this  could  not  prevaile,  for  the  beautie 
of  Dorastus  had  made  such  a  deepe  impression  in  her  heart,  as  it  could  not  be  worne 
out  without  cracking,  so  that  she  was  forced  to  blame  her  owne  folly  in  this  wise. 

Ah  Fawnia,  why  doest  thou  gaze  against  the  Sunne,  or  catch  at  the  Winde  ?  starres 
are  to  be  looked  at  with  the  eye,  not  reacht  at  with  the  hande :  thoughts  are  to  be 
measured  by  Fortunes,  not  by  desires :  falles  come  not  by  sitting  low,  but  by  climing 
too  hie :  what  then  shal  al  feare  to  fal,  because  some  happe  to  fall  ?  No  luck 
commeth  by  lot,  and  fortune  windeth  those  threedes  which  the  destinies  spin.  Thou 
art  favored  Fawnia  of  a  prince,  and  yet  thou  art  so  fond  to  reject  desired  favours : 
thou  hast  deniall  at  thy  tonges  end,  and  desire  at  thy  hearts  bottome ;  a  womans 
fault,  to  spurne  at  that  with  her  foote,  which  she  greedily  catcheth  at  with  her  hand. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


343 


Thou  lovest  Dorastus,  Fawnia,  and  yet  seemest  to  lower.  Take  heede,  if  hee  retire 
thou  wilt  repent ;  for  unles  hee  love,  thou  canst  but  dye.  Dye  then  Fawnia ;  for 
Dorastus  doth  but  jest :  the  Lyon  never  prayeth  on  the  mouse,  nor  Faulcons  stoupe 
not  to  dead  stales.  Sit  downe  then  in  sorrow,  ceasse  to  love,  and  content  thy  selfe, 
that  Dorastus  will  vouchsafe  to  flatter  Fawnia,  though  not  to  fancy  Fawnia.  Heigh 
ho !  Ah  foole,  it  were  seemelier  for  thee  to  whistle  as  a  Shepheard,  then  to  sigh  as  a 
lover.  And  with  that  she  ceassed  from  these  perplexed  passions,  folding  her  sheepe, 
and  hying  home  to  her  poore  Cottage. 

But  such  was  the  incessant  sorrow  of  Dorastus  to  thinke  on  the  witte  and  beautie 
of  Fawnia,  and  to  see  how  fond  hee  was  being  a  Prince ;  and  how  froward  she  was 
being  a  beggar,  then  he  began  to  loose  his  wonted  appetite,  to  looke  pale  and  wan  ; 
instead  of  mirth,  to  feede  on  melancholy ;  for  courtly  daunces  to  use  cold  dumpes ; 
in  so  much  that  not  onely  his  owne  men,  but  his  father  and  all  the  court  began  to 
marvaile  at  his  sudden  change,  thinking  that  some  lingring  sickenes  had  brought  him 
into  this  state :  wherefore  he  caused  Phisitions  to  come,  but  Dorastus  neither  would 
let  them  minister,  nor  so  much  as  suffer  them  to  see  [him ;]  but  remained  stil  so 
oppressed  with  these  passions,  as  he  feared  in  him  selfe  a  farther  inconvenience. 
His  honor  wished  him  to  ceasse  from  such  folly,  but  Love  forced  him  to  follow 
fancy:  yea  and  in  despight  of  honour,  love  wonne  the  conquest,  so  that  his  hot 
desires  caused  him  to  find  new  devises,  for  hee  presently  made  himselfe  a  ^  ^ 

shepheards  coate,  that  he  might  goe  unknowne,  and  with  the  lesse  sus- 
pition  to  prattle  with  Fawnia,  and  conveied  it  secretly  into  a  thick  grove  hard  joyn- 
ing  to  the  Pallace,  whether  finding  fit  time,  and  opportunity,  he  went  all  alone,  and 
putting  off  his  princely  apparel  got  on  those  shepheards  roabes,  and  taking  a  great 
hooke  in  his  hand  (which  he  had  also  gotten)  he  went  very  anciently  [mV]  to  find  out 
the  mistres  of  his  affection  :  but  as  he  went  by  the  way,  seeing  himselfe  clad  in  such 
unseemely  ragges,  he  began  to  smile  at  his  owne  folly,  and  to  reprove  his  fondnesse, 


in  these  tearmes. 

Well  said  Dorastus,  thou  keepest  a  rich  decorum,  base  desires  and  homely  attires : 
thy  thoughtes  are  fit  for  none  but  a  shepheard,  and  thy  apparell  such  as  only  become 
a  shepheard.  A  strange  change  from  a  Prince  to  a  pesant !  What  is  it?  thy 
wretched  fortune  or  thy  wilful  folly  ?  Is  it  thy  cursed  destinies  ?  Or  thy  crooked 
desires,  that  appointeth  thee  this  penance  ?  Ah  Dorastus  thou  canst  but  love,  and 
unlesse  thou  love,  thou  art  like  to  perish  for  love.  Yet  fond  foole,  choose  flowers, 
not  weedes;  Diamondes,  not  peables;  Ladies  which  may  honour  thee,  not  shep¬ 
heards  which  may  disgrace  thee.  Venus  is  painted  in  silkes,  not  in  ragges ;  and 
Cupid  treadeth  on  disdaine,  when  he  reacheth  at  dignitie.  And  yet  Dorastus  shame 
not  at  thy  shepheards  weede  :  the  heavenly  Godes  have  sometime  earthly  thoughtes  : 
Neptune  became  a  ram,  Jupiter  a  Bui,  Apollo  a  shepheard  :  they  Gods,  ^  ^ 

and  yet  in  love ;  and  thou  a  man  appointed  to  love. 

Devising  thus  with  himselfe,  he  drew  nigh  to  the  place  where  Fawnia  was  keep¬ 
ing  her  shepe,  who  casting  her  eye  aside,  and  seeing  such  a  manerly  shepheard,  per¬ 
fectly  limmed,  and  comming  with  so  good  a  pace,  she  began  halfe  to  forget  Dorastus, 
and  to  favor  this  prety  shepheard,  whom  she  thought  shee  might  both  love  and  ob- 
taine :  but  as  shee  was  in  these  thoughts,  she  perceived  then,  that  it  was  the  yong 
prince  Dorastus,  wherfore  she  rose  up  and  reverently  saluted  him.  Dorastus  taking 
her  by  the  hand,  repaied  her  curtesie  with  a  sweete  kisse,  and  praying  her  to  sit  downe 
by  him,  he  began  thus  to  lay  the  batterie. 

If  thou  marvel  Fawnia  at  my  strange  attyre,  thou  wouldest  more  muse  at  my 


344 


APPENDIX 


unaccustomed  thoughtes :  the  one  disgraceth  but  my  outward  shape,  the  other  dis¬ 
turbed!  my  inward  sences.  I  love  Fawnia,  and  therefore  what  love  liketh  I  cannot 
mislike.  Fawnia  thou  hast  promised  to  love,  and  I  hope  thou  wilt  pertorme  no  lesse : 
I  have  fulfilled  thy  request,  and  now  thou  canst  but  graunt  my  desire.  Thou  wert 
content  to  love  Dorastus  when  he  ceast  to  be  a  Prince  and  to  become  a  shepheard, 
and  see  I  have  made  the  change,  and  therefore  not  to  misse  of  my  choice. 

Trueth,  quoth  Fawnia,  but  all  that  weare  Codes  are  not  Monkes  :  painted  Eagles 
are  pictures,  not  Eagles.  Zeusis  Grapes  were  like  Grapes,  yet  shadowes  :  rich  cloth¬ 
ing  make  not  princes :  nor  homely  attyre  beggers :  shepheards  are  not  called  shep- 
heardes,  because  they  were  hookes  and  bagges,  but  that  they  are  borne  poore,  and 
live  to  keepe  sheepe ;  so  this  attire  hath  not  made  Dorastus  a  shepherd,  but  to  seeme 
like  a  shepherd. 

Well  Fawnia,  answered  Dorastus,  were  I  a  shepherd,  I  could  not  but  like  thee, 
and  being  a  prince  I  am  forst  to  love  thee.  Take  heed  Fawnia  be  not  proud  of 
beauties  painting,  for  it  is  a  flower  that  fadeth  in  the  blossome.  Those  which  dis- 
dayne  in  youth  are  despised  in  age :  Beauties  shadowes  are  trickt  up  with  times 
colours,  which  being  set  to  drie  in  the  sunne  are  stained  with  the  sunne,  scarce  pleas¬ 
ing  the  sight  ere  they  beginne  not  to  be  worth  the  sight,  not  much  unlike  the  herbe 
Ephemeron,  which  flourisheth  in  the  morning  and  is  withered  before  the  sunne  set¬ 
ting  :  if  my  desire  were  against  lawe,  thou  mightest  justly  deny  me  by  reason ;  but  I 
love  thee  Fawnia,  not  to  misuse  thee  as  a  Concubine,  but  to  use  thee  as  my  wife  :  I 
can  promise  no  more,  and  meane  to  performe  no  lesse. 

Fawnia  hearing  this  solemne  protestation  of  Dorastus,  could  no  longer  withstand 
the  assault,  but  yeelded  up  the  forte  in  these  friendly  tearmes. 

Ah  Dorastus,  I  shame  to  expresse  that  thou  forcest  me  with  thy  sugred  speeche  to 
confesse  :  my  base  birth  causeth  the  one,  and  thy  high  dignities  the  other.  Beggars 
thoughts  ought  not  to  reach  so  far  as  Kings,  and  yet  my  desires  reach  as  high  as 
Princes.  I  dare  not  say,  Dorastus,  I  love  thee,  because  I  am  a  shepherd ;  but  the 
Gods  know  I  have  honored  Dorastus  (pardon  if  I  say  amisse)  yea  and  loved  Dorastus 
with  such  dutiful  affection  as  Fawnia  can  performe,  or  Dorastus  desire :  I  yeeld,  not 
overcome  with  prayers,  but  with  love,  resting  Dorastus  handmaid  ready  to  obey  his 
wil,  if  no  prejudice  at  all  to  his  honour,  nor  to  my  credit. 

Dorastus  hearing  this  freendly  conclusion  of  Fawnia  embraced  her  in  his  armes, 
swearing  that  neither  distance,  time,  nor  adverse  fortune  should  diminish  his  affec¬ 
tion  :  but  that  in  despight  of  the  destinies  he  would  remaine  loyall  unto  death.  Hav¬ 
ing  thus  plight  their  troath  each  to  other,  seeing  they  could  not  have  the  full  fruition 
of  their  love  in  Sycilia,  for  that  Egistus  consent  woulde  never  bee  graunted  to  so 
meane  a  match,  Dorastus  determined,  assone  as  time  and  opportunitie  would  give 
them  leave,  to  provide  a  great  masse  of  money,  and  many  rich  and  costly  jewels,  for 
the  easier  cariage,  and  then  to  transporte  themselves  and  their  treasure  into  Italy, 
where  they  should  leade  a  contented  life,  until  such  time  as  either  he  could  be  recon¬ 
ciled  to  his  Father,  or  els  by  succession  come  to  the  Kingdome.  This  devise  was 
greatly  praysed  of  Fawnia,  for  she  feared  if  the  King  his  father  should  but  heare  of 
the  contract,  that  his  furie  would  be  such  as  no  lesse  than  death  would  stand  for  pay¬ 
ment  :  she  therefore  tould  him,  that  delay  bred  daunger :  that  many  mishaps  did  fall 
out  betweene  the  cup  and  the  lip,  and  that  to  avoid  danger,  it  were  best  with  as  much 
speed  as  might  be  to  pass  out  of  Sycilia,  least  fortune  might  prevent  their  pretence 
with  some  newe  despight:  Dorastus,  whom  love  pricked  forward  with  desire,  prom¬ 
ised  to  dispatch  his  affaires  with  as  great  hast,  as  either  time  or  oportunitie  would 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


345 

geve  him  leave  :  and  so  resting  upon  this  point,  after  many  imbracings  and  sweete 
kisses  they  departed. 

Dorastus  having  taken  his  leave  of  his  best  beloved  Fawnia,  went  to  the  Grove 
where  hee  had  his  rich  apparel,  and  there  uncasing  himself  as  secretly  as  might  be, 
hiding  up  his  shepheards  attire,  till' occasion  should  serve  againe  to  use  it :  he  went  to 
the  pallace,  shewing  by  his  merrie  countenaunce,  that  either  the  state  of  his  body  was 
amended,  or  the  case  of  his  minde  greately  redressed :  Fawnia  poore  soule  was  no 
less  joyful,  that  being  a  shepheard,  fortune  had  favoured  her  so,  as  to  reward  her 
with  the  love  of  a  Prince,  hoping  in  time  to  be  advaunced  from  the  daughter  of  a 
poore  farmer  to  be  the  wife  of  a  riche  King :  so  that  she  thought  every  houre  a  yeere, 
till  by  their  departure  they  might  prevent  danger,  not  ceasing  still  to  goe  every  daye 
to  her  sheepe,  not  so  much  for  the  care  of  her  flock,  as  for  the  desire  she  had  to  see 
her  love  and  Lord  Dorastus :  who  oftentimes,  when  oportunitie  would  serve,  repaired 
thither  to  feede  his  fancy  with  the  sweet  content  of  Fawnias  presence  :  and  although 
he  never  went  to  visit  her,  but  in  his  shepheards  ragges,  yet  his  ofte  repaire  made 
him  not  onely  suspected,  but  knowne  to  divers  of  their  neighbours :  who  for  the  good 
will  they  bare  to  old  Porrus,  tould  him  secretly  of  the  matter,  wishing  him  to  keepe 
his  daughter  at  home,  least  she  went  so  ofte  to  the  field  that  she  brought  him  home  a 
yong  sonne :  for  they  feared  that  Fawnia  being  so  beautifull,  the  yong  prince  would 
allure  her  to  folly.  Porrus  was  stricken  into  a  dump  at  these  newes,  so  that  thanking 
his  neighboures  for  their  good  will :  he  hyed  him  home  to  his  wife,  and  calling  her 
aside,  wringing  his  handes  and  shedding  foorth  teares,  he  brake  the  matter  to  her  in 
these  tearmes. 

I  am  afraid  wife,  that  my  daughter  Fawnia  hath  made  her  selfe  so  fine,  that 
she  will  buy  repentance  too  deare.  I  heare  newes,  which  if  they  be  true,  some 
will  wish  they  had  not  proved  true.  It  is  tould  me  by  my  neighbours,  that  Doras¬ 
tus  the  Kinges  sonne  begins  to  looke  at  our  daughter  Fawnia :  which  if  it  be  so, 
I  will  not  geve  her  a  halfepeny  for  her  honestie  at  the  yeeres  end.  I  tell  thee  wife, 
nowadaies  beauty  is  a  great  stale  to  trap  yong  men,  and  faire  wordes  and  sweete 
promises  are  two  great  enemies  to  a  maydens  honestie:  and  thou  knowest  where 
poore  men  intreate,  and  cannot  obtaine,  there  Princes  may  commaund,  and  wil  ob- 
taine.  Though  Kings  sonnes  daunce  in  nettes,  they  may  not  be  seene :  *  but 
poore  mens  faultes  are  spied  at  a  little  hole :  Well,  it  is  a  hard  case  where  Kinges 
lustes  are  lawes,  and  that  they  should  binde  poore  men  to  that,  which  they  them¬ 
selves  wilfully  breake. 

Peace  husband  (quoth  his  wife)  take  heede  what  you  say :  speake  no  more  than 
you  should,  least  you  heare  what  you  would  not :  great  streames  are  to  be  stopped  by 
sleight,  not  by  force  :  and  princes  to  be  perswaded  by  submission,  not  by  rigor :  doe 
what  you  can,  but  no  more  than  you  may.  .  .  .  Take  heede  I  say,  it  is  ill  jesting  with 
edged  tooles,  and  bad  sporting  with  Kinges.  The  Wolfe  had  his  skinne  puld  over 
his  eares  for  but  looking  into  the  Lions  den.  Tush  wife  (quoth  he)  thou  speakest 
like  a  foole,  if  the  King  should  knowe  that  Dorastus  had  begotten  our  daughter  with 
childe  (as  I  feare  it  will  fall  out  little  better)  the  Kings  furie  would  be  such  as  no 
doubt  we  should  both  loose  our  goodes  and  lives  :  necessitie  therefore  hath  no  lawe, 


*  Alluding  to  the  old  story  of  the  fisherman’s  daughter,  who  was  ordered  to  dance 
before  a  great  lord,  so  that  she  might  be  seen,  yet  not  seen,  to  effect  which  she  cov¬ 
ered  herself  with  one  of  her  father’s  nets.  The  Italian  fool  and  jester  Gonella  for 
the  same  purpose  is  said  to  have  put  himself  behind  a  sieve. — Hazlitt. 


APPENDIX 


346 

and  T  will  prevent  this  mischiefe  with  a  newe  devise  that  is  come  into  my  head,  which 
shall  neither  offend  the  King,  nor  displease  Dorastus.  I  meane  to  take  the  chaine  and 
the  jewels  that  I  found  with  Fawnia,  and  carrie  them  to  the  King,  letting 
IV,  iv,  777.  kjm  tjjen  t0  understand  how  she  is  none  of  my  daughter,  but  that  I  found 
her  beaten  up  with  the  water  alone  in  a  little  boate  wrapped  in  a  rich  Mantle,  wherein 
was  inclosed  this  treasure.  By  this  meanes  I  hope  the  King  will  take  Fawnia  into 
his  service,  and  we  whatsoever  chaunceth  shal  be  blamelesse.  This  device  pleased 
the  good  wife  very  well,  so  that  they  determined  assoone  as  they  might  know  the 
King  at  leisure,  to  make  him  privie  to  this  case. 

In  the  meane  time  Dorastus  was  not  slacke  in  his  affaires,  but  applyed  his  matters 
with  such  diligence,  that  he  provided  all  thinges  fitte  for  their  journey.  Treasure 
and  Jewels  he  had  gotten  great  store,  thincking  there  was  no  better  friend  then  money 
in  a  strange  countrey :  rich  attire  he  had  provided  for  Fawnia,  and,  because  he  could 
not  bring  the  matter  to  passe  without  the  helpe  and  advice  of  some  one,  he  made  an 
old  servant  of  his  called  Capnio,  who  had  served  him  from  his  childhood,  privie  to 
his  affaires  :  who  seeing  no  perswasions  could  prevaile  to  divert  him  from  his  setled 
determination,  gave  his  consent  and  dealt  so  secretly  in  the  cause,  that  within  short 
space  hee  had  gotten  a  ship  ready  for  their  passage  :  the  Mariners  seeing  a  fit  gale 
of  winde  for  their  purpose,  wished  Capnio  to  make  no  delayes,  least  if  they  pre- 
termitted  this  good  weather,  they  might  stay  long  ere  they  had  such  a  fayre  winde. 
Capnio  fearing  that  his  negligence  should  hinder  the  journey,  in  the  night  time  con¬ 
veyed  the  trunckes  full  of  treasure  into  the  shippe,  and  by  secrette  meanes  let  Fawnia 
understand,  that  the  next  morning  they  meant  to  depart :  she  upon  this  newes  slept 
verie  little  that  night,  but  gotte  up  very  early,  and  wente  to  her  sheepe,  looking  every 
minute  when  she  should  see  Dorastus,  who  taried  not  long,  for  feare  delay  might 
breede  daunger,  but  came  as  fast  as  he  could  gallop,  and  without  any  great  circum¬ 
stance  took  Fawnia  up  behinde  him  and  rode  to  the  haven,  where  the  shippe  lay, 
which  was  not  three  quarters  of  a  mile  distant  from  that  place.  He  no  sooner  came 
there,  but  the  Marriners  were  readie  with  their  Cockboate  to  set  them  aboard,  where 
being  coucht  together  in  a  Cabben  they  past  away  the  time  in  recounting  their  old 
loves,  til  their  man  Capnio  should  come.  Porrus  who  had  heard  that  this  morning 
the  King  would  go  abroad  to  take  the  ayre,  called  in  haste  to  his  wife  to  bring  him 
his  holyday  hose  and  his  best  Iacket,  that  he  might  goe  like  an  honest  substantiall 
man  to  tell  his  tale.  His  wife  a  good  cleanly  wenche,  brought  him  all  things  fitte, 
and  spungd  him  up  very  handsomlie,  giving  him  the  chaines  and  Iewels  in  a  little 
boxe,  which  Porrus  for  the  more  safety  put  in  his  bosom.  Having  thus  all  his 
trinkets  in  readines,  taking  his  staffe  in  his  hand  he  bad  his  wife  kisse  him  for 
good  lucke,  and  so  hee  went  towards  the  Pallace.  But  as  he  was  going,  for¬ 
tune  (who  meant  to  shewe  him  a  little  false  play)  prevented  his  purpose  in  this 
wise. 

He  met  by  chaunce  in  his  way  Capnio,  who  trudging  as  fast  as  he  could  with  a 
IV  iv  803  c°ffer  ur*der  his  arme  to  the  ship,  and  spying  Porrus  whome  he 

knewe  to  be  Fawnias  Father,  going  towardes  the  Pallace,  being  a  wylie 
fellow,  began  to  doubt  the  worst,  and  therefore  crost  him  the  way,  and  askt  him 
whither  he  was  going  so  earely  this  morning.  Porrus  (who  knew  by  his  face  that  he 
was  one  of  the  Court)  meaning  simply,  told  him  that  the  Kings  son  Dorastus  dealt 
hardly  with  him ;  for  he  had  but  one  daughter  who  was  a  little  Beautifull,  and  that 
his  neighboures  told  him  the  young  Prince  had  allured  her  to  folly,  he  went  therefore 
now  to  complaine  to  the  King  how  greatly  he  was  abused. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


347 


IV,  iv,  761. 


IV,  iv,  850. 


Capnio  (who  straight  way  smelt  the  whole  matter)  began  to  soth  him  in  his  talke, 
and  said  that  Dorastus  dealt  not  like  a  Prince  to  spoyle  any  poore  manes 
daughter  in  that  sort :  he  therefore  would  doe  the  best  for  him  he  could, 
because  he  knew  he  was  an  honest  man.  But  (quoth  Capnio)  you  lose  your  labour 
in  going  to  the  Pallace,  for  the  King  meanes  this  day  to  take  the  aire  of 
the  Sea,  and  to  goe  aboord  of  a  shippe  that  lies  in  the  haven.  I  am  going 
before,  you  see,  to  provide  all  things  in  redinesse,  and  if  you  will  follow  my  coun- 
saile,  turne  back  with  me  to  the  haven,  where  I  will  set  you  in  such  a  fitte  place  as 
you  may  speake  to  the  King  at  your  pleasure.  Porrus  giving  credit  to  Capnios 
smooth  tale,  gave  him  a  thousand  thanks  for  his  frendly  advise,  and  went  with  him 
to  the  haven,  making  all  the  way  his  complaintes  of  Dorastus,  yet  concealing  secretlie 
the  chaine  and  the  Jewels.  Assone  as  they  were  come  to  the  Sea  side,  the  marriners 
seeing  Capnio,  came  a  land  with  their  cock-boate,  who  still  dissembling  the  matter, 
demaunded  of  Porrus  if  he  would  go  see  the  ship  ?  who  unwilling  and  fearing  the 
worst,  because  he  was  not  well  acquainted  with  Capnio,  made  his  excuse  that  he 
could  not  brooke  the  Sea,  therefore  would  not  trouble  him. 

Capnio  seeing  that  by  faire  meanes  hee  could  not  get  him  aboord,  commaunded 
the  mariners  that  by  violence  they  should  carrie  him  into  the  shippe,  who  like  sturdy 
knaves  hoisted  the  poore  shepheard  on  their  backes,  and  bearing  him  to  the  boate, 
lanched  from  the  land. 

Porrus  seeing  himselfe  so  cunningly  betraied  durst  not  crie  out,  for  hee  sawe  it 
would  not  prevaile,  but  began  to  intreate  Capnio  and  the  mariners  to  be  good  to  him, 
and  to  pittie  his  estate,  hee  was  but  a  poore  man  that  lived  by  his  labour :  they  laugh¬ 
ing  to  see  the  shepheard  so  afraide,  made  as  much  haste  as  they  could,  and  set  him 
aboorde.  Porrus  was  no  sooner  in  the  shippe,  but  he  saw  Dorastus  walking  with 
Fawnia,  yet  he  scarse  knew  her :  for  she  had  attired  her  selfe  in  riche  apparell, 
which  so  increased  her  beauty,  that  shee  resembled  rather  an  Angell  then  a  mortall 
creature. 

Dorastus  and  Fawnia,  were  halfe  astonished  to  see  the  olde  shepherd,  marvailing 
greatly  what  wind  had  brought  him  thither,  til  Capnio  told  them  al  the  whole  dis¬ 
course  ;  how  Porrus  was  going  to  make  his  complaint  to  the  King,  if  by  pollicie  he 
had  not  prevented  him,  and  therefore  now  sith  he  was  aboord,  for  the  avoiding  of 
further  danger,  it  were  best  to  carrie  him  into  Italy. 

Dorastus  praised  greatly  his  mans  devise,  and  allowed  of  his  counsaile ;  but  Faw¬ 
nia  (who  stil  feared  Porrus,  as  her  father)  began  to  blush  for  shame,  that  by  her 
meanes  he  should  either  incure  daunger  or  displeasure. 

The  old  shephard  hearing  this  hard  sentence,  that  he  should  on  such  a  sodaine  be 
caried  from  his  Wife,  his  country,  and  kinsfolke,  into  a  forraine  Lande  amongst 
straungers,  began  with  bitter  teares  to  make  his  complaint,  and  on  his  knees  to  in¬ 
treate  Dorastus,  that  pardoning  his  unadvised  folly  he  would  give  him  leave  to  goe 
home ;  swearing  that  hee  would  keepe  all  thinges  as  secret  as  they  could  wish.  But 
these  protestations  could  not  prevaile,  although  Fawnia  intreated  Dorastus  very  earn¬ 
estly,  but  the  mariners  hoisting  their  maine  sailes  waied  ankers,  and  hailed  into  the 
deepe,  where  we  leave  them  to  the  favour  of  the  wind  and  seas,  and  returne  to 
Egistus. 

Who  having  appointed  this  day  to  hunt  in  one  of  his  Forrests,  called  for  his  sonne 
Dorastus  to  go  sport  himselfe,  because  hee  saw  that  of  late  hee  began  to  loure ;  but 
his  men  made  answer  that  hee  was  gone  abroade  none  knew  whither,  except  he  were 
gone  to  the  grove  to  walke  all  alone,  as  his  custome  was  to  doe  every  day. 


APPENDIX 


348 

The  King  willing  to  waken  him  out  of  his  dumpes  sent  one  of  his  men  to  goe 
seeke  him,  but  in  vaine,  for  at  last  he  returned,  but  finde  him  he  could  not,  so  that 
the  King  went  himselfe  to  goe  see  the  sport ;  where  passing  away  the  day,  returning 
at  night  from  hunting,  hee  asked  for  his  sonne,  but  he  could  not  be  heard  of,  which 
drave  the  King  into  a  great  choler :  where  upon  most  of  his  Noblemen  and  other 
Courtiers,  poasted  abroad  to  seek  him,  but  they  could  not  heare  of  him  through  all 
Sicilia,  onely  they  missed  Capnio  his  man,  which  againe  made  the  King  suspect  that 
hee  was  not  gone  farre. 

Two  or  three  daies  being  passed,  and  no  newes  heard  of  Dorastus,  Egistus  began 
to  feare  that  he  was  devoured  with  some  wilde  beastes,  and  upon  that  made  out  a 
great  troupe  of  men  to  go  seeke  him ;  who  coasted  through  all  the  Country,  and 
searched  in  everie  daungerous  and  secrete  place,  untill  at  last  they  mette  with  a 
Fisherman  that  was  sitting  in  a  little  covert  hard  by  the  sea  side  mending  his  nettes, 
when  Dorastus  and  Fawnia  tooke  shipping ;  who  being  examined  if  he  either  knewe 
or  heard  where  the  Kings  Sonne  was,  without  any  secrecie  at  all  revealed  the  whole 
matter,  how  he  was  sayled  two  dayes  past,  and  had  in  his  company  his  man  Capnio, 
Porrus  and  his  faire  Daughter  Fawnia.  This  heavie  newes  was  presently  caryed  to 
the  King,  who  halfe  dead  for  sorrow  commaunded  Porrus  wife  to  bee  sent  for :  she 
being  come  to  the  Pallace,  after  due  examination,  confessed  that  her  neighbours  had 
oft  told  her  that  the  Kings  Sonne  was  too  familier  with  Fawnia,  her  Daughter ; 
whereuppon,  her  husband  fearing  the  worst,  about  two  dayes  past  (hearing  the  King 
should  goe  an  hunting)  rose  earely  in  the  morning  and  went  to  make  his  complaint, 
but  since  she  neither  hearde  of  him,  nor  saw  him.  Egistus  perceiving  the  womans 
unfeyned  simplicity,  let  her  depart  without  incurring  further  displeasure,  conceiving 
such  secret  greefe  for  his  Sonnes  recklesse  follie,  that  he  had  so  forgotten  his  honour 
and  parentage,  by  so  base  a  choise  to  dishonor  his  father,  and  discredit  himselfe,  that 
with  very  care  and  thought  be  fel  into  a  quartan  fever,  which  was  so  unfit  for  his  aged 
yeeres  and  complexion,  that  he  became  so  weake,  as  the  Phisiti'ons  would  graunt  him 
no  life. 

But  his  sonne  Dorastus  little  regarded  either  father,  countrie,  or  Kingdome  in  re¬ 
spect  of  his  Lady  Fawnia,  for  fortune  smyling  on  this  young  novice,  lent  him  so- 
lucky  a  gale  of  winde,  for  the  space  of  a  day  and  a  night,  that  the  maryners  lay  and 
slept  upon  the  hatches;  but  on  the  next  morning  about  the  breake  of  the  day,  the 
aire  began  to  be  overcast,  the  winds  to  rise,  the  seas  to  swel,  yea  presently  there  arose 
such  a  fearfull  tempest,  as  the  ship  was  in  danger  to  be  swallowed  up  with  every  sea, 
the  maine  mast  with  the  violence  of  the  wind  was  thrown  over  boord,  the  savles  were 
tome,  the  tacklings  went  in  sunder,  the  storme  raging  still  so  furiously  that  poore 
Fawnia  was  almost  dead  for  feare,  but  that  she  was  greatly  comforted  with  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  Dorastus.  The  tempest  continued  three  dayes,  at  which  time  the  Mariners 
everie  minute  looked  for  death,  and  the  aire  was  so  darkned  with  cloudes  that  the 
Maister  could  not  tell  by  his  compasse  in  what  Coast  they  were.  But  upon  the  fourth 
III  iii  5  a^out  ten  ^e  ciocke,  the  wind  began  to  cease,  the  sea  to  waxe 

calme,  and  the  sky  to  be  cleare,  and  the  Mariners  descryed  the  coast  of 
Bohemia,  shooting  of  their  ordnance  for  joy  that  they  had  escaped  such  a  fearefull 
tempest. 

Dorastus  hearing  that  they  were  arrived  at  some  harbour,  sweetly  kissed  Fawnia, 
and  bad  her  be  of  good  cheare :  when  they  tolde  him  that  the  port  belonged  unto  the 
cheife  Cittie  of  Bohemia  where  Pandosto  kept  his  Court,  Dorastus  began  to  be  sad, 
knowing  that  his  father  hated  no  man  so  much  as  Pandosto,  and  that  the  King  him- 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


349 


self  had  sought  secretly  to  betray  Egistus :  this  considered,  he  was  halfe  afraide  to 
goe  on  land,  but  that  Capnio  counselled  him  to  chaunge  his  name  and  his  countrey, 
until  such  time  as  they  could  get  some  other  barke  to  transport  them  into  Italy.  Do- 
rastus  liking  this  devise  made  his  case  privy  to  the  Marriners,  rewarding  them  boun¬ 
tifully  for  their  paines,  and  charging  them  to  saye  that  he  was  a  Gentleman  of 
Trapalonia  called  Meleagrus.  The  shipmen  willing  to  shew  what  friendship  they 
could  to  Dorastus,  promised  to  be  as  secret  as  they  could,  or  hee  might  wish,  and 
uppon  this  they  landed  in  a  little  village  a  mile  distant  from  the  Citie,  where  after 
they  had  rested  a  day,  thinking  to  make  provision  for  their  mariage ;  the  fame  of 
Fawnias  beauty  was  spread  throughout  all  the  Citie,  so  that  it  came  to  the  eares  of 
Pandosto ;  who  then  being  about  the  age  of  fifty,  had  notwithstanding  yong  and 
freshe  affections  :  so  that  he  desired  greatly  to  see  Fawnia,  and  to  bring  this  matter 
the  better  to  passe,  hearing  they  had  but  one  man,  and  how  they  rested  at  a  very 
homely  house  ;  he  caused  them  to  be  apprehended  as  spies,  and  sent  a  dozen  of  his 
garde  to  take  them :  who  being  come  to  their  lodging,  tolde  them  the  Kings  message. 
Dorastus  no  whit  dismayed,  accompanied  with  Fawnia  and  Capnio,  went  to  the  court 
(for  they  left  Porrus  to  keepe  the  stuffe)  who  being  admitted  to  the  Kings  presence, 
Dorastus  and  Fawnia  with  humble  obedience  saluted  his  majestie. 

Pandosto  amased  at  the  singular  perfection  of  Fawnia,  stood  halfe  astonished, 
viewing  her  beauty,  so  that  he  had  almost  forgot  himselfe  what  hee  had  to  doe :  at 
last  with  stearne  countenance  he  demaunded  their  names,  and  of  what  countrey  they 
were,  and  what  caused  them  to  land  in  Bohemia,  Sir  (quoth  Dorastus)  know  that  my 
name  Meleagrus  is  a  Knight  borne  and  brought  up  in  Trapalonia,  and  this  gentle¬ 
woman,  whom  I  meane  to  take  to  my  wife  is  an  Italian  borne  in  Padua,  from  whence 
I  have  now  brought  her.  The  Cause  I  have  so  small  a  trayne  with  me  is 
for  that  her  friends  unwilling  to  consent,  I  intended  secretly  to  convey  ’  ’ 
her  into  Trapalonia;  whither  as  I  was  sailing,  by  distresse  of  weather  I  was  driven 
into  these  coasts  :  thus  have  you  heard  my  name,  my  country,  and  the  cause  of 
my  voiage.  Pandosto  starting  from  his  seat  as  one  in  choller,  made  this  rough 
reply. 

Meleagrus,  I  feare  this  smooth  tale  hath  but  small  trueth,  and  that  thou  coverest  a 
foule  skin  with  faire  paintings.  No  doubt  this  Ladie  by  her  grace  and  beauty  is  of 
her  degree  more  meete  for  a  mighty  Prince,  then  for  a  simple  knight,  and  thou  like  a 
perjured  traitour  hath  bereft  her  of  her  parents,  to  their  present  griefe,  and  her  insu- 
ing  sorrow.  Till  therefore  I  heare  more  of  her  parentage  and  of  thy  calling,  I  wil 
stay  you  both  here  in  Bohemia. 

Dorastus,  in  whome  rested  nothing  but  Kingly  valor,  was  not  able  to  suffer  the 
reproches  of  Pandosto,  but  that  he  made  him  this  answer. 

It  is  not  meete  for  a  King,  without  due  proofe  to  appeach  any  man  of  ill  beha¬ 
viour,  nor  upon  suspition  to  inferre  beleefe :  straungers  ought  to  bee  entertained  with 
courtesie,  not  to  bee  intreated  with  crueltie,  least  being  forced  by  want  to  put  up  in¬ 
juries  :  the  Gods  revenge  their  cause  with  rigor. 

Pandosto  hearing  Dorastus  utter  these  wordes,  commaunded  that  he  should  straight 
be  committed  to  prison,  untill  such  time  as  they  heard  further  of  his  pleasure,  but  as 
for  Fawnia,  he  charged  that  she  should  be  entertained  in  the  Court,  with  such  cur- 
tesie  as  belonged  to  a  straunger  and  her  calling.  The  rest  of  the  shipmen  he  put 
into  the  dungeon. 

Having  thus  hardly  handled  the  supposed  Trapalonians,  Pandosto  contrarie  to  his 
aged  yeares  began  to  be  somwhat  tickled  with  the  beauty  of  Fawnia. 


350 


APPENDIX 


[Four  pages  of  the  Reprint  are  here  omitted,  partly  to  save  space,  and  partly  be¬ 
cause  they  contain  no  word  or  phrase  which  recalls  the  drama,  unless  it  be  two 
phrases  which  might  be  thus,  most  remotely,  construed  :  one  is  where  Fawnia  in  a 
soliloquy  says  of  herself :  ‘  better  had  it  beene  for  thee,  by  sitting  lowe  to  have  had 
‘  quiet,  then  by  climing  high  to  have  fallen  into  miserie Florizel  says  (V,  i,  253)  : 
‘  The  oddes  for  high  and  low’s  alike.’  The  second  is  where  Fawnia  says  ‘  the  body 
‘  is  subject  to  victories,  but  the  minde  not  to  be  subdued  by  conquest Perdita  says 
(IV,  iv,  625)  :  ‘  Affliction  may  subdue  the  cheek,  But  not  take  in  the  mind.’  There 
is  one  other  passage  in  the  drama  which,  while  it  repeats  no  word  or  phrase  in  these 
omitted  pages,  has  been  deemed  nevertheless  to  have  been  prompted  by  the  subject 
here  treated ;  it  is  where  Paulina  tells  Leontes  that  his  eye  hath  too  much  youth  in’t 
when  he  looks  at  Perdita,  and  Leontes  replies  with  tender  reproach.  But  mainly 
these  pages  are  omitted  because  in  them  is  detailed  the  repulsive  episode  wherein 
the  aged,  amorous  Pandosto  persecutes  with  love  his  own  unrecognised  daughter, 
Fawnia. — Ed.] 

Pandosto  seeing  that  there  was  in  Fawnia  a  determinate  courage  to  love  Meleagrus, 
and  a  resolution  without  feare  to  hate  him,  flong  away  from  her  in  a  rage :  swearing 
if  in  shorte  time  she  would  not  be  wonne  with  reason ;  he  would  forget  all  courtesie, 
and  compel  her  to  graunt  by  rigour :  but  these  threatning  wordes  no  whit  dismayed 
Fawnia;  but  that  she  still  both  despited  and  dispised  Pandosto.  While  thus  these 
two  lovers  strove,  the  one  to  winne  love  the  other  to  live  in  hate :  Egistus  heard  cer- 
taine  newes  by  the  Merchauntes  of  Bohemia,  that  his  sonne  Dorastus  was  imprisoned 
by  Pandosto,  which  made  him  feare  greatly  that  his  sonne  should  be  but  hardly  en¬ 
treated  :  yet  considering  that  Bellaria  and  hee  was  cleared  by  the  Oracle  of  Apollo 
from  that  crime  wherewith  Pandosto  had  unjustly  charged  him,  hee  thought  best  to 
send  with  all  speed  to  Pandosto,  that  he  should  set  free  his  sonne  Dorastus,  and  put 
to  death  Fawnia  and  her  father  Porrus :  finding  this  by  the  advise  of  Counsaile  the 
speediest  remedy  to  release  his  sonne,  he  caused  presently  too  of  his  shippes  to  be 
r'gged,  and  thoroughly  furnished  with  provision  of  men  and  victuals,  and  sent  divers 
of  his  men  and  nobles  Embassadoures  into  Bohemia;  who  willing  to  obey  their  King, 
and  relieve  their  yong  Prince :  made  no  delayes,  for  feare  of  danger,  but  with  as 
much  speed  as  might  be,  sailed  towards  Bohemia :  the  winde  and  seas  favored  them 
greatly,  which  made  them  hope  of  some  good  happe,  for  within  three  daies  they  were 
landed :  which  Pandosto  no  soner  heard  of  their  arrivall,  but  hee  in  person  went  to 
meete  them,  intreating  them  with  such  sumptuous  and  familiar  courtesie,  that  they 
might  well  perceive  how  sory  he  was  for  the  former  injuries  hee  had  offered  to  their 
King,  and  how  willing  (if  it  might  be)  to  make  amendes. 

As  Pandosto  made  report  to  them,  how  one  Maleagrus,  a  Knight  of  Trapolonia, 
was  lately  arived  with  a  Lady  called  Fawnia  in  his  land,  comming  very  suspitiously, 
accompanied  onely  with  one  servant,  and  an  olde  shepheard.  The  Embassadours 
perceived  by  the  halfe,  what  the  whole  tale  ment,  and  began  to  conjecture,  that  it  was 
Dorastus,  who  for  feare  to  bee  knowne,  had  chaunged  his  name :  but  dissembling  the 
matter,  they  shortly  arived  at  the  Court,  where  after  they  had  bin  verie  solemnly  and 
sumptuously  feasted,  the  noble  men  of  Sicilia  being  gathered  togither,  they  made  re- 
porte  of  their  Embassage  :  where  they  certified  Pandosto  that  Meleagrus  was  sonne 
and  heire  to  the  King  Egistus,  and  that  his  name  was  Dorastus :  how  contrarie  to  the 
Kings  minde  he  had  privily  convaied  away  that  Fawnia,  intending  to  marrie  her, 
being  but  daughter  to  that  poore  shepheard  Porrus :  whereupon  the  Kings  request 
was  that  Capnio,  Fawnia,  and  Porrus,  might  bee  murthered  and  put  to  death,  and 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


351 


that  his  sonne  Dorastus  might  be  sent  home  in  safetie.  Pandosto  having  attentively 
and  with  great  mervaile  heard  their  Embassage,  willing  to  reconcile  himselfe  to  Egis- 
tus,  and  to  shew  him  how  greatly  he  esteemed  his  favour :  although  love  and  fancy 
forbad  him  to  hurt  Fawnia,  yet  in  despight  of  love  hee  determined  to  execute  Egistus 
will  without  mercy ;  and  therefore  he  presently  sent  for  Dorastus  out  of  prison,  who 
mervailing  at  this  unlooked  for  curtesie,  found  at  his  comming  to  the  Kings  presence, 
that  which  he  least  doubted  of,  his  fathers  Embassadours  :  who  no  sooner  sawe  him, 
but  with  great  reverence  they  honored  him :  and  Pandosto  embracing  Dorastus,  set 
him  by  him  very  lovingly  in  a  chaire  of  estate.  Dorastus  ashamed  that  his  follie  was 
bewraied,  sate  a  long  time  as  one  in  a  muse,  til  Pandosto  told  him  the  summe  of  his 
Fathers  embassage :  which  he  had  no  sooner  heard,  but  he  was  toucht  at  the  quicke, 
foY  the  cruell  sentence  that  was  pronounced  against  Fawnia :  but  neither  could  his 
sorrow  nor  perswasions  prevaile,  for  Pandosto  commaunded  that  Fawnia,  Porrus,  and 
Capnio,  should  bee  brought  to  his  presence ;  who  were  no  sooner  come,  but  Pandosto 
having  his  former  love  turned  to  a  disdainfull  hate,  began  to  rage  against  Fawnia  in 
these  tearmes. 

Thou  disdainfull  vassal,  thou  currish  kite,  assigned  by  the  destinies  to  base  fortune, 
and  yet  with  an  aspiring  minde  gazing  after  honour :  how  durst  thou  presume,  being 
a  beggar,  to  match  with  a  Prince  ?  By  thy  alluring  lookes  to  inchant  the  sonne  of  a 
King  to  leave  his  owne  countrie  to  fulfill  thy  disordinate  lusts?  O  despightfull 
minde,  a  proud  heart  in  a  beggar  is  not  unlike  to  a  great  fire  in  a  smal  cottage,  which 
warmeth  not  the  house,  but  burneth  it :  assure  thy  selfe  that  thou  shalt  die,  and  thou 
old  doating  foole,  whose  follie  hath  bene  such,  as  to  suffer  thy  daughter  to  reach 
above  thy  fortune ;  looke  for  no  other  meede,  but  the  like  punishment.  But  Capnio, 
thou  which  hast  betrayed  the  King,  and  hast  consented  to  the  unlawfull  lust  of  thy 
Lord  and  maister,  I  know  not  how  justly  I  may  plague  thee  :  death  is  too  easie  a 
punishment  for  thy  falsehood,  and  to  live  (if  not  in  extreme  miserie)  were  not  to 
shew  thee  equitie.  I  therefore  award  that  thou  shall  have  thine  eyes  put  out,  and 
continually  while  thou  dies!,  grinde  in  a  mil  like  a  brute  beast.  The  feare  of  death 
brought  a  sorrowfull  silence  upon  Fawnia  and  Capnio,  but  Porrus  seeing  no  hope  of 
life,  burst  forth  into  these  speeches. 

Pandosto,  and  ye  noble  Embassadours  of  Sicilia,  seeing  without  cause  I  am  con¬ 
demned  to  die ;  I  am  yet  glad  I  have  opportunitie  to  disburden  my  conscience  before 
my  death :  I  will  tel  you  as  much  as  I  know,  and  yet  no  more  than  is  true :  whereas 
I  am  accused  that  I  have  bene  a  supporter  of  Fawnias  pride,  and  shee  disdained  as  a 
vilde  begger,  so  it  is  that  I  am  neither  Father  unto  her,  nor  she  daughter  unto  me. 
For  so  it  happened  that  I  being  a  poore  shepheard  in  Sicilia,  living  by  keeping  others 
mens  flockes ;  one  of  my  sheepe  straying  downe  to  the  sea  side,  as  I  went  to  seeke 
her,  I  saw  a  little  boat  driven  upon  the  shoare,  wherein  I  found  a  babe  of  sixe  daies 
olde,  wrapped  in  a  mantle  of  skarlet,  having  about  the  necke  this  chaine :  I  pittying 
the  child,  and  desirous  of  the  treasure,  carried  it  home  to  my  wife,  who  with  great 
care  nursed  it  up,  and  set  it  to  keepe  sheepe.  Here  is  the  chaine  and  the  Jewels,  and 
this  Fawnia  is  the  childe  whome  I  found  in  the  boate,  what  shee  is,  or  of  what 
parentage  I  knowe  not,  but  this  I  am  assured  that  she  is  none  of  mine. 

Pandosto  would  scarce  suffer  him  to  tell  out  his  tale,  but  that  he  enquired  the 
time  of  the  yeere,  the  manner  of  the  boate,  and  other  circumstances,  which  when  he 
found  agreeing  to  his  count,  he  sodainelie  leapt  from  his  seate,  and  kissed  Fawnia, 
wetting  her  tender  cheeks  with  his  teares,  and  crying  my  daughter  Fawnia,  ah  sweete 
Fawnia,  I  am  thy  Father,  Fawnia.  This  sodaine  passion  of  the  King  drave  them  all 


352 


APPENDIX 


into  a  maze,  especially  Fawnia  and  Dorastus.  But  when  the  King  had  breathed 
himselfe  a  while  in  this  newe  joy,  he  rehearsed  before  the  Embassadours  the  whole 
matter,  how  he  hadde  entreated  his  wife  Bellaria  for  jealousie,  and  that  this  was  the 
childe  whome  hee  sent  to  floate  in  the  seas. 

Fawnia  was  not  more  joyfull  that  she  had  found  such  a  Father,  then  Dorastus  was 
glad  he  should  get  such  a  wife.  The  Embassadors  rejoyced  that  their  yong  prince 
had  made  such  a  choice,  that  those  Kingdomes,  which  through  enmitie  had  long  time 
bin  dissevered,  should  now  through  perpetual  amitie  be  united  and  reconciled.  The 
Citizens  and  subjects  of  Bohemia  (hearing  that  the  King  had  found  againe  his  Daugh- 
y  ter,  which  was  supposed  dead,  joyfull  that  there  was  an  heire  apparent  to 

his  Kingdome)  made  Bonfires  and  showes  throughout  the  Cittie.  The 
Courtiers  and  Knights  appointed  Justs  and  Turneis  to  signifie  their  willing  mindes  in 
gratifying  the  Kings  hap. 

Eighteene  daies  being  past  in  these  princely  sports,  Pandosto  willing  to  recom- 
pence  old  Porrus,  of  a  shepheard  made  him  a  Knight :  which  done,  providing  a  suf¬ 
ficient  Navie  to  receive  him  and  his  retinue,  accompanied  with  Dorastus,  Fawnia,  and 
the  Sicilian  Embassadours,  he  sailed  towards  Sicilia,  where  he  was  most  princelie 
entertained  by  Egistus ;  who  hearing  this  comicall  event,  rejoyced  greatly  at  his  sonnes 
good  happe,  and  without  delay  (to  the  perpetuall  joy  of  the  two  yong  Lovers)  cele¬ 
brated  the  marriage  :  which  was  no  sooner  ended,  but  Pandosto  (calling  to  mind  how 
first  he  betraied  his  friend  Egistus,  how  his  jealousie  was  the  cause  of  Bellarias  death, 
that  contrarie  to  the  law  of  nature  hee  had  lusted  after  his  owne  Daughter)  moved 
with  these  desperate  thoughts,  he  fell  into  a  melancholie  fit,  and  to  close  up  the  Com- 
edie  with  a  Tragicall  stratageme,  he  slewe  himselfe,  whose  death  being  many  daies 
bewailed  of  Fawnia,  Dorastus,  and  his  deere  friend  Egistus,  Dorastus  taking  his 
leave  of  his  father,  went  with  his  wife  and  the  dead  corps  into  Bohemia,  where  after 
they  were  sumptuouslie  intoombed,  Dorastus  ended  his  daies  in  contented  quiet. 

Finis. 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS 

Mrs  Lennox  (Shakespear  Illustrated ,  1753,  vo1-  »,  P-  75) :  It  has  been  mentioned 
as  a  great  praise  to  Shakespear  that  the  old  paltry  story  of  Dorastus  and  Fawnia 
served  him  for  a  Winter’s  Tale,  but  if  we  compare  the  conduct  of  the  incidents  in 
the  Play  with  the  paltry  Story  on  which  it  is  founded,  we  shall  find  the  original  much 
less  absurd  and  ridiculous.  If  Shakespear  had  even  improved  the  story  and  cleared  it 
of  great  part  of  its  inconsistencies,  yet  he  would  still  have  been  accountable  for  what 
remained,  for  why,  indeed,  did  he  chuse  a  subject  so  faulty  for  the  story  of  a  play  ?  His 
claim  to  praise  would  have  been  but  very  small,  by  making  what  was  bad  better,  since 
he  was  free  in  the  choice  ot  his  subject ;  but  certainly  he  can  have  no  pretension  to 
it  at  all  by  changing  bad  to  worse ;  that  he  has  done  so  will  be  easily  proved  by  ex¬ 
amining  some  of  the  principal  incidents,  as  they  are  differently  managed  by  the 
novelist  and  the  poet.  .  .  .  This  account  of  the  king’s  jealousy  [in  the  novel]  does 
not  absolutely  clash  with  probability.  But  let  us  see  how  Shakespear  manages  it 
in  the  play.  ...  All  this  conversation  passes  in  the  presence  of  Leontes,  who  from 
hence  takes  occasion  to  be  jealous,  and  passes  in  an  instant  from  the  greatest  con- 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS 


353 


fidence,  security,  and  friendship  imaginable,  to  the  last  extremity  of  jealousy  and 
rage.  What  wonderful  contrivance  is  here  ?  The  Legerdemain,  who  shows  you  a 
tree  that  buds,  blossoms,  and  bears  ripe  fruit  in  the  space  of  five  minutes,  does  not 
put  so  great  a  cheat  on  the  senses  as  Shakespear  does  on  the  understanding;  for  this 
jealousy  of  one  minute’s  growth  we  see  take  root  before  our  eyes,  and  so  far  from 
there  being  the  smallest  progression  in  the  several  actions  of  budding,  blossoming, 
and  bearing  ripe  fruit,  that  we  have  the  first  and  the  last  at  one  and  the  same  instant. 
The  extravagant  effects  of  the  king’s  rage  and  jealousy  are  carried  far  enough  in  all 
conscience  in  the  Novel,  and  Shakespear  is  not  a  whit  more  moderate;  only  he  has 
altered  a  circumstance  which  entirely  destroys  the  little  probability  the  Novelist  had 
preserved  in  the  relation.  .  .  .  Shakespear  makes  the  king  in  the  heighth  of  his  frenzy 
of  jealousy  send  himself  to  the  Oracle  of  Apollo,  and  in  the  mean  time  commit  the 
most  barbarous  cruelties  on  his  Queen  and  child.  How  inconsistent  is  this !  why 
does  he  consult  the  Oracle  if  he  is  resolved  to  proceed  to  extremities  before  the 
answer  arrives  ?  The  request  comes  very  naturally  from  the  Queen  in  the  Novel, 
and  the  king’s  compliance  with  it  is  very  well  accounted  for,  but  in  the  play  nothing 
can  be  more  absurd  than  that  the  king  should  be  reasonable  enough  to  consult  volun¬ 
tarily  the  Gods  concerning  the  infidelity  of  his  wife ;  and  while  the  answer  was 
expected,  and  her  guilt  yet  doubtful,  punish  her  with  as  much  rigour  as  if  the  Oracle 
had  declared  her  an  adultress.  Here  again  the  paltry  story  has  the  advantage  of  the 
play.  .  .  .  Antigonus  obeys,  and  this  done,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  he  should  never 
return  to  Sicily,  .  .  .  therefore  a  bear  rushes  out  of  the  woods  and  devours  him ;  the 
good  natured  bear,  as  it  should  seem,  resolved  not  to  spoil  the  story,  passes  by  the 
little  princess,  who  is  to  make  so  great  a  figure  hereafter,  and  a  convenient  storm 
arising,  splits  the  ship,  so  that  all  the  sailors  perishing,  though  they  were  near  enough 
the  shore  to  have  saved  themselves,  no  one  is  left  to  carry  back  any  account  of  the 
affair  to  Sicily.  ...  In  the  play  the  king  comes  very  opportunely  to  hear  the  prince, 
his  son,  declare  his  passion  for  the  fair  shepherdess  publicly,  and  his  intentions  of 
marrying  her;  nay,  he  carries  his  indiscretion  so  far  as  to  join  hands  with  her  before 
all  the  country  people  who  are  present ;  can  any  thing  be  more  absurd  ?  ...  Is  it  not 
natural  to  suppose  that  the  enraged  king  will  keep  his  son  in  strict  confinement  to 
prevent  this  unequal  match  ?  but  it  happens  quite  otherwise;  for  the  king,  after  some 
severe  menaces,  goes  back  to  his  palace  and  leaves  his  son  at  liberty  to  run  away  with 
the  country  girl,  which  he  accordingly  does.  .  .  .  Perdita,  though  her  father  and 
brother  are  in  the  same  vessel  with  her,  never  sees  or  speaks  to  them ;  the  old  Shep¬ 
herd  and  his  son  make  no  attempts  to  speak  to  her;  and  the  Prince  has  so  little  con¬ 
sideration  for  the  father  and  brother  of  his  beloved  that  he  takes  no  notice  of  them ; 
how  wonderfull  is  all  this !  .  .  .  Shakespear  seems  to  have  preserved  the  queen  alive 
for  the  sake  of  her  representing  her  own  statue  in  the  last  scene, — a  mean  and  absurd 
contrivance :  for  how  can  it  be  imagined  that  Hermione,  a  virtuous  and  affectionate 
wife,  would  conceal  herself  during  sixteen  years  in  a  solitary  house,  though  she  was 
sensible  that  her  repentant  husband  was  all  that  time  consuming  away  with  grief 
and  remorse  for  her  death  :  and  what  reason  could  she  have  for  chusing  to  live  in 
such  a  miserable  confinement  when  she  might  have  been  happy  in  the  possession  of 
her  husband’s  affection  and  have  shared  his  throne  ?  How  ridiculous  also  in  a  great 
Queen,  on  so  interesting  an  occasion,  to  submit  to  such  buffoonery  as  standing  on  a 
pedestal,  motionless,  her  eyes  fixed,  and  at  last  to  be  conjured  down  by  a  magical 
command  of  Paulina.  .  .  .  The  novel  has  nothing  in  it  half  so  low  and  improbable 
as  this  contrivance  of  the  statue ;  and  indeed  wherever  Shakespear  has  altered  or 
23 


354 


APPENDIX 


invented,  his  Winter's  Tale  is  greatly  inferior  to  the  old  paltry  story  that  furnished 
him  with  the  subject  of  it. 

[In  Campbell’s  Introduction  to  his  edition,  there  is  a  foot-note  to  his  remarks 
which  I  think  can  be  read  with  more  satisfaction  here  than  where  it  originally  occurs. 
It  is  as  follows :  *  My  dislike  to  Mrs  Lennox’s  memory  for  having  misapplied  her 
‘  little  talent,  and  still  less  learning,  in  an  effort  to  prove  that  Shakespeare  has  spoilt 
‘  every  story  on  which  his  plays  were  founded,  is  softened  by  the  perusal  of  her  his- 
‘  tory.  She  was  the  protdgde  of  Dr  Johnson,  who  is  said  to  have  written  the  preface 
‘  to  her  Shakespeare  Illustrated.  She  began  her  literary  career  in  1747,  with  publish- 

*  ing  a  collection  of  poems  under  her  maiden  name  of  Charlotte  Ramsay.  Subse- 

*  quently  came  out  her  Female  Quixote,  which  has  considerable  merit,  and  was  very 
‘  favourably  received.  Others  of  her  works  appeared  later ;  an  account  of  them  is 
‘  given  in  Nichols’s  Literary  Anecdotes,  vol.  iii,  p.  200.  Towards  the  latter  end  of 
‘  her  days  she  was  afflicted  with  poverty  and  sickness.  She  died  Jan.  4,  1804,  at  the 
‘  age  of  eighty-four,  after  having  depended  for  some  time  on  the  bounty  of  the  “  Liter- 

*  ary  Fund.”  Without  genius  she  possessed  talents,  and  her  industry  and  misfortunes 
‘  have  a  claim  on  our  interest.’  Mrs  Lennox  was  born  in  New  York,  where  her  father, 
Colonel  James  Ramsay,  was  Lieutenant-Governor,  and  where  she  lived  until  she  was 
fifteen  years  old,  when,  in  1735,  she  went  to  England. 

Mrs  Inchbald  ( British  Theatre,  London,  1822,  vol.  xii) :  The  Winters  Tale 
was  very  successful  at  Drury  Lane  Theatre  a  few  years  ago;  and  yet,  it  seems  to 
class  among  those  dramas  that  charm  more  in  perusal  than  in  representation.  The 
long  absence  from  the  scene  of  the  two  most  important  characters,  Leontes  and  his 
wife,  and  the  introduction  of  various  other  persons  to  fill  their  places,  divert,  in  some 
measure,  the  attention  of  an  audience ;  and  they  do  not  so  feelingly  unite  all  they  see 
and  all  they  hear  into  a  single,  story,  as  he  who,  with  the  book  in  his  hand,  and 
neither  his  eye  nor  ear  distracted,  combines,  and  enjoys  the  whole  grand  variety. 
Besides  the  improbability  of  exciting  equal  interest  by  the  plot  of  this  drama,  in  per¬ 
formance  as  in  the  closet ;  some  of  the  poetry  is  less  calculated  for  that  energetic 
delivery  which  the  stage  requires,  than  for  the  quiet  contemplation  of  one  who 
reads.  The  conversations  of  Florizel  and  Perdita  have  more  of  tenderness,  than 
the  fervour,  of  love ;  and  consequently  their  passion  has  not  the  force  of  expression 
to  animate  a  multitude,  though  it  is  properly  adapted  to  steal  upon  the  heart  of  an 
individual. 

Shakespeare  has  said  in  Othello  that  a  man  is  ‘jealous,  because  he  is  jealous.’ 
This  conceit  of  the  poet  seems  to  be  the  only  reason  that  can  be  possibly  alleged  for 
the  jealousy  of  Leontes ;  his  unfounded  suspicion  of  Hermione  is  a  much  greater 
fault,  and  one  with  which  imagination  can  less  accord,  than  with  the  hasty  strides  of 
time,  so  much  censured  by  critics,  between  the  Third  and  Fourth  Acts.  It  is  easier 
for  fancy  to  overleap  whole  ages  than  to  overlook  one  powerful  demonstration  of  in¬ 
sanity  in  that  mind  which  is  reputed  sane.  .  .  .  There  are  two  occurrences  in  this 
drama,  quite  as  improbable  as  the  unprovoked  jealousy  of  Leontes, — the  one,  that  the 
gentle,  the  amiable,  the  tender  Perdita  should  be  an  unconcerned  spectator  of  the 
doom  which  menaced  her  foster,  and  supposed  real,  father ;  and  carelessly  forsake 
him  in  the  midst  of  his  calamities.  The  other  disgraceful  improbability  is, — that  the 
young  prince  Florizel  should  introduce  himself  to  the  Court  of  Sicilia,  by  speaking 
arrant  falsehoods. 

There  is  a  scene  in  this  play  which  is  an  exception  to  the  rest,  in  being  far  more 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS 


355 


grand  in  exhibition  than  the  reader  will  possibly  behold  in  idea.  This  is  the  scene 
of  the  Statue,  when  Mrs  Siddons  stands  for  Hermione. 

Campbell  ( Introduction ,  1838,  p.  lxii):  After  a  hundred  perusals  of  this  play  I 
sat  down  to  it,  for  the  last  time,  fresh  from  reading  Mrs  Lennox’s  objections  to  it; 
and  a  dreadful  list  of  them  she  seems  at  first  sight  to  make  out;  but  when  you  come 
to  the  piece  itself,  some  of  those  objections  disappear,  as  if  conscious  of  their  false¬ 
hood,  and  the  rest  insensibly  melt  away.  The  jealousy  of  Leontes,  though  rash  and 
irrational,  is  not  unnatural  in  a  hasty  and  wilful  man.  The  lapse  of  time  is  explained 
by  an  apology  from  the  lips  of  Time  himself.  The  silence  of  Florizel  towards  his 
Perdita,  and  her  supposed  father  and  brother,  on  shipboard,  has  a  fair  excuse  in  the 
impossibility  of  the  Poet’s  representing  dramatically  a  narrated  event ;  and  the  great¬ 
est  of  the  alleged  improbabilities,  namely,  that  of  Hermione  refusing  reconciliation 
with  her  husband,  may  be  explained  by  the  conceivableness  of  a  mother  being  un¬ 
willing  to  re-embrace  a  husband  who  had  ordered  the  murder  of  her  child,  until  that 
husband  had  repented,  and  the  lost  Perdita  had  been  restored.  Mrs  Lennox  says,, 
that  the  Statue  scene  is  low  and  ridiculous.  I  am  sure  Mrs  Siddons  used  to  make  it 
appear  to  us  in  a  different  light.  Let  Mrs  Lennox  and  her  followers,  if  she  has  any, 
get  a  patent  for  this  belief.  When  a  projector  asked  a  reward  from  James  I.  for  hav¬ 
ing  invented  the  art  of  flying,  the  King  offered  him  a  patent  for  it ;  the  humbler  priv¬ 
ilege  of  an  exclusive  right  to  crawl  upon  all-fours  ought  to  be  given  to  the  believers, 
of  Shakespeare’s  Statue  scene  being  low  and  ridiculous.  ,  Mrs  Lennox  says  that  the 
original  story  of  Greene  is  more  purely  moral  than  that  of  our  Poet.  Now  in  the. 
original  tale,  the  father  of  Fawnia  attempts  to  seduce  his  own  daughter.  Shakespeare 
has  omitted  this  exquisite  trait  of  morality. 

Hallam  ( Literature  of  Europe,  1839,  iii,  574) :  The  name  of  Shakespeare  is: 
the  greatest  in  our  literature,— it  is  the  greatest  in  all  literature.  No  man  ever  came 
near  to  him  in  the  creative  powers  of  the  mind ;  no  man  had  ever  such  strength  at 
once,  and  such  variety  of  imagination.  Coleridge  has  most  felicitously  applied  to 
him  a  Greek  epithet,  given  before  to  I  know  not  whom,  certainly  none  so  deserving 
of  it,  fivpidvov f,  the  thousand-souled  Shakespeare.  The  number  of  characters  in  his. 
plays  is  astonishingly  great,  without  reckoning  those,  who  although  transient,  have 
often  their  individuality,  all  distinct,  all  types  of  human  life  in  well  defined  differ¬ 
ences.  Yet  he  never  takes  an  abstract  quality  to  embody  it,  scarcely  perhaps  a  defi¬ 
nite  condition  of  manners,  as  Jonson  does ;  nor  did  he  draw  much,  as  I  conceive, 
from  living  models;  there  is  no  manifest  appearance  of  personal  caricature  in  his- 
comedies,  though  in  some  slight  traits  of  character  this  may  not  improbably  have  been 
the  case.  Above  all,  neither  he  nor  his  contemporaries  wrote  for  the  stage  in  the 
worst,  though  most  literal,  and  of  late  years  the  most  usual  sense  ;  making  the  ser¬ 
vants  and  hand-maids  of  dramatic  invention  to  lord  over  it,  and  limiting  the  capaci¬ 
ties  of  the  poet’s  mind  to  those  of  the  performers.  If  this  poverty  of  the  representa¬ 
tive  department  of  the  drama  had  hung  like  an  incumbent  fiend  on  the  creative  power 
of  Shakespeare,  how  would  he  have  poured  forth  with  such  inexhaustible  prodigality 
the  vast  diversity  of  characters  that  we  find  in  some  of  his  plays  ?  This  it  is  in  which 
he  leaves  far  behind  not  the  dramatists  alone,  but  all  writers  of  fiction.  Compare 
with  him  Homer,  the  tragedians  of  Greece,  the  poets  of  Italy,  Plautus,  Cervantes, 
Moli^re,  Addison,  Le  Sage,  Fielding,  Richardson,  Scott,  the  romancers  of  the  elder 
or  later  schools, — one  man  has  far  more  than  surpassed  them  all.  Others  may  have. 


APPENDIX 


356 

been  as  sublime,  others  may  have  been  more  pathetic,  others  may  have  equalled  him 
in  grace  and  purity  of  language,  and  have  shunned  some  of  his  faults ;  but  the  phil¬ 
osophy  of  Shakespeare,  his  intimate  searching  out  of  the  human  heart,  whether  in 
the  gnomic  form  of  sentence,  or  in  the  dramatic  exhibition  of  character,  is  a  gift  pe¬ 
culiarly  his  own.  It  is,  if  not  entirely  wanting,  very  little  manifested  in  comparison 
with  him,  by  the  English  dramatists  of  his  own  and  the  subsequent  period. 

These  dramatists  are  hardly  less  inferior  to  Shakespeare  in  judgement.  To  this 
quality  I  particularly  advert,  because  foreign  writers,  and  sometimes  our  own,  have 
imputed  an  extraordinary  barbarism  and  rudeness  to  his  works.  They  belong  indeed 
to  an  age  sufficiently  rude  and  barbarous  in  its  entertainments,  and  are  of  course  to 
be  classed  with  what  is  called  the  romantic  school,  which  has  hardly  yet  shaken  off 
that  reproach.  But  no  one  who  has  perused  the  plays  anterior  to  those  of  Shake¬ 
speare,  or  contemporary  with  them,  or  subsequent  to  them  down  to  the  closing  of  the 
theatres  in  the  civil  war,  will  pretend  to  deny  that  there  is  far  less  regularity,  in  re¬ 
gard  to  everything  where  regularity  can  be  desired,  in  a  large  proportion  of  these 
(perhaps  in  all  the  tragedies),  than  in  his  own.  We  need  only  repeat  the  names  of 
1  he  Merchant  of  Venice,  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Macbeth,  Othello,  The  Merry  Wives  of 
Windsor,  Measure  for  Measure.  The  plots  in  these  are  excellently  constructed,  and 
in  some  with  uncommon  artifice.  But  even  where  an  analysis  of  the  story  might 
excite  criticism,  there  is  usually  a  unity  of  interest  which  tones  the  whole.  The 
Winter’s  Tale  is  not  a  model  to  follow,  but  we  feel  that  The  Winter's  Tale  is  a 
single  story;  it  is  even  managed  as  such  with  consummate  skill.  It  is  another  proof 
of  Shakespeare’s  judgement,  that  he  has  given  action  enough  to  his  comedies  without 
the  bustling  intricacies  of  the  Spanish  stage.  If  his  plots  have  any  little  obscurity  in 
some  parts,  it  is  from  copying  his  novel  or  history  too  minutely. 

Hartley  Coleridge  [Essays,  etc.,  London,  1851,  ii,  148) :  In  this  wild  drama 
the  comedy  is  excellent,  the  pastoral  is  exquisite;  but  of  the  scenes  which  carry  on 
the  plot,  some  appear  to  me  to  be  harsh  in  the  thought,  and  infelicitous  in  diction  : — 
Shakespeare  throughout,  but  not  always  Shakespeare  in  a  happy  vein.  The  sudden 
jealousy  of  Leontes,  though  unaccountable,  is  not  impossible.  I  am  not  sure  that 
the  ready  soliciting  of  Hermione,  and  the  easy  compliance  of  Polixenes  might  not 
produce,  in  a  better  mind,  a  momentary  cloud,  a  wish  that  the  request  had  not  been 
made,  an  impatience  for  Polixenes’  departure.  How  slight  a  spark  may  cause  ex¬ 
plosion  in  the  foul  atmosphere  of  a  despot’s  heart  it  is  hard  to  say.  Irresponsible 
power  is  tyranny  without,  and  moral  anarchy  within.  We  should  little  wonder  at 
the  conduct  of  Leontes  in  an  Eastern  tale.  Many  of  the  sultans  in  the  Arabian 
Nights  act  as  madly  and  wickedly,  whom  yet  the  inventors  evidently  meant  for  wise 
and  gracious  princes ;  nay,  history  records  abundant  instances  of  like  abjuration  of 
reason  in  men  not  incapable  of  generosity  or  incidental  greatness,  to  say  nothing  of 
taste  and  sensibility,  for  which  some  of  the  worst  of  kings  have  been  conspicuous. 
But  the  exhibition  of  such  madness  of  the  heart,  if  fit  for  drama  at  all,  should  be 
confined  to  the  sternest  tragedy.  The  grossness  of  Leontes’  imaginations,  his  mur¬ 
derous  suggestions,  and  inaccessibility  to  reason,  remorse,  or  religion,  is  naturally 
consequent  on  the  base  passion,  say  rather  the  unclean  d turnon,  that  possesses  him. 
It  is  nature  such  as  may  still  be  found  in  St.  Giles’s.  But  is  it  possible  that  one  who 
had  once  fallen  thus,  could  ever  again  be  worthy  of  a  restoration  to  happiness  ?  In 
the  constituted  order  of  human  progression, — surely  never.  Remorse,  the  tyrant 
would  feel ;  but  it  would  urge  him  to  vengeance  on  the  instruments  of  his  crimes, — 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS 


35  7 


perhaps  to  some  superstitious  rite, — some  self-sought  atonement ;  but  never  to  a  heart¬ 
cleansing  repentance.  For  the  improbability  of  the  events  I  care  as  little  as  for  the 
violation  of  the  unities  and  the  outrages  on  geography.  Except  Autolycus,  none  of 
the  characters  show  much  of  Shakespeare’s  philosophic  depth.  On  him  I  think  I 
could  lecture  very  psychologically.  Hermione  is  frank  and  noble,  rising  in  dignity  as 
she  falls  in  fortune, — not  unlike  Marie  Antoinette,  whose  unsuspecting  levity,  though  it 
alienated  not  her  husband,  exposed  her  to  the  slander  of  foul  minds  that  had  not  even 
the  excuse  of  jealousy, — in  sunshine  a  butterfly,  in  misery  a  martyr.  Paulina  is  an 
honest  scold.  Perdita  a  pretty  piece  of  poetry.  Polixenes  not  very  amiable,  nor,  in 
truth,  much  of  anything.  The  length  of  time  he  remains  witness  to  his  son’s  court¬ 
ship,  before  he  discovers  himself,  is  a  sacrifice  to  effect.  Camillo  is  an  old  rogue 
whom  I  can  hardly  forgive  for  his  double  treachery.  The  Shepherd  and  his  son  are 
well  enough  in  their  way ;  but  Mopsa  and  Dorcas  might  be  countrified  enough  with 
better  tongues  in  their  heads.  Of  the  rest  nothing  need  be  said.  The  progressive 
interest  of  the  play,  tnalgrl  the  vast  hiatus  for  which  Shakespeare  himself  thought  it 
necessary  to  apologise,  is  well  sustained;  but  the  catastrophe  is  hurried,  and  the 
queen’s  reanimation  beyond  all  dramatic  credibility.  Yet  it  acts  well,  and  the  whole 
is  pleasing  and  effective  on  the  stage. 

W.  W.  Lloyd  (Singer,  ed.  ii,  1856,  p.  131) :  The  Alcestis  of  Euripides,  both  in 
treatment  and  incident,  has  many  points  of  analogy  with  The  Winter's  Tale.  .  .  .  Ad- 
metus,  fated  to  die,  is  by  favour  of  Apollo  permitted  to  prolong  his  life  by  furnishing 
Death  with  a  voluntary  substitute.  He  urges  the  duty  upon  his  aged  parents,  who 
repudiate  the  proposal  with  very  marked  reflections  on  its  unreasonableness,  and  on 
his  coolness  in  the  proposition,  but  they  fail  to  bring  home  to  him  this  view  of  his 
conduct ;  and  when  his  wife,  Alcestis,  becomes  the  volunteer,  he  grieves  at  her  fate 
as  he  would  at  an  inevitable  blow,  is  inconsolable  at  his  bereavement,  would  fain  ac¬ 
company  her,  but,  wrapt  up  in  blind  selfishness,  never  once  contrasts  her  conduct, 
which  he  so  much  admires,  with  his  own.  His  position  is  placed  before  him  most 
forcibly  by  his  father,  but  he  can  see  only  his  father’s  selfishness,  not  his  own,  and 
drives  on  in  dark  obstinacy  upon  the  path  that  must  end  in  his  being  undeceived  to 
humiliation  the  most  degrading.  No  word  of  reproach  passes  the  lips  of  Alcestis ; 
but  her  parting  appeal  to  him,  to  spare  her  children  the  unhappiness  of  a  step-mother, 
speaks  expressively.  If  she  says  a  word  to  set  forth  her  sacrifice  and  the  contrast  of 
her  self-devotion  to  the  coldness  of  others,  it  is  to  urge  a  claim  to  this  consideration 
for  those  she  leaves  behind,  and  she  places  them  solemnly  in  his  hands  upon  formal 
declaration  of  the  stipulation.  There  is  no  mistaking  in  the  comparative  coldness  of 
her  adieu  to  him,  a  sense  of  the  forfeiture  he  has  incurred  of  that  respect  without 
which  love  lives  not.  She  dies  on  the  stage  like  Hermione,  and  her  sorrowing  hus¬ 
band  forthwith  prepares  her  solemn  funeral,  rejecting  his  father’s  contribution,  as  he 
regards  him  as  the  impersonation  of  cowardice  and  selfishness.  It  is  when  he  re¬ 
turns  from  the  entombment,  and  stands  before  the  doors  of  his  widowed  household, 
that  his  nobler  heart  recovers,  and  he  passionately  avows  that  too  late  he  learns  his 
wife  has  the  nobler  and  the  better  fate ;  he  has  forfeited  happiness  and  fame  together, 
hia  dwelling  must  henceforth  be  unbearable,  and  elsewhere  he  can  only  expect  the 
vituperation  he  utterly  deserves.  The  Chorus  comfort  him,  and  urge  the  reparation 
of  funeral  honour.  In  the  mean  time  Hercules  brings  back  Alcestis  veiled,  rescued 
by  his  arm  from  the  already  closed  clutches  of  Thanatos,  hateful  to  God  and  man. 
Hercules  pretends  that  his  companion  is  a  prize  won  in  games,  and  offering  to  leave 


APPENDIX 


358 

her  with  Admetus,  and  even  referring  to  renewed  wedlock,  draws  from  him  expres¬ 
sions  soothing  to  the  revived  queen,  as  those  that  Paulina  draws  from  the  penitent 
Leontes.  Yet,  like  Leontes  gazing  at  the  statue,  he  looks  till  the  force  of  resemblance 
raises  him  to  the  highest  pitch  of  agitation.  At  length,  by  gradation  like  that  in 
Shakespeare’s  play,  the  form  of  his  wife  is  unveiled,  and  he  recognises  her  and  falls 
on  her  neck.  But  she  still  stands  speechless ;  the  purifications  due  to  the  infernal 
gods  must  first  be  performed,  and  a  three  days’  interval  elapses  before  he  may  hear 
her  voice ;  and  thus  in  her  silent  presence  the  play  concludes. 

The  elevated  dignity  and  majesty  thus  expressed  in  the  figure  of  Alcestis,  the  vin¬ 
dication  of  the  self-devoted  womanhood  from  the  selfish  neglect  of  a  stronger  power, 
but  an  inferior  nature,  is  admirably  realised,  and  is  parallel  to  the  reparation  accorded 
to  Hermione,  who  suffers  with  dignity  as  well  as  patience,  and  preserves  herself  not 
from  consideration  for  a  husband  who  has  forfeited  his  nobler  title,  but  for  the  sake 
of  a  daughter  lost,  but  promised  by  the  Oracle  to  be  found.  The  silence  of  Alcestis 
is  not  more  satisfactory  and  expressive  than  the  circumstance  that,  in  the  single  short 
speech  of  Hermione,  her  words  recognize  and  address  alone  her  recovered  daughter. 
She  extends  her  hand  to  Leontes,  and  when  he  embraces  her  in  joyful  astonishment, 
full  forgiveness  is  sealed  by  her  frank  embrace  and  entire  reconciliation.  ‘  She  hangs 
‘  upon  his  neck but  it  is  when  the  recovered  Perdita  kneels  that  her  mother’s  voice 
is  heard  again,  and  then,  as  if  in  the  same  awe  of  the  powers  of  death  from  whom 
Hermione  and  Perdita  seem,  like  Alcestis,  to  have  been  recovered,  the  scene  hastily 
closes  and  the  play  is  at  an  end. 

F.  J.  Furnivall  ( Leopold  Shakespeare,  Introd.  p.  xci) :  The  last  complete  play 
of  Shakspere,  as  it  is,  the  golden  glow  of  the  sunset  of  his  genius  is  over  it,  the 
sweet  country  air  all  through  it ;  and  of  few,  if  any  of  his  plays,  is  there  a  pleasanter 
picture  in  the  memory  than  of  Winter’s  Tale.  As  long  as  men  can  think,  shall  Per¬ 
dita  brighten  and  sweeten,  Hermione  ennoble,  men’s  minds  and  lives.  How  happily, 
too,  it  brings  Shakspere  before  us,  mixing  with  his  Stratford  neighbours  at  their  sheep¬ 
shearing  and  country  sports,  enjoying  the  vagabond  pedlar’s  gammon  and  talk,  de¬ 
lighting  in  the  sweet  Warwickshire  maidens,  and  buying  them  ‘  fairings,’  telling 
goblin  stories  to  the  boys,  ‘  There  was  a  man  dwelt  by  a  church-yard,’ — opening  his 
heart  afresh  to  all  the  innocent  mirth,  and  the  beauty  of  nature  around  him.  .  .  . 
The  play  is  late  in  metre,  in  feeling,  in  purpose.  It  has  no  five-measure  rhyme  in 
the  dialogue,  its  end-stopt  lines  are  only  one  in  2-12,  its  double-endings  are  as 
many  as  one  in  2  85 ;  it  has  passages  in  Shakspere’s  latest  budding  style,  ‘  What 
‘  you  do,  still  betters  what  is  done,’  etc.  Its  purpose,  its  lesson,  is  to  teach  forgive¬ 
ness  of  wrongs,  not  vengeance  for  them ;  to  give  the  sinner  time  to  repent  and  amend, 
not  to  cut  him  off  in  his  sin ;  to  frustrate  the  crimes  he  has  purpost.  And,  as  in 
Pericles,  father  and  lost  daughter,  and  wife  and  mother  thought  dead,  meet  again ; 
as  in  Cymbeline,  father  and  injured  daughter  meet  again,  she  forgiving  her  wrongs ; 
as  there,  too,  friends  meet  again,  the  injured  friend  forgiving  his  wrongs,  so  here  do 
lost  daughter,  injured  daughter  and  injuring  father,  meet,  he  being  forgiven ;  so  in¬ 
jured  friend  forgiving,  meets  injuring  friend  forgiven;  while  above  all  rises  the  figure 
of  the  noble,  long-suffering  wife  Hermione,  forgiving  the  base  though  now  repentant 
husband  who  had  so  cruelly  injured  her.  She  links  this  play  to  Shakspere’s  last 
fragment  Henry  VIII,  and  makes  us  believe  that  this  twice-repeated  reunion  of 
husband  and  wife,  in  their  daughter,  late  in  life,  this  twice-repeated  forgiveness  of 
sinning  husbands  by  sinned-against  wives,  have  somewhat  to  do  with  Shakspere’s 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS 


359 


reunion  with  his  wife,  and  his  renewed  family  life  at  Stratford.  .  .  .  The  attempt  of 
Polyxenes  to  get  Camillo  to  poison  Polyxenes  is  more  direct  than  even  John’s  with 
Hubert  to  murder  Arthur,  Richard’s  with  Tyrrel  to  strangle  the  innocents,  Henry  the 
Fourth’s  with  Exton  to  clear  Richard  the  Second  from  his  path. 

Baynes  ( Encycl, .  Brit.,  Ninth  Ed.  1886;  Shakespeare  Studies,  1896,  p.  130) :  In 
the  third  period  of  Shakespeare’s  dramatic  career  years  had  evidently  brought  en¬ 
larged  vision,  wider  thoughts,  and  deeper  experiences.  While  the  old  mastery  of  art 
remains,  the  works  belonging  to  this  period  seem  to  bear  traces  of  more  intense  moral 
struggles,  larger  and  less  joyous  views  of  human  life,  more  troubled,  complex,  and 
profound  conceptions  and  emotions.  Comparatively  few  marks  of  the  lightness  and 
animation  of  the  earlier  works  remain,  but  at  the  same  time  the  dramas  of  this  period 
display  an  unrivalled  power  of  piercing  the  deepest  mysteries  and  sounding  the  most 
tremendous  and  perplexing  problems  of  human  life  and  human  destiny.  To  this 
period  belong  the  four  great  tragedies, — Hamlet,  Macbeth,  Othelh ,  Lear.  ...  In  the 
four  grand  tragedies  the  central  problem  is  a  profoundly  moral  one.  It  is  the  supreme 
internal  conflict  of  good  and  evil  amongst  the  central  forces  and  higher  elements  of 
human  nature,  as  appealed  to  and  developed  by  sudden  and  powerful  temptation, 
smitten  by  accumulated  wrongs,  or  plunged  in  overwhelming  calamities.  As  the  re¬ 
sult,  we  learn  that  there  is  something  infinitely  more  precious  in  life  than  social  ease 
and  worldly  success, — nobleness  of  soul,  fidelity  to  truth  and  honour,  human  love  and 
loyalty,  strength  and  tenderness,  and  trust  to  the  very  end.  In  the  most  tragic  ex¬ 
periences  this  fidelity  to  all  that  is  best  in  life  is  only  possible  through  the  loss  of  life 
itself.  But  when  Desdemona  expires  with  a  sigh,  and  Cordelia’s  loving  eyes  are 
closed,  when  Hamlet  no  more  draws  his  breath  in  pain,  and  the  tempest-tossed  Lear 
is  at  last  liberated  from  the  rack  of  this  tough  world,  we  feel  that,  Death  having  set 
his  sacred  seal  on  their  great  sorrows  and  greater  love,  they  remain  with  us  as  pos¬ 
sessions  for  ever.  In  the  three  dramas  belonging  to  Shakespeare’s  last  period,  or 
rather  which  may  be  said  to  close  his  dramatic  career,  the  same  feeling  of  severe  but 
consolatory  calm  is  still  more  apparent.  If  the  deeper  discords  of  life  are  not  finally 
resolved,  the  virtues  which  soothe  their  perplexities  and  give  us  courage  and  endur¬ 
ance  to  wait,  as  well  as  confidence  to  trust  the  final  issues, — the  virtues  of  forgiveness 
and  generosity,  of  forbearance  and  self-control, — are  largely  illustrated.  This  is  a 
characteristic  feature  in  each  of  these  closing  dramas,  in  The  Winter’s  Tale,  Cym- 
beline,  and  The  Tempest.  The  Tempest  is  supposed,  on  tolerably  good  grounds,  to 
be  Shakespeare’s  last  work,  and  in  it  we  see  the  great  magician,  having  gained  by 
the  wonderful  experience  of  life,  and  the  no  less  wonderful  practice  of  his  art,  serene 
wisdom,  clear  and  enlarged  vision,  and  beneficent  self-control,  break  his  magical  wand 
and  retire  from  the  scene  of  his  triumphs  to  the  home  he  had  chosen  amidst  the 
woods  and  meadows  of  the  Avon,  and  surrounded  by  the  family  and  friends  he  loved. 

Tennyson  ( Memoir ,  by  his  Son,  London,  1897,  vol.  ii,  p.  290) :  There  are  three 
repartees  in  Shakespeare  which  always  bring  tears  to  my  eyes  from  their  simplicity. 
One  is  in  King  Lear  when  Lear  says  to  Cordelia,  ‘  So  young  and  so  untender,’  and 
Cordelia  lovingly  answers,  ‘  So  young,  my  lord,  and  true.’  And  in  The  Winters 
Tale,  when  Florizel  takes  Perdita’s  hand  to  lead  her  to  the  dance,  and  says,  ‘  So  tur- 
•  ties  pair  that  never  mean  to  part,’  and  the  little  Perdita  answers,  giving  her  hand  to 
Florizel,  ‘  I’ll  swear  for  ’em.’  And  in  Cymbeline,  when  Imogen  in  tender  rebuke  says 
to  her  husband  : — 


APPENDIX 


360 


‘  Why  did  you  throw  your  wedded  lady  from  you  ? 
Think  that  you  are  upon  a  rock :  and  now 
Throw  me  again !’ 

and  Posthumus  does  not  ask  forgiveness,  but  answers,  kissing  her: — 

‘  Hang  there  like  fruit,  my  soul, 

Till  the  tree  die  !’ 


HERMIONE 

Mrs  Jameson  (ii,  2) :  When,  by  the  presence  or  the  agency  of  some  predominant 
and  exciting  power,  the  feelings  and  affections  are  upturned  from  the  depths  of  the 
heart,  and  flung  to  the  surface,  the  painter  or  the  poet  has  but  to  watch  the  workings 
of  the  passions,  thus  in  a  manner  made  visible,  and  transfer  them  to  his  page  or  his 
canvas,  in  colours  more  or  less  vigorous ;  but  where  all  is  calm  without,  and  around, 
to  dive  into  the  profoundest  abysses  of  character,  trace  the  affections  where  they  lie 
hidden  like  the  ocean  springs,  wind  into  the  most  intricate  involutions  of  the  heart, 
patiently  unravel  its  most  delicate  fibres,  and  in  a  few  graceful  touches  place  before 
us  the  distinct  and  visible  result,— to  do  this,  demanded  power  of  another  and  a  rarer 
kind. 

There  are  several  of  Shakespeare  s  characters  which  are  especially  distinguished 
by  this  profound  feeling  in  the  conception,  and  subdued  harmony  of  tone  in  the 
delineation.  To  them  may  be  particularly  applied  the  ingenious  simile  which 
Goethe  has  used  to  illustrate  generally  all  Shakespeare’s  characters,  when  he  com¬ 
pares  them  to  the  old-fashioned  watches  in  glass  cases,  which  not  only  showed  the 
index  pointing  to  the  hour,  but  the  wheels  and  springs  within,  which  set  that  index 
in  motion. 

Imogen,  Desdemona,  and  Hermione,  are  three  women  placed  in  situations  nearly 
similar,  and  equally  endowed  with  all  the  qualities  which  can  render  that  situation 
striking  and  interesting.  They  are  all  gentle,  beautiful,  and  innocent ;  all  are  models 
of  conjugal  submission,  truth,  and  tenderness ;  and  all  are  victims  of  the  unfounded 
jealousy  of  their  husbands.  So  far  the  parallel  is  close,  but  here  the  resemblance 
ceases ;  the  circumstances  of  each  situation  are  varied  with  wonderful  skill,  and  the 
characters,  which  are  as  different  as  it  is  possible  to  imagine,  conceived  and  discrim¬ 
inated  with  a  power  of  truth  and  a  delicacy  of  feeling  yet  more  astonishing. 

Critically  speaking,  the  character  of  Hermione  is  the  most  simple  in  point  of 
dramatic  effect,  that  of  Imogen  the  most  varied  and  complex.  Hermione  is  most 
distinguished  by  her  magnanimity  and  her  fortitude,  Desdemona  by  her  gentleness 
and  refined  grace,  while  Imogen  combines  all  the  best  qualities  of  both,  with  others 
which  they  do  not  possess;  consequently,  she  is,  as  a  character,  superior  to  either; 

>Ut  cons‘dered  as  women,  I  suppose  the  preference  would  depend  on  individual 
taste.  .  .  . 

The  character  of  Hermione  exhibits  what  is  never  found  in  the  other  sex,  but 
rarely  in  our  own, -yet  sometimes, -dignity  without  pride,  love  without  passion, 
and  tenderness  without  weakness.  To  conceive  a  character,  in  which  there  enters 
so  much  of  the  negative,  required  perhaps  no  rare  and  astonishing  effort  of  ge- 


CRITICISMS—  HERMIONE 


361 

nius,  such  as  created  a  Juliet,  a  Miranda,  or  a  Lady  Macbeth  :  but  to  delineate 
such  a  character  in  a  poetical  form,  to  develope  it  through  the  medium  of  action  and 
dialogue,  without  the  aid  of  description ;  to  preserve  its  tranquil,  mild,  and  serious 
beauty,  its  unimpassioned  dignity,  and  at  the  same  time  keep  the  strongest  hold  upon 
our  sympathy  and  our  imagination ;  and  out  of  this  exterior  calm,  produce  the  most 
profound  pathos,  the  most  vivid  impression  of  life  and  internal  power : — it  is  this, 
which  renders  the  character  of  Hermione  one  of  Shakespeare’s  masterpieces. 

Hermione  is  a  queen,  a  matron,  and  a  mother;  she  is  good  and  beautiful,  and 
royally  descended.  A  majestic  sweetness,  a  grand  and  gracious  simplicity,  an  easy, 
unforced,  yet  dignified  self-possession,  are  in  all  her  deportment,  and  in  every  word 
she  utters.  She  is  one  of  those  characters,  of  whom  it  has  been  said  proverbially, 
that  ‘  still  waters  run  deep.’  Her  passions  are  not  vehement,  but  in  her  settled  mind 
the  sources  of  pain  or  pleasure,  love  or  resentment,  are  like  the  springs  that  feed 
mountain  lakes,  impenetrable,  unfathomable,  and  inexhaustible. 

[Page  14.]  The  character  of  Hermione  is  considered  open  to  criticism  on  one 
point.  I  have  heard  it  remarked  that  when  she  secludes  herself  from  the  world  for 
sixteen  years,  during  which  time  she  is  mourned  as  dead  by  her  repentant  husband, 
and  is  not  won  to  relent  from  her  resolve  by  his  sorrow,  his  remorse,  his  constancy  to 
her  memory ;  such  conduct,  argues  the  critic,  is  unfeeling  as  it  is  inconceivable  in  a 
tender  and  virtuous  woman.  Would  Imogen  have  done  so*  who  is  so  generously 
ready  to  grant  a  pardon  before  it  be  asked  ?  or  Desdemona,  who  does  not  forgive 
because  she  cannot  even  resent?  No,  assuredly;  but  this  is  only  another  proof  of 
the  wonderful  delicacy  and  consistency  with  which  Shakespeare  has  discriminated 
the  characters  of  all  three.  The  incident  of  Hermione’s  supposed  death  and  con¬ 
cealment  for  sixteen  years,  is  not  indeed  very  probable  in  itself,  nor  very  likely  to 
occur  in  every-day  life.  But  besides  all  the  probability  necessary  for  the  purposes 
of  poetry,  it  has  all  the  likelihood  it  can  derive  from  the  peculiar  character  of  Her¬ 
mione,  who  is  precisely  the  woman  who  could  and  would  have  acted  in  this  manner. 
In  such  a  mind  as  hers,  the  sense  of  a  cruel  injury,  inflicted  by  one  she  had  loved 
and  trusted,  without  awakening  any  violent  anger  or  any  desire  for  vengeance,  would 
sink  deep, — almost  incurably  and  lastingly  deep.  So  far  she  is  most  unlike  either 
Imogen  or  Desdemona,  who  are  portrayed  as  much  more  flexible  in  temper;  but  then 
the  circumstances  under  which  she  is  wronged  are  very  different,  and  far  more  un¬ 
pardonable.  The  self-created,  frantic  jealousy  of  Leontes  is  very  distinct  from  that 
of  Othello,  writhing  under  the  arts  of  Iago;  or  that  of  Posthumus,  whose  understand¬ 
ing  has  been  cheated  by  the  most  damning  evidence  of  his  wife’s  infidelity.  The 
jealousy  which  in  Othello  and  Posthumus  is  an  error  of  judgement,  in  Leontes  is  a 
vice  of  the  blood;  he  suspects  without  cause,  condemns  without  proof;  he  is  without 
excuse, — unless  the  mixture  of  pride,  passion,  and  imagination,  and  the  predisposition 
to  jealousy  with  which  Shakespeare  has  portrayed  him,  be  considered  as  an  excuse. 
Hermione  has  been  openly  insulted ;  he  to  whom  she  gave  herself,  her  heart,  her 
soul,  has  stooped  to  the  weakness  and  baseness  of  suspicion ;  has  doubted  her  truth, 
has  wronged  her  love,  has  sunk  in  her  esteem  and  forfeited  her  confidence.  She  has 
been  branded  with  vile  names ;  her  son,  her  eldest  hope,  is  dead, — dead  through  the 
false  accusation  which  has  stuck  infamy  on  his  mother’s  name  ;  and  her  innocent  babe, 
staiped  with  illegitimacy,  disowned,  and  rejected,  has  been  exposed  to  a  cruel  death. 
Can  we  believe  that  the  mere  tardy  acknowledgement  of  her  innocence  could  make 
amends  for  wrongs  and  agonies  such  as  these  ?  or  heal  a  heart  which  must  have  bled 
inwardly,  consumed  by  that  untold  grief,  ‘  which  burns  worse  than  tears  drown  ’  ? 


362 


APPENDIX 


Keeping  in  view  the  peculiar  character  of  Hermione,  such  as  she  is  delineated,  is 
she  one  either  to  forgive  hastily  or  forget  quickly  ?  and  though  she  might,  in  her  soli¬ 
tude,  mourn  over  her  repentant  husband,  would  his  repentance  suffice  to  restore  him 
at  once  to  his  place  in  her  heart  ?  to  efface  from  her  strong  and  reflecting  mind  the 
recollection  of  his  miserable  weakness  ?  or  can  we  fancy  this  high-souled  woman, — 
left  childless  through  the  injury  which  has  been  inflicted  on  her,  widowed  in  heart  by 
the  unworthiness  of  him  she  loved,  a  spectacle  of  grief  to  all, — to  her  husband  a 
continual  reproach  and  humiliation, — walking  through  the  parade  of  royalty  in  the 
court  which  had  witnessed  her  anguish,  her  shame,  her  degradation,  and  her  despair  ? 
Methinks  that  the  want  of  feeling,  nature,  delicacy,  and  consistency,  would  lie  in 
such  an  exhibition  as  this.  In  a  mind  like  Hermione’s,  where  the  strength  of  feel¬ 
ing  is  founded  in  the  power  of  thought,  and  where  there  is  little  of  impulse  or  imag¬ 
ination, — ‘  the  depth,  but  not  the  tumult  of  the  soul,’  * — there  are  but  two  influences 
which  predominate  over  the  will, — time  and  religion.  And  what  then  remained,  but 
that,  wounded  in  heart  and  spirit,  she  should  retire  from  the  world  ? — not  to  brood 
over  her  wrongs,  but  to  study  forgiveness,  and  wait  the  fulfillment  of  the  Oracle  which 
had  promised  the  termination  of  her  sorrows.  Thus  a  premature  reconciliation  would 
not  only  have  been  painfully  inconsistent  with  the  character ;  it  would  also  have  de¬ 
prived  us  of  that  most  beautiful  scene,  in  which  Hermione  is  discovered  to  her  hus¬ 
band  as  the  statue  or  image  of  herself. 

[Page  22.]  There  are  several  among  Shakespeare’s  characters  which  exercise  a 
far  stronger  power  over  our  feelings,  our  fancy,  our  understanding,  than  that  of  Her¬ 
mione  ;  but  not  one, — unless  perhaps  Cordelia, — constructed  upon  so  pure  and  high 
a  principle.  It  is  the  union  of  gentleness  with  power  which  constitutes  the  perfec¬ 
tion  of  mental  grace.  Thus  among  the  ancients,  with  whom  the  graces  wrere  also  the 
charities  (to  show,  perhaps,  that  while  form  alone  may  constitute  beauty,  sentiment  is 
necessary  to  grace),  one  and  the  same  word  signified  equally  strength  and  virtue. 
This  feeling,  carried  into  the  fine  arts,  was  the  secret  of  the  antique  grace, — the  grace 
of  repose.  The  same  eternal  nature, — the  same  sense  of  immutable  truth  and  beauty, 
which  revealed  this  sublime  principle  of  art  to  the  ancient  Greeks,  revealed  it  to  the 
genius  of  Shakespeare ;  and  the  character  of  Hermione,  in  which  we  have  the  same 
largeness  of  conception  and  delicacy  of  execution,— the  same  effect  of  suffering  with¬ 
out  passion,  and  grandeur  without  effort,  is  an  instance,  I  think,  that  he  felt  within 
himself,  and  by  intuition,  what  we  study  all  our  lives  in  the  remains  of  ancient  art. 
The  calm,  regular,  classical  beauty  of  Hermione’s  character  is  the  more  impressive 
from  the  wild  and  gothic  accompaniments  of  her  story,  and  the  beautiful  relief  af¬ 
forded  by  the  pastoral  and  romantic  grace  which  is  thrown  around  her  daughter 
Perdita. 

Anon.  ( Blackwood's  Magazine ,  Feb.  1833,  p.  149)  :  In  the  lustre  of  virtue,  and 
the  gloom  of  agony,  the  childless  widow, — for  though  forgiving  her  husband  all,  she 
has  pronounced  a  solemn  divorce,— retires  into  seclusion  from  love  and  life,  deep, 
dark,  and  incommunicable  as  the  grave.  Into  that  sixteen  years’  penance,— not  for 


*  ‘ - The  gods  approve 

The  depth,  and  not  the  tumult  of  the  soul  .'—Wordsworth. 

‘  II  pouvait  y  avoir  des  vagues  majestueuses  et  non  de  l’orage  dans  son  coeur,’  was 
finely  observed  of  Madame  de  Stael  in  her  maturer  years ;  it  would  have  been  true 
of  Hermione  at  any  period  of  her  life. 


CRITICISMS— HERMIONE 


363 


her  own  sin,  for  she  is  pure,  but  for  her  husband’s,  with  whom  she  doubtless  has 
vowed  to  be  reconciled  on  the  bed  of  death  (but  Heaven  brings,  in  its  own  good 
time,  a  more  blissful  reconciliation), — imagination  fears,  in  its  reverence,  even  for  one 
moment  to  enter.  It  could  not  have  been  wholly  unhappy,  self-sustained  as  Her- 
mione  was  by  her  devotion  to  one  holy  purpose ;  and  that  she  acted  right  all  hearts 
feel  on  her  wondrous  reappearance  among  the  living  as  from  the  dead.  That  is  the 
moment  when  we  should  have  felt  that  Shakespeare  had  erred,  if  erred  he  had,  in 
that  long  sunless  immurement.  But  our  whole  nature  leaps  up  in  a  fit  of  joy,  to  hail 
the  apparition.  .  .  . 

We  have  been  somewhat  too  hard  on  poor  Leontes.  We  must  not  blame  him  for 
having  breathed  a  disease.  He  has  dree’d  a  rueful  punishment.  All  the  atonement 
that  could  be  made  for  his  crime  he  did  make, — and  the  heavens  had  been  long  hung 
with  black  over  his  head.  His  crown  was  worthless  in  his  eyes, — his  throne  the  seat 
of  misery.  Never  for  one  day,  we  may  believe,  had  he  not  been  haunted  by  the 
ghost  of  his  little  son,  who  died  of  a  broken  heart, — of  the  baby  exposed  in  the 
wild,  and  never  heard  of  more,  either  she  or  Antigonus.  ...  It  would  be  unchristian 
not  to  forgive  Leontes. 

Hudson  ( Introd .  p.  21) :  We  can  scarce  call  Hermione  sweet  or  gentle,  though 
she  is  both ;  she  is  a  noble  woman, — one  whom,  even  in  her  greatest  anguish,  we 
hardly  dare  to  pity.  The  whole  figure  is  replete  with  classic  grace,  is  shaped  and 
finished  in  the  highest  style  of  classic  art.  As  she  acts  the  part  of  a  statue  in  the 
play,  so  she  has  a  statue-like  calmness  and  firmness  of  soul.  A  certain  austere  and 
solid  sweetness  pervades  her  whole  demeanour,  and  seems,  as  it  were,  the  essential 
form  of  her  life.  It  is  as  if  some  masterpiece  of  ancient  sculpture  had  warmed  and 
quickened  into  life  from  its  fulness  of  beauty  and  expression.  Appearing  at  first  as 
the  cheerful  hostess  of  her  husband’s  friend,  and  stooping  from  her  queenly  elevation 
to  the  most  winning  affabilities,  her  behaviour  rises  in  dignity  as  her  sorrow  deepens. 
With  an  equal  sense  of  what  is  due  to  the  King  as  her  husband,  and  to  herself  as  a 
woman,  a  wife,  and  a  mother,  she  knows  how  to  reconcile  all  these  demands ;  she 
therefore  resists  without  violence,  and  submits  without  weakness.  And  what  her  wise 
spirit  sees  to  be  fit  and  becoming,  that  she  always  has  strength  and  steadiness  of  cha¬ 
racter  to  do;  hence,  notwithstanding  the  insults  and  hardships  wantonly  put  upon 
her,  she  still  preserves  the  smoothnesses  of  peace ;  is  never  betrayed  into  the  least 
sign  of  anger  or  impatience  or  resentment,  but  maintains,  throughout,  perfect  order 
and  fitness  and  proportion  in  act  and  speech ;  the  charge,  so  dreadful  in  itself,  and 
so  cruel  in  its  circumstances,  neither  rouses  her  passions,  as  it  would  Paulina’s,  nor 
stuns  her  sensibilities,  as  in  the  case  of  Desdemona ;  but  like  the  sinking  of  lead 
in  the  ocean’s  bosom,  it  goes  to  the  depths  without  ruffling  the  surface  of  her 
soul.  Her  situation  is,  indeed,  full  of  pathos, — a  pathos  the  more  deeply-moving 
to  others,  that  it  stirs  no  tumults  in  her;  for  her  nature  is  manifestly  fitted  up 
and  furnished  with  all  tender  and  gentle  and  womanly  feelings ;  only  she  has  the 
force  of  mind  to  control  them,  and  keep  them  all  in  the  right  place  and  degree. 
<  They  are  the  patient  sorrows  that  touch  nearest.’  And  so,  under  the  worst  that 
can  befall,  she  remains  within  the  region  of  herself,  calm  and  serenely  beautiful, 
stands  firm,  yet  full  of  grace,  in  the  austere  strengths  of  reason  and  conscious 
rectitude.  And  when,  at  her  terrible  wrongs  and  sufferings,  all  hearts  are  shaken, 
all  eyes  wet,  but  her  own,  the  impression  made  by  her  stout-hearted  fortitude  is 
of  one  whose  pure,  tranquil,  deep-working  breast  is  the  home  of  sorrows  too 


364 


APPENDIX 


big  for  any  eye-messengers  to  report :  <  Calm  pleasures  there  abide,  majestic 
‘  pains.’  .  .  . 

The  Queen’s  long  concealing  of  herself  has  been  censured  by  some  as  repugnant 
to  nature.  Possibly  they  may  think  it  somewhat  strained  and  theatrical,  but  it  is  not 
so;  the  woman  is  but  true  to  herself,  in  this  matter,  and  to  the  solid  and  self-poised 
repose  in  which  her  being  dwells.  So  that  the  thing  does  not  seem  repugnant  to 
nature  as  individualised  by  her  reason  and  will ;  nor  is  her  character  herein  more 
above  or  out  of  nature  than  the  proper  ideal  of  art  abundantly  warrants.  For  to  her 
keen  sensibility  of  honour  the  King’s  treatment  is  literally  an  infinite  wrong ;  nor  does 
its  cruelty  more  wound  her  affection,  than  its  meanness  alienates  her  respect ;  and  one 
so  strong  to  bear  injury  might  be  equally  strong  to  remember  it.  Therewithal  she 
knows  full  well  that,  in  so  delicate  an  instrument  as  married  life,  if  one  string  be  out 
of  tune,  the  whole  is  ajar,  and  will  yield  no  music ;  for  her,  therefore,  all  things  must 
be  right,  else  none  is  so.  And  she  is  both  too  clear  of  mind  and  too  upright  of  heart 
to  put  herself  where  she  cannot  be  precisely  what  the  laws  of  propriety  and  decorum 
require  her  to  seem.  Accordingly,  when  she  does  forgive,  the  forgiveness  is  simply 
perfect ;  the  breach  that  has  been  so  long  a-healing  is  at  length  completely  healed; 
for  to  be  whole  and  entire  in  whatever  she  does,  is  both  an  impulse  of  nature  and  a 
law  of  conscience  with  her.  When  the  King  was  wooing  her,  she  held  him  off  three 
months,  w-hich  he  thought  unreasonably  long ;  but  the  reason  why  he  did  so  is  rightly 
explained  when,  for  his  inexpressible  sin  against  her,  she  has  locked  herself  from  his 
sight  sixteen  years,  leaving  him  to  mourn  and  repent.  Moreover,  with  her  severe 
chastity  of  principle,  the  reconciliation  to  her  husband  must  begin  there  where  the 
separation  grew.  Thus  it  was  for  Perdita  to  restore  the  parental  unity  which  her 
being  represents,  but  of  which  she  had  occasioned  the  breaking.  Such  is  Ilermione, 
in  her  proud  submission,  her  ‘  dignified  obedience,’  with  her  Roman  firmness  and 
integrity  of  soul,  heroic  in  strength,  heroic  in  gentleness,  the  queenliest  of  women, 
the  w'omanhest  of  queens.  She  is,  perhaps,  the  Poet’s  best  illustration  of  the  great 
principle,  which  I  fear  is  not  so  commonly  felt  as  it  should  be,  that  the  highest 
beauty  always  has  an  element  or  shade  of  the  terrible  in  it,  so  that  it  awes  you  while 
it  attracts. 


PA  ULINA 

Mrs  Jameson  (ii,  23)  :  The  character  of  Paulina,  though  it  has  obtained  but  little 
notice,  and  no  critical  remark,  (that  I  have  seen,)  is  yet  one  of  the  striking  beauties 
of  the  play ;  and  it  has  its  moral  too.  As  we  see  running  through  the  whole  uni¬ 
verse  that  principle  of  contrast  which  may  be  called  the  life  of  nature,  so  we  behold 
it  everywhere  illustrated  in  Shakespeare :  upon  this  principle  he  has  placed  Emilia 
beside  Desdemona,  the  Nurse  beside  Juliet;  the  clowns  and  dairymaids,  and  the 
merry  pedlar  thief,  Autolycus,  round  Florizel ;— and  made  Paulina  the  friend  of 
Hermione. 

Paulina  does  not  fill  any  ostensible  office  near  the  person  of  the  queen,  but  is  a 
lady  of  high  rank  in  the  Court, -the  wife  of  the  Lord  Antigonus.  She  is  a  character 
strongly  drawn  from  real  and  common  life,— a  clever,  generous,  strong-minded, 
warm-hearted  woman,  fearless  in  asserting  the  truth,  firm  in  her  sense  of  right, 
enthusiastic  in  all  her  affections;  quick  in  thought,  resolute  in  word,  and  energetic  in 
action ;  but  heedless,  hot-tempered,  impatient,  loud,  bold,  voluble,  and  turbulent  of 


CRITICISMS— PA  ULINA 


365 


tongue  ;  regardless  of  the  feelings  of  those  for  whom  she  would  sacrifice  her  life,  and 
injuring  from  excess  of  zeal  those  whom  she  most  wishes  to  serve.  How  many  such 
there  are  in  the  world !  But  Paulina,  though  a  very  termagant,  is  yet  a  poetical  ter¬ 
magant  in  her  way  ;  and  the  manner  in  which  all  the  evil  and  dangerous  tendencies 
of  such  a  temper  are  placed  before  us,  even  while  the  individual  character  preserves 
the  strongest  hold  upon  our  respect  and  admiration,  forms  an  impressive  lesson,  as 
well  as  a  natural  and  delightful  portrait.  ...  It  is  admirable  that  Hermione  and 
Paulina,  while  sufficiently  approximated  to  afford  all  the  pleasure  of  contrast,  are 
never  brought  too  nearly  in  contact  on  the  scene  or  in  the  dialogue ;  for  this  would 
have  been  a  fault  in  taste,  and  have  necessarily  weakened  the  effect  of  both  charac¬ 
ters  ; — either  the  serene  grandeur  of  Hermione  would  have  subdued  and  overawed 
the  fiery  spirit  of  Paulina,  or  the  impetuous  temper  of  the  latter  must  have  disturbed 
in  some  respect  our  impression  of  the  calm,  majestic,  and  somewhat  melancholy 
beauty  of  Hermione. 

[Georg  Brandes  (p.  924)  asserts  that  Mrs  Jameson  omitted  Paulina  in  her 
‘  Female  Characters,’  which  is  true  only  of  the  Table  of  Contents. 

For  once,  Mrs  Jameson  has  failed  to  do  justice;  and  Paulina’s  indignation  at  out¬ 
rageous  injustice  and  oppression  has  been  mistaken  for  ‘  hot  temper  ’  and  ‘  turbulence 
‘  of  tongue.’  ‘  Oppression  maketh  the  wise  man  mad,’ — it  is  this  madness  which  is 
Paulina’s, — the  furthest  possible  remove  from  that  of  a  ‘  loud,  bold,  voluble  ’  scold. 
A  hot  temper  distorts  the  judgement,  but  in  the  midst  of  Paulina’s  vehemence,  her 
vision  is  clear  enough,  and  her  judgement  calm  enough  to  utter  one  of  the  deepest 
of  truths :  ‘  it  is  an  heretic  which  makes  the  fire,  not  she  which  burns  in  it.’  As 
for  ‘  injuring  through  excessive  zeal  those  whom  she  would  serve,’ — where  is  the 
proof  of  it?  Can  it  be  supposed  that  any  words  of  hers  could  or  did  add  to  the 
heaviness  of  Hermione’s  estate,  or  increase  the  frenzied  wrath  of  one  who  blasphemed 
the  very  Oracle  of  a  God  ?  It  is  to  be  feared  that  Mrs  Jameson  was  influenced  in  her 
estimate  by  some  stage-Paulina,  who  had  failed  to  grasp  the  moral  grandeur  of  the 
character,  and  took  as  the  key-note  Paulina’s  unfortunate  threat  against  the  eyes  of 
any  one  who  should  interfere  in  her  momentous  struggle  with  Leontes.  At  the  very 
beginning  of  her  stormy  interview  with  the  King,  her  persistent  iteration  of  ‘ good 
‘  Queen,’  ought  to  show  us  that  hers  was  an  absolutely  unselfish  nature,  stirred  to  its 
depths  by  the  sight  of  injustice,— the  true  stuff  whereof  martyrs  are  made  who  will 
pursue  their  path,  though  all  the  tiles  on  the  houses  are  devils. — Ed.] 

\V.  W.  Lloyd  (Singer,  ed.  ii,  p.  131 )  :  The  character  of  Paulina  is  a  necessity  to 
the  play;  without  the  support  derived  from  her  constant  presence,  it  would  not  be 
intelligible  how  such  a  mind  as  that  of  Leontes  could  have  the  force  and  freshness 
of  feeling,  after  sixteen  years  elapsed,  that  are  required  to  give  interest  to  the  recog¬ 
nition,  and  to  satisfy  our  sympathies  with  the  honour  of  Hermione.  She  is  the  thorn 
in  the  flesh  that  may  irritate,  but  only  to  preserve  it  from  callosity ;  the  spiked  girdle 
of  the  penitent  that  forbids  him  to  omit  his  vigil.  ...  It  is  the  very  harshness  of  the 
virtue  of  Paulina  that  gives  effect  to  the  more  delicate  strength  and  graceful  vigour 
of  the  virtue  of  Hermione,  and  saves  by  contrast  the  coolness  of  her  temperament 
from  the  thought  of  coldness,— nay,  gives  to  it  a  glow  of  nature’s  warmth ;  while  the 
softening  and  humanizing  that  her  character  has  undergone,  encourages  our  faith  in 
the  mellowing  traits  of  Leontes,  whom  ;.er  care  and  comfort  has  reclaimed. 


366 


APPENDIX 


LEONTES 

Coleridge  ( Lectures ,  1818?,  London,  1849,  P-  253) :  The  idea  of  this  delightful 
drama  is  a  genuine  jealousy  of  disposition,  and  it  should  be  immediately  followed  by 
the  perusal  of  Othello ,  which  is  the  direct  contrast  of  it  in  every  particular.  For 
jealousy  is  a  vice  of  the  mind,  a  culpable  tendency  of  the  temper,  having  certain 
well  known  and  well  defined  effects  and  concomitants,  all  of  which  are  visible  in 
Leontes,  and,  I  boldly  say,  not  one  of  which  marks  its  presence  in  Othello : — such 
as,  first,  an  excitability  by  the  most  inadequate  causes,  and  an  eagerness  to  snatch  at 
proofs;  secondly,  a  grossness  of  conception,  and  a  disposition  to  degrade  the  object 
of  the  passion  by  sensual  fancies  and  images;  thirdly,  a  sense  of  shame  of  his  own 
feelings  exhibited  in  a  solitary  moodiness  of  humour,  and  yet  from  the  violence  of 
the  passion  forced  to  utter  itself,  and  therefore  catching  occasions  to  ease  the  mind 
by  ambiguities,  equivoques,  by  talking  to  those  who  cannot,  and  who  are  known  not 
to  be  able  to,  understand  what  is  said  to  them,— in  short,  by  soliloquy  in  the  form 
of  dialogue,  and  hence  a  confused,  broken,  and  fragmentary  manner;  fourthly,  a 
dread  of  vulgar  ridicule,  as  distinct  from  a  high  sense  of  honour,  or  a  mistaken 
sense  of  duty;  and  lastly,  and  immediately  consequent  on  this,  a  spirit  of  selfish 
vindictiveness. 


Lady  Martin  (p.  344) :  A  sudden  access  of  madness  can  alone  account  for  the 
debasing  change  in  the  nature  of  Leontes.  Such  inexplicable  outbreaks  of  jealousy,. 
I  have  been  told,  do  occasionally  occur  in  real  life.  While  they  last,  the  very  nature 
of  their  victims  is  transformed,  and  their  imagination,  wholesome  and  cleanly  till 
then,  becomes,  like  that  of  Leontes,  ‘  foul  as  Vulcan’s  stithy.’ 

It  was  easy  for  Greene,  with  the  greater  latitude  which  the  narrative  form  allows,, 
to  lead  up  to  and  explain  the  ultimate  explosion  of  Pandosto’s  jealousy,  which  had 
been  silently  growing  through  the  protracted  stay  of  Egistus  at  his  Court,  until  at  last 
he  began  to  put  a  vile  construction  upon  his  wife’s  simplest  acts  of  courtesy  and  hos¬ 
pitality.  But  drama  allows  no  scope  for  slow  development.  Shakespeare  has  there¬ 
fore  dealt  with  Leontes  as  a  man  in  whom  the  passion  of  jealousy  is  inherent ;  and 
shows  it  breaking  out  suddenly  with  a  force  that  is  deaf  to  reason,  and  which,  stimu¬ 
lated  by  an  imagination  tainted  to  the  core,  finds  evidences  of  guilt  in  actions  the 
most  innocent.  How  different  is  such  a  nature  from  Othello’s  !  He  was  ‘  not  easily 
‘jealous;’  but,  having  become  ‘perplexed  in  the  extreme’  by  Iago’s  perversion  of 
circumstances  innocent  in  themselves,—*  trifles  light  as  air,’— he  loses  for  a  while  his- 
faith  in  the  being  he  loved  as  his  very  life.  Even  then,  grief  for  the  fall  of  her  whom 
he  had  made  his  idol,-‘  Oh  the  pity  of  it,  the  pity  of  it,  Iago  I’-surges  up  through 
the  wildest  paroxysms  of  his  passion.  Tenderness  for  a  beauty  so  exquisite  that  ‘  the 
‘sense  ached  at  it,’  stays  his  uplifted  dagger.  In  his  mind  Desdemona  is,  to  the  last, 
the  ‘  cunnmg’st  pattern  of  excelling  nature.’  .  As  the  victim  of  craftily  devised  strat- 
egem,  he  never  himself  quite  forfeits  our  sympathy. 

Of  the  jealousy  that  animates  Leontes,  the  jealousy  that  needs  no  extraneous 
prompting  to  suspicion,  Emilia,  in  Othello,  gives  a  perfect  description.  In  answer 
to  the  hope  which  she  expresses  to  Desdemona  that  Othello’s  harsh  bearing 
towards  her  is  due  to  state  affairs,  and  to  ‘no  conception,  nor  no  jealous  toy  con¬ 
cerning  you,’  Desdemona  replies,  ‘  Alas  the  day,  I  never  gave  him  cause  !’  To  this 


CRITICISMS— LEONTES 


3  6? 


‘  But  jealous  souls  will  not  be  answered  so ; 

They  are  not  ever  jealous  for  the  cause, 

But  jealous  for  they  are  jealous ;  ’ti$  a  monster 
Begot  upon  itself,  born  on  itself.’ 

This  is  the  jealousy  which  Shakespeare  has  portrayed  in  Leontes, — a  jealousy  with¬ 
out  cause, — cruel,  vindictive,  and  remorseless  almost  beyond  belief.  Othello,  more¬ 
over,  had  been  wedded,  so  far  as  we  see,  but  a  few  brief  weeks.  He  had  not  had 
time  to  prove  how  deeply  Desdemona  loved  him.  But  years  of  happy  wedlock  had 
assured  Leontes  of  Hermione’s  affection, — years  in  which  he  had  tested  the  inward 
nobility  which  expressed  itself  in  that  majastic  bearing,  of  which  he  speaks  again 
and  again,  long  after  he  has  reason  to  believe  her  to  be  dead.  Maintaining  through 
all  her  life  the  charm  of  royal  graciousness  and  dignity,  she  has  inspired  the  chival¬ 
rously  enthusiastic  admiration  and  devotion  of  every  member  of  the  Court ;  a  woman, 
in  short,  with  whom  no  derogatory  thought  could  be  associated,  being,  as  she  is  de¬ 
scribed  by  one  of  them,  to  be  *  so  sovereignly  honourable.’ 

Hudson  ( Introduction ,  p.  15)  :  In  the  delineation  of  Leontes  there  is  an  abrupt¬ 
ness  of  change  which  strikes  us,  at  first  view,  as  not  a  little  a-clash  with  nature ;  we 
cannot  well  see  how  one  state  of  mind  grows  out  of  another ;  his  jealousy  shoots 
comet-like,  as  something  unprovided  for  in  the  general  ordering  of  his  character. 
Which  causes  this  feature  to  appear  as  if  it  were  suggested  rather  by  the  exigencies 
of  the  stage  than  by  the  natural  workings  of  human  passion.  And  herein  the  Poet 
seems  at  variance  with  himself ;  his  usual  method  being  to  unfold  a  passion  in  its  rise 
and  progress,  so  that  we  go  along  with  it  freely  from  its  origin  to  its  consummation. 
And,  certainly,  there  is  no  accounting  for  Leontes’  conduct,  but  by  supposing  a  pre¬ 
disposition  to  jealousy  in  him,  which,  however,  has  been  hitherto  kept  latent  by  his 
wife’s  clear,  firm,  serene  discreetness,  but  which  breaks  out  into  sudden  and  frightful 
activity  as  soon  as  she,  under  a  special  pressure  of  motives,  slightly  overacts  the  con¬ 
fidence  of  friendship.  There  needed  but  a  spark  of  occasion  to  set  this  secret  maga¬ 
zine  of  passion  all  a-blaze. 

The  Pandosto  of  the  novel  has,  properly  speaking,  no  character  at  all ;  he  is  but 
a  human  figure  going  through  a  set  of  motions ;  that  is,  the  person  and  the  action  are 
put  together  arbitrarily,  and  not  under  any  law  of  vital  correspondence.  Almost  any 
other  figure  would  fit  the  motions  just  as  well.  It  is  true  Shakespeare  had  a  course 
of  action  marked  out  for  him  in  the  tale.  But  then  he  was  bound  by  his  own  prin¬ 
ciples  of  art  to  make  the  character  such  as  would  rationally  support  the  action,  and 
cohere  with  it.  For  such  is  the  necessary  law  of  moral  development  and  transpira¬ 
tion.  Nor  is  it  by  any  means  safe  to  affirm  that  he  has  not  done  this.  For  it  is  to 
be  noted  that  Polixenes  has  made  a  pretty  long  visit,  having  passed,  it  seems,  no  less 
than  nine  lunar  months  at  the  home  of  his  royal  friend.  And  he  might  well  have 
found  it  not  always  easy  to  avoid  preferring  the  Queen’s  society  to  the  King’s ;  for 
she  is  a  most  irresistible  creature,  and  her  calm,  ingenuous  modesty,  itself  the  most 
dignified  of  all  womanly  graces,  is  what,  more  than  anything  else,  makes  her  so. 
What  secret  thoughts  may  have  been  gathering  to  a  head  in  the  mind  of  Leontes 
during  that  period,  is  left  for  us  to  divine  from  the  after-results.  And  I  believe  there  is 
a  jealousy  of  friendship,  as  well  as  of  love.  Accordingly,  though  Leontes  invokes  the 
Queen’s  influence  to  induce  a  lengthening  of  the  visit,  yet  he  seems  a  little  disturbed 
on  seeing  that  her  influence  has  proved  stronger  than  his  own.  ...  In  his  seeming 


APPENDIX 


36S 

abruptness  I.eontes,  after  all,  does  but  exemplify  the  strange  transformations  which 
sometimes  occur  in  men  upon  sudden  and  unforeseen  emergencies.  And  it  is  observ¬ 
able  that  the  very  slightness  of  the  Queen’s  indiscretion,  the  fact  that  she  goes  but  a 
little,  a  very  little  too  far,  only  works  against  her,  causing  the  king  to  suspect  her  of 
great  effort  and  care  to  avoid  suspicion.  And  on  the  same  principle,  because  he  has 
never  suspected  her  before,  therefore  he  suspects  her  all  the  more  vehemently  now  ; 
that  his  confidence  has  hitherto  stood  unshaken,  he  attributes  to  extreme  artfulness  on 
her  part;  for  even  so  to  an  ill-disposed  mind  perfect  innocence  is  apt  to  give  an  im¬ 
pression  of  consummate  art.  A  passion  thus  groundless  and  self-generated  might 
well  be  full-grown  as  soon  as  born.  The  more  greedy  and  craving,  too,  that  it  has 
nothing  real  to  eat ;  it  therefore  proceeds  at  once  to  ‘  make  the  meat  it  feeds  on,’ 
causing  him  to  magnify  whatever  he  sees,  and  to  imagine  many  things  that  are  not. 
1  hat  jealousy,  however,  is  not  the  habit  of  his  mind,  appears  in  that  it  finds  him 
unprepared,  ami  takes  him  by  surprise ;  insomuch  that  he  forthwith  loses  all  self- 
control,  and  runs  right  athwart  the  rules  of  common  decency  and  decorum,  so  that 
he  becomes  an  ob  ect  at  once  of  pity,  of  hatred,  and  scorn.  I  think  the  Poet  hardly 
anywhere  shows  a  keener  and  juster  insight  of  nature  than  in  the  behaviour  of  this 
man  while  the  distemper  is  upon  him.  lie  is  utterly  reason-proof,  and  indeed  acts  as 
one  literally  insane,  bor  the  poison  infects  not  only  his  manners,  but  his  very  modes 
ot  thought ;  in  fact,  all  his  rational  and  imaginative  forces,  even  his  speech  and  lan¬ 
guage,  seem  to  have  caught  the  disease.  And  all  the  loathsome  tilth  which  had 
settled  to  the  bottom  of  his  nature  is  now  shaken  up  to  the  surface,  so  that  there 
appeare  to  be  nothing  but  meanness  and  malignity  and  essential  coarseness  in  him. 
Meanwhile  an  instinctive  shame  of  his  passion  ami  a  dread  of  vulgar  ridicule  put  him 
upon  talking  in  dark  riddles  and  enigmas  ;  hence  the  confused,  broken,  and  disjointed 
style,  an  odd  jumble  of  dialogue  and  soliloquy,  in  which  he  tries  to  jerk  out  his 
thoughts,  as  if  he  would  have  them  known,  and  yet  not  have  them  known.  .  .  .  The 
I  oet  manages  with  great  art  to  bring  Leontes  oft  irom  the  disgraces  of  his  passion, 
and  repeal  him  home  to  our  sympathies,  which  had  been  freely  drawn  to  him  at  first 
by  his  generosity  ol  friendship.  To  this  end,  jealousy  is  represented  as  his  only  fault, 
and  this  11s  a  sudden  freak,  which  passes  on  directly  into  a  frenzy,  and  whips  him 
quite  out  of  himself,  temporarily  overriding  his  characteristic  qualities,  but  not  com¬ 
bining  with  them;  the  more  violent  for  being  unwonted,  and  the  shorter-lived  for 
being  violent.  In  his  firm,  compact  energy  of  thought  and  speech,  after  his  passion 
has  cleared  itself,  and  in  his  perennial  tlow  of  repentance  after  his  bereavement,  are 
displayed  the  real  tone  and  texture  of  his  character.  We  feel  that,  if  his  sin  has 
been  great,  his  suffering  is  also  great,  and  that  if  he  were  a  greater  sinner,  his  suffer¬ 
ing  would  be  less.  Quick,  impulsive,  headstrong,  he  admits  no  bounds  to  anger  or 
to  penitence ;  condemns  himself  as  vehemently  as  he  does  others ;  and  will  spend 
his  life  in  atoning  for  a  wrong  he  has  done  in  a  moment  of  passion ;  so  that  we  are 
the  more  willing  to  forgive  him,  inasmuch  as  he  never  forgives  himself. 


PERDITA 

Hudson  (. Introduction ,  p.  31) :  l’erdita,  notwithstanding  she  occupies  so  little 
room  in  the  play,  fills  a  large  space  in  the  reader’s  thoughts,  almost  disputing  preced¬ 
ence  with  the  Queen.  And  her  mother’s  best  native  qualities  reappear  in  her,  sweetly 


CRITICISMS— A  UTOL  YCUS 


369 

modified  by  pastoral  associations ;  her  nature  being  really  much  the  same,  only  it  has 
been  developed  and  seasoned  in  a  different  atmosphere ;  a  nature  too  strong  indeed 
to  be  displaced  by  any  power  of  circumstances  or  supervenings  of  art,  but  at  the 
same  time  too  delicate  and  susceptive  not  to  take  a  lively  and  lasting  impress  of  them. 
So  that,  while  she  has  thoroughly  assimilated,  she  nevertheless  clearly  indicates,  the 
food  of  place  and  climate,  insomuch  that  the  dignities  of  the  princely  and  the  sim¬ 
plicities  of  the  pastoral  character  seem  striving  which  shall  express  her  goodliest. 
We  can  hardly  call  her  a  poetical  being;  she  is  rather  poetry  itself,  and  everything 
lends  and  borrows  beauty  at  her  touch.  A  playmate  of  the  flowers,  when  we  see  her 
with  them,  we  are  at  a  loss  whether  they  take  more  inspiration  from  her,  or  she  from 
them ;  and  while  she  is  the  sweetest  of  poets  in  making  nosegays,  the  nosegays  be¬ 
come  in  her  hands  the  richest  of  crowns.  If,  as  Schlegel  somewhere  remarks,  the 
Poet  is  ‘  particularly  fond  of  showing  the  superiority  of  the  innate  over  the  acquired,’ 
he  has  surely  done  it  nowhere  with  finer  effect  than  in  this  unfledged  angel. 

There  is  much  to  suggest  a  comparison  of  Perdita  and  Miranda ;  yet  how  shall  I 
compare  them  ?  Perfectly  distinct  indeed  as  individuals,  still  their  characters  are 
strikingly  similar ;  only  Perdita  has  perhaps  a  sweeter  gracefulness,  the  freedom,  sim¬ 
plicity,  and  playfulness  of  nature  being  in  her  case  less  checked  by  external  restraints ; 
while  Miranda  carries  more  of  a  magical  and  mysterious  charm  woven  into  her  cha¬ 
racter  from  the  supernatural  influences  of  her  whereabout.  So  like,  yet  so  different, 
it  is  hard  saying  which  is  the  better  of  the  two,  or  rather  one  can  hardly  help  liking 
her  best  with  whom  he  last  conversed,  ft  is  an  interesting  fact,  also,  for  such  it 
seems  to  be,  that  these  two  glorious  delineations  were  produced  very  near  together, 
perhaps  both  the  same  year;  and  this  too  when  Shakespeare  was  in  his  highest  ma¬ 
turity  of  poetry  and  wisdom ;  from  which  it  has  been  not  unjustly  argued  that  his 
experience  both  in  social  and  domestic  life  must  have  been  favourable  to  exalted  con¬ 
ceptions  of  womanhood.  The  Poet,  though  in  no  sort  a  bigot,  was  evidently  full  of 
loyal  and  patriotic  sentiment ;  and  I  have  sometimes  thought  that  the  government  of 
Elizabeth,  with  the  grand  national  enthusiasm  which  clustered  round  her  throne  and 
person,  may  have  had  a  good  deal  to  do  in  shaping  and  inspiring  this  part  of  his 
workmanship.  Be  that  as  it  may,  with  but  one  great  exception,  I  think  the  world 
now  finds  its  best  ideas  of  moral  beauty  in  Shakespeare’s  women. 


AUTO L  YCUS 

Henry  Giles  ( Human  Life  in  Shakespeare ,  Boston,  1868,  p.  199) :  But  for 
Autolycus,  the  ideal  world  would  have  wanted  its  most  admirable  rascal, — the  actual 
world  would  have  been  deprived  of  a  type  for  characters  that  are  like  him  in  every¬ 
thing  but  his  brilliancy.  For  he  is  a  brilliant  scape-grace ;  a  knave  of  many  facul¬ 
ties  ;  of  sparkling  versatility  of  parts ;  with  wit  equal  to  his  thievery ;  quick,  sharp, 
and  changeable.  Most  thoroughly  Autolycus  despises  those  whom  he  cheats ;  and 
he  never  loses  his  self-respect  being  detected,  or  by  failure.  He  is  equally  perfect  in 
the  rogue’s  philosophy  and  practice.  Next  to  the  disgrace  of  being  outwitted  would 
be  the  infamy  of  being  a  stupid  rustic  and  an  honest  man.  ‘  How  blessed  are  we,’ 
he  says,  ‘  that  are  not  simple  men  !  Yet  nature  might  have  made  me  as  these  ;  there- 
‘  fore  I’ll  not  disdain.’  Excellent  humility!  the  moderation  of  a  mind  really  elevated, 
which  is  never  insolent  in  superiority,  because  it  feels  that  no  human  greatness  is  self- 


24 


370 


APPENDIX 


derived,  but  comes  by  Genius,  Destiny,  Opportunity.  Autolycus  is  the  generic 
charlatan,  and  is  consummate  in  those  arts  of  lying,  fraud,  and  imposition,  which 
constitute  the  character.  The  character  has  innumerable  degrees  and  diversities ; 
still,  a  brief  summary  will  include  all  its  essential  qualities.  The  charlatan  is  a  man 
with  the  rogue  genius  in  him  like  a  natural  instinct,  who  is  vain  of  his  talent,  and 
who  employs  the  skill  and  success  of  gainful  deceit  as  much  for  the  sense  of  power 
which  they  gratify  as  for  the  money  which  they  bring.  .  .  .  The  charlatan  represents 
the  lowest  qualities  of  an  age  as  noble  forms  represent  its  highest;  as  the  sage  repre¬ 
sents  its  wisdom,  the  saint  its  goodness,  the  hero  its  courage,  and  the  martyr  its  moral 
grandeur,  the  charlatan  represents  its  ignorance,  its  selfishness,  its  venality,  its 
hypocrisy,  its  vulgarities,  and  all  its  sordid  materialisms. 

Alfred  Roffe  ( A  Musical  Triad ,  etc.,  London,  1872,  p.  14) :  Autolycus,  ques¬ 
tionable,  and  indeed,  utterly  indefensible  as  he  is  morally,  must  certainly  be  placed 
amongst  Shakespeare’s  musical  characters,  and  looked  at  from  that  special  aspect,  he 
must  be  allowed  to  have  a  grain  of  geniality  about  him,  which  grain  of  geniality  has 
made  it  possible  for  him  to  be  one  of  the  figures  in  The  i Vinter's  Tale,  and  to  be  artis¬ 
tically  fitted  into  his  position  in  the  piece.  Our  very  first  acquaintance  with  this 
roguish  pedlar  is  made  as  he  is  wending  his  way  along  the  road  near  to  the  old  Shep¬ 
herd  s  cottage,  when  we  hear  him  singing  his  half  nature-enjoying,  half-thievish  song, 

‘  When  Daffodils  begin  to  peer,’  the  words  of  which  seem  to  show  that  Autolycus  has 
his  bad  enjoyment  of  the  ‘  white  sheet  blanching  on  the  hedge  ’  (by  means  of  which  he 
hopes  to  obtain  that  ‘  quart  of  ale,  which  is  a  dish  for  a  king  ’),  yet  there  seems  to  be 
an  equal  enjoyment  of  the  *  daffodils  ’  which  *  begin  to  peer,’  of  ‘  the  sweet  birds,  oh  ! 

*  bow  they  sing,’  and  of  ‘  the  lark  that  tirra-lirra  chants.’  This  song  of  enjoyment  by 
Autolycus  is  then  followed  by  certain  soliloquizing  disclosures  of  his  antecedents,  and 
of  his  present  cogitations,  which  would  afford  matter  sufficient  for  some  moral  spec¬ 
ulation,  but  that  the  vocal  qualities  of  Autolycus  form  the  most  urgent  subject  now. 
That  those  vocal  qualities  were  something  quite  remarkable  we  must  perforce  infer, 
from  the  enthusiastic  praises  bestowed  by  the  servant  who  rushes  in  to  announce  the 
approach  of  the  wonderful  Pedlar,  exclaiming :  ‘  O  Master,  if  you  did  but  hear  the 
Pedlar  at  the  door  ...  he  sings  several  tunes  faster  than  you  can  tell  money  .  .  .  all 
men's  ears  grow  to  his  tunes.'  From  this  living  description,  it  must  be  most  clearly 
evinced,  that  Autolycus  sings  of  his  wares  with  a  truly,  thorough,  actual  sense  of  en¬ 
joyment,  over  and  above  his  merely  commercial  motives  in  promoting  the  quickest 
sale  of  his  ‘  inkles,’  etc.,  which  articles,  as  the  Servant  afterward  declares,  ‘  he  sings 
over  as  they  were  gods  and  goddesses.’  In  fact,  Autolycus  is  a  true  Artist  (not  only 
in  his  most  questionable  doings)  but  musically,  as  far  as  his  style  of  song  is  concerned. 
It  is  most  evident  that  Autolycus  sings  his  Songs  with  just  the  right  feeling,  and 
does  not  merely  announce  his  wares,  but  actually  makes  people  in  love  with  them. 
When  he  puts  forth  what  he  designates  as  being  ‘  a  merry  ballad,  but  a  very  pretty 
‘  one,’  and  which  ballad  he  tells  Dorcas  and  Mopsa  ‘  goes  to  the  tune  of  “  Two 

Maids  wooing  a  Man,  ’  we  can  feel  no  sort  of  doubt  that  Autolycus,  while  he  most 
earnestly  desires  to  sell  his  ballads,  is  also  equally  in  the  vein  for  singing  in  a  Trio! 
That,  in  itself,  is  clearly  a  pleasure  to  him,  and  when  the  two  Lasses  tell  him  that 
they  ‘  can  both  sing  it ;’  that  ‘  it  is  in  three  parts,’  and  that  if  he  will  ‘  bear  a  part  he 
‘  shaI1 only  note  his  answer.  He  is  indeed  a  most  roguish  Pedlar,  but  he  is  also 
right  willing  to  sing,  even  for  singing’s  sake,  he  joyfully  exclaims,  ‘  I  can  bear  my 
‘  part;  you  must  know  ’tis  my  occupation;  have  at  it  with  you.’  Whether  in  Shake- 


CRITICISMS— A  UTOL  YCUS 


371 


speare’s  view  of  such  a  character  as  that  of  Autolycus,  with  its  total  want  of  principle, 
any  redeemable  point ,  any  possibility  of  future  amendment ,  be  mixed  up,  is  a  question 
concerning  which  a  few  words  may  now,  it  is  submitted,  be  offered ;  not  altogether 
unprofitably.  Supposing  it  granted  that  our  case  is  allowed,  as  to  the  possession  by 
Autolycus  of  a  certain  degree  of  geniality  in  his  appreciation  both  of  Music  and  of 
the  beauty  in  external  nature,  may  not  that  geniality  seem  to  indicate  that  a  germ  of 
some  possible  progress  in  good  may  after  all  lie  within  this  notable  Pedlar  ?  Perhaps, 
for  instance,  from  something  like  this  point  of  view,  those  remarkable  words  of  Au¬ 
tolycus,  that  ‘  for  the  life  to  come,  I  sleep  out  the  thought  of  it,’  are  really  suggestive 
of  something,  not  merely  more,  but  quite  different  too,  from  what  at  first  sight  might 
appear  to  be  the  case.  Do  not,  then,  these  brave  words  indicate  really,  the  very 
reverse  of  what  they  express  ?  Is  it  not  a  well-known  fact,  that  when  a  man  tells  us 
(unasked)  that  he  is  not  at  all  afraid  of  a  given  thing,  we  frequently  infer,  at  once, 
that  in  his  ‘  heart  of  heart,’  the  speaker  is  really  very  MUCH  afraid  !  Now  with 
regard  to  Autolycus,  a  strong  presumption  arises,  that  Shakespeare  intended  to  imply 
that  this  ‘  thought  ’  of  *  the  life  to  come  '  did  occasionally  visit  the  mind  of  the  reflec¬ 
tive  Pedlar  in  such  a  way  that  he  could  not  so  comfortably  ‘sleep  out  the  thought  of  it.’ 
In  conformity  with  every  view  of  Shakespeare’s  admitted  greatness,  we  are  irresistibly 
led  on  to  believe  that  he  never  writes  anything  without  a  purpose  ; — in  fact,  that 
something  in  the  moral  world,  or  in  the  mind  of  man,  is  always  meant  to  be  painted 
in  everything  that  is  said  or  done,  which  would  be  the  reason  that  we  can  and  do 
speculate  concerning  Shakespeare’s  characters,  just  as  we  can  and  do  speculate  upon 
the  mental  qualities  of  those  we  encounter  in  actual  life.  If  a  true  geniality  as  to 
Music  be  allowed  to  Autolycus,  and  likewise  a  certain  amount  of  faculty  for  enjoying 
the  beauties  of  external  nature  in  birds  and  flowers,  it  would  be  hard  to  say  that  these 
qualities  do  not  imply  some  small  germ  of  possible  good  in  him ; — but,  we  may  go 
still  further,  for  it  must  be  conceded  that,  even  expressed  in  words,  a  few  faint  glim¬ 
merings  of  just  thinking  in  Autolycus  do  appear,  even  as  to  his  immoral  state.  He 
begins  to  perceive  that  his  dishonesty  tells  against  him,  and  he  can  exclaim,  ‘Now  had 
‘ I  n°t  the  dash  of  my  former  life  in  me,  would  preferment  drop  on  my  head;’ — and 
again,  after  running  over  several  circumstances  as  he  is  soliloquizing,  he  comes  to  this 
sensible  conclusion — ‘But'tis  all  one  to  me;  for  had  I  been  the  finder-out  of  this 
secret,  it  would  not  have  relished  among  my  other  discredits.’  It  is  curious  too,  that 
at  the  very  moment  when  Autolycus  has  finished  this  reflection,  which  at  least  shows 
that  he  is  coming  upon  the  right  track  of  thought  (whether  he  will  finally  come  to 
one  of  right  action  or  not),  the  old  Shepherd  and  his  Son  appear  before  him,  with  the 
marks  of  their  new-found  prosperity  bright  upon  them.  This  suggests  a  train  of 
thought  to  Autolycus,  which  is  anything  but  encouraging  as  to  his  former  ways.  He 
is  prompted  to  exclaim,  as  well  as  he  might,  ‘  Here  come  those  I  have  done  good  to 
‘  against  my  will,  and  already  appearing  in  the  blossoms  of  their  good-fortune.’ 

Upon  the  whole,  one  can  hardly  help  being  half  inclined  to  think  that  Autolycus, 
with  his  evident  abilities,  his  enjoyment  in  the  Daffodils,  the  songs  of  the  birds  (not 
forgetting  the  tirra-lirra  of  the  lark),  his  real  love  for,  and  talents  in  Music,  all 

weighed  together,  will  ultimately  turn  over  a  new  leaf  in  his  course  of  life; — or, _ 

which  comes  to  the  same  thing, — one  can  hardly  help  fancying  that  it  was  Shake¬ 
speare’s  intention  to  point  at  some  such  possibility  for  this  very  remarkable  Pedlar  of 
the  ‘  Winter’s  Tale.’ 

F.  J.  Furnivall  ( Leopold  Shaksperc,  Introd.  p.  xcii)  :  Not  only  do  we  see  Shak- 


APPENDIX 


spere’s  freshness  of  spirit  in  his  production  of  Perdita,  but  also  in  his  creation  of  Au- 
tolvcus.  That,  at  the  close  of  his  dramatic  life,  after  all  the  troubles  he  had  passed 
through,  Shakspere  had  yet  the  youngness  of  heart  to  bubble  out  into  this  merry  rogue, 
the  incarnation  of  fun  and  rascality,  and  let  him  sail  off  successful  and  unharmed,  is 
wonderful.  And  that  there  is  no  diminution  of  his  former  comic  power  is  shown, 
too,  in  his  Clown,  who  wants  but  something  to  be  a  reasonable  man. 

D.  J.  Snider  (vol.  ii,  p.  72)  :  Autolycus  is  not  wholly  a  product  of  shepherd  life, 
but  apparently  of  the  court  also,  having  been  formerly  a  servant  of  Prince  Florizel. 
He  is,  moreover,  negative  only  to  the  honesty  of  the  pastoral  character,  while  he  par¬ 
ticipates  in  its  free  joyousness  and  sportive  nature.  ...  He  is  a  rogue  not  so  much  from 
malice  as  from  pleasure ;  he  takes  delight  in  thievery  for  its  own  sake  rather  than  for 
its  gains.  He  is  aware  of  his  misdeeds,  and  laughs  at  them ;  his  life  is  folly,  to  be 
sure, — but  then,  he  wants  to  enjoy  his  own  folly.  His  cunning  is  a  source  of  a  con¬ 
tinuous  chuckling  to  himself ;  the  property  won  is  of  far  less  account.  He  is  comic 
to  himself  and  plays  a  comic  part  for  his  own  special  amusement.  He,  therefore, 
belongs  to  the  class  of  consciously  comic  characters,  who  make  fun  and  enact  folly 
for  themselves.  He  celebrates  his  vagabond  life  and  thievish  disposition  in  verse ;  it 
is  a  theme  for  Art  with  him.  Such  a  person  stands  in  contrast  with  the  simple  hon¬ 
est  shepherds ;  but,  still,  he  is  of  them,  and  harmoniously  blends  with  their  world. 
He  furnishes  the  intrigue  and  disguise  of  this  little  realm,  and  is,  hence,  the  source 
of  its  comic  situations.  .  .  .  He  will  assist  in  breaking  up  the  pastoral  world  and  trans¬ 
ferring  it  to  Sicilia,  where  he  will  repent. 

J.  N.  Hetherington  ( Cornhill  Magazine,  1S79,  Dec.,  p.  733):  We  often  hear 
of  what  Shakespeare’s  characters  might  have  said  or  done  when  off  the  stage ;  and  it 
is  no  great  stretch  of  imagination  to  suppose  that,  before  we  make  his  acquaintance, 
Autolycus,  amongst  other  callings,  honest  or  otherwise,  may  have  been  a  jester. 
Certainly  his  songs  and  witticisms  would  have  found  favour  in  any  court;  and  he, 
like  Touchstone,  loved  the  court,  and  affected  the  manners  thereof.  .  .  .  But,  instead 
of  a  Fool  in  the  guise  of  a  professional  jester,  we  have  the  most  delightful  of  rogues, 
who  simply  plays  the  fool.  In  the  early  plays,  the  humourous  and  pathetic  characters 
are  kept  quite  separate.  Each  has  a  marked  sphere  of  action  allotted  to  him,  beyond 
which  he  never  passes.  But  in  the  later  periods  the  various  characters  are  combined  ; 
wise  men  play  the  fool,  whilst  fools  talk  and  act  like  wise  men.  Humour  and  pathos 
run  together,  and  the  result  is  a  picture  more  true  to  nature  than  was  the  first.  So, 
after  showing  the  possibilities  of  the  Fool’s  part  in  Touchstone  and  Lear’s  Fool, 
Shakespeare  discarded  the  character  and  gave  the  part  to  a  rogue,  combining  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  folly  and  knavery  so  closely  that  we  can  no  longer  separate  them.  Is  not 
this  more  natural  and  nearer  to  real  life  ?  Does  not  the  man  who  plays  the  fool  for 
us  in  society  often  prove  rather  slippery  ?  I  think  this  is  what  Shakespeare  felt  and 
acted  on ;  and  as  we  laugh  at  the  jests  of  Autolycus  and  condone  his  snappings  up 
of  ‘  unconsidered  trifles,’  we  know  that  some  such  character  might  meet  us  any  day 
and  cheat  us  before  our  eyes.  We  get  to  like  the  rogue  so  well  that  we  end  by  tak¬ 
ing  his  part,  and  rejoicing  in  the  success  of  his  schemes.  How  is  it  possible  to  find 
fault  with  a  ‘merry  heart’  that  ‘goes  all  the  day,’  laughing  and  singing  as  it  goes, 
whom  •  Fortune  will  not  suffer  to  be  honest  ’  ?  Touchstone,  and  Lears  Fool  may  be 
more  pathetic,  more  philosophic,  and  greater  in  poetic  intensity ;  but  they  are  not 
more  true  to  human  nature  than  this  prince  of  knaves  and  fools. 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— SCHLEGEL 


373 


A  goodly  figure  this  to  close  the  procession,  which  began  with  the  twin  Dromios 
and  Launce,  and  which  includes  a  host  of  worthies,  who  are  as  dear  to  us  as  all  the 
heroes  of  old  romance. 

As  they  pass  by,  one  by  one,  they  serve  not  only  to  amuse  us  and  arrest  attention, 
to  move  alike  smiles  and  tears,  but  they  also  serve  to  show  that  Shakespeare’s  laugh¬ 
ter  is  as  truly  human  as  aught  else  in  him ;  that  tragedy  becomes  more  tragic  when 
the  humour  of  every  day  life  surrounds  it ;  and  that  even  these  minor  characters,  as 
they  have  been  called,  reflect  each  varying  phase  of  thought  in  the  growth  of  their 
author's  genius.  The  joyous  and,  at  times,  boisterous  merriment  of  youth,  the  stead¬ 
ier  mirth  of  manhood,  the  bitter  irony  of  disappointment,  and  the  wild  laugh  of  de¬ 
spair,  are  all  presented  by  the  Fools. 

[See,  also,  W.  C.  Hazlitt,  on  Source  of  the  Plot,  p.  323.] 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS 

A.  W.  Schlegel  ( Lectures ,  etc.,  1811,  trans.  by  J.  Black,  1815,  ii,  181):  The 
Winter  s  Tale  is  as  appropriately  named  as  A  Midsummer  Night ’s  Dream.  It  is 
one  of  those  tales  which  are  peculiarly  calculated  to  beguile  the  dreary  leisure  of  a 
long  winter  evening,  which  are  attractive  and  intelligible  even  to  childhood,  and 
which,  animated  by  fervent  truth  in  the  delineation  of  character  and  passion,  invested 
with  the  decoration  of  a  poetry  lowering  itself,  as  it  were,  to  the  simplicity  of  the  sub¬ 
ject,  transport  even  manhood  back  to  the  golden  age  of  imagination.  The  calcula¬ 
tion  of  probabilities  has  nothing  to  do  with  such  wonderful  and  fleeting  adventures,, 
ending  at  last  in  general  joy;  and  accordingly  Shakespeare  has  here  taken  the  great¬ 
est  liberties  with  anachronisms  and  geographical  errors ;  he  opens  a  free  navigation 
between  Sicily  and  Bohemia,  makes  Giulio  Romano  the  contemporary  of  the  Delphic 
Oracle,  not  to  mention  other  incongruities.  .  .  . 

[Page  182.]  The  jealousy  of  Leontes  is  not,  like  that  of  Othello,  developed  withi 
all  its  causes,  symptoms,  and  gradations ;  it  is  brought  forward  at  once,  and  is  por¬ 
trayed  as  a  distempered  frenzy.  It  is  a  passion  with  whose  effects  the  spectator  is. 
more  concerned  than  with  its  origin,  and  which  does  not  produce  the  catastrophe,  but 
merely  ties  the  knot  of  the  piece.  In  fact,  the  poet  might  perhaps  have  wished  to 
indicate  slightly  that  Hermione,  though  virtuous,  was  too  active  in  her  efforts  to  please 
Polixenes;  and  it  appears  as  if  this  germ  of  an  inclination  first  attained  its  proper 
maturity  in  their  children.  Nothing  can  be  more  fresh  and  youthful,  nothing  at  once 
so  ideally  pastoral  and  princely  as  the  love  of  Florizel  and  Perdita;  of  the  Prince, 
whom  love  converts  into  a  voluntary  shepherd ;  and  the  Princess,  who  betrays  her 
exalted  origin  without  knowing  it,  and  in  whose  hands  the  nosegays  become  crowns. 
Shakespeare  has  never  hesitated  to  place  ideal  poetry  close  by  the  side  of  the  most 
vulgar  prose ;  and  this  is  also  generally  the  case  in  the  world  of  reality.  Perdita’s- 
foster-father  and  his  son  are  both  made  simple  boors,  that  we  may  the  more  distinctly 
see  that  whatever  ennobles  her  belongs  to  herself.  The  merry  pedlar  and  pickpocket 
Autolycus,  so  inimitably  portrayed,  is  necessary  to  complete  the  rustic  feast,  which. 
Perdita,  on  her  part,  seems  to  render  fit  for  an  assemblage  of  deities  in  disguise. 

F.  Kreyssig  ( Vorlesungen ,  Berlin,  1862,  vol.  iii,  p.  497):  There  is  one  charac- 


374 


APPENDIX 


teristic  of  Shakespeare,  which  must  not  be  overlooked,  and  this  is :  how  small  was 
the  admiration  which  this  Court-actor  and  poet  of  the  theatre  had  for  the  manners  or 
culture  of  a  Court.  If  against  Shakespeare’s  bitter  and  manifold  attacks  on  plebeian, 
presumptuous  ignorance,  we  should  balance  his  representations  of  preposterous,  aristo¬ 
cratic  folly,  it  would  not  be  hard  to  see  that  the  be-feathered  and  musk-scented 
Cavaliers  have  not  one  atom  of  preference,  in  the  poet’s  aversion,  over  sweaty  caps 
and  dirty  hands.  Everywhere  and  at  all  times  Shakespeare  pursues  them;  he  treats 
them  as  game,  small,  big,  or  medium ;  he  attacks  them  with  the  bird-bolts  of  his  wit 
as  well  as  with  the  inevitable  arrows  of  his  ruthless  satire  and  the  sharp  sword  of 
moral  indignation.  From  the  learned  Pedant  at  the  Court  of  Navarre,  from  Touch¬ 
stone’s  courtier  who  was  politic  with  his  friend,  smooth  with  his  enemy,  and  had 
undone  three  tailors, — down  to  the  flatterers  of  Richard  the  Third,  and  the  down¬ 
right  malice  of  Cloten,  no  single  symptom  of  the  moral  sickness  in  this  sphere  of  life 
did  Shakespeare  spare.  In  this  regard  the  Comedies,  the  Histories,  and  the  Trag¬ 
edies  vied  with  each  other.  Love's  Labour’s  Lost,  As  You  Like  It,  King  John, 
Henry  VI.,  Richard  III.,  Hamlet,  and  Lear,  Cymbeline,  and  The  Tempest  all  alike 
show  how  small  the  advantage,  in  the  eyes  of  a  poet  who  knows  the  heart,  have  the 
darlings  of  fortune  over  the  stepchildren  of  society,  and  how,  under  all  circumstances, 
like  his  mistress,  Nature,  he  shows,  incorruptibly  and  with  truth,  virtue  her  own 
feature,  and  scorn  her  own  image.  To  all  these  delineations  of  a  class,  favoured  by 
fortune  and  by  power,  this  Winter' s  Tale  presents  an  unmistakeable  contrast.  Not 
that  dark  heavy  shadows  are  lacking  in  the  Court-life  here  shown  us.  The  murder 
plotted  against  Polixenes,  a  guest  and  friend  from  boyhood,  and  the  trial  of  Her- 
mione  are  not  calculated  to  reveal  the  highest  circle  as  a  paradise  of  happiness  and 
virtue ;  but  we  should  take  note  that  all  these  enormities  spring  from  the  moral  dis¬ 
ease  of  one  single  person,  although  he,  to  be  sure,  is  the  highest  in  rank.  But  of  that 
band  of  flatterers  and  hypocrites,  an  unfailing  group  in  all  other  night-scenes  of  the 
highest  classes,  of  envenomed  slanderers  and  fortune  hunters,  always  on  the  alert  to 
convert  their  rulers’  bad  thoughts  into  acts — of  all  these  there  is  here  no  trace.  No 
assassin  can  Leontes  find  for  the  man,  against  whom  jealousy  has  goaded  him  to 
frenzy  ;  not  a  single  accuser  of  his  disowned  wife,  nor  a  single  false  witness  against 
her.  Rather  than  purchase  the  favour  of  his  lord  at  the  price  of  his  conscience, 
Camillo  takes  to  flight ;  in  the  circle  of  courtiers  not  one  will  step  forward  as  an  ac¬ 
cuser  of  the  queen  or  as  a  witness  against  her.  All  counsel  circumspection,  calm 
deliberation,  unintimidated  by  the  frenzy  of  their  king.  The  application  to  the  Oracle 
is  conducted  throughout  honestly  and  honourably  ;  it  never  occurs  to  Cleomines  and 
Dion  to  give  to  the  interpreters  of  the  God  a  hint  of  their  lord’s  wishes.  When  An- 
tigonus  assents  to  the  exposure  of  the  infant  he  has,  quite  apart  from  the  danger 
threatening  his  own  life,  no  choice  other  than  either  to  see  the  helpless  creature  mur¬ 
dered  before  his  eyes  by  the  king  or  else  to  deliver  it  to  an  unknown  fate. 

[Page  509.]  Florizel’s  whole  character  represents  the  sovereign  power  of  true,  gen¬ 
uine  love  over  the  external  forces  of  the  world.  Not  for  an  instant  do  the  thoughts 
of  his  birth,  of  his  rank,  of  his  duty  to  his  father  in  the  present  and  to  his  country 
in  the  future,  make  him  waver  in  the  choice  which  he  has  made  for  life.  The  re¬ 
monstrances  of  his  disguised  father  awaken  in  him  not  a  single  thought  of  repent¬ 
ance,  or  of  misgiving.  The  only  thing  that  occurs  to  him  after  the  unwelcome  dis¬ 
closure  is  flight,  and  an  independent  completion  of  his  plans.  We  can  hardly  avoid 
the  thought  that  we  are  on  the  verge  of  a  second  tragedy,  deeper  than  the  discords 
of  the  first.  It  must  not  and  it  should  not  be  denied  that  in  the  conflict  now  before 


GERM  A  N  CRITICISMS— B  UL  THA  UPT 


375 


us,  between  the  youthful  impulses  of  the  heart  and  the  positive  duties  of  life,  the  poet 
has  spoken  less  earnestly  than  in  Romeo  Juliet ,  or  in  Othello ,  and  Cy77ibeline. 
Feelings  and  fancy  outweigh  the  laws  of  the  understanding,  as  is  natural  in  a  ‘  lale. 
Not  the  heart,  but  life  must  yield  in  the  conflict  between  Must  and  May,  and  then  to 
a  gentle-hearted  benign  fate  be  the  task  committed  of  converting  the  follies  of  youth 
into  happiness  and  blessing. 

Heinrich  Bulthaupt  ( Dramaturgic  der  Classiker,  1884,  2d  ed.  vol.  ii,  p.  37^) : 
The  speed  with  which  Leontes,  one  of  the  most  disagreeable  men  on  God’s  earth, 
talks  himself  into  a  jealous  madness,  is  certainly  in  the  worst  sense  ‘  more  than  hu- 
<  man.’  Merely  because  his  wife  converses  earnestly  with  his  guest,  his  most  trusted 
friend,  after  her  request  had  induced  that  guest  to  remain  longer  in  Sicilia,  this  hor¬ 
rible,  bloodthirsty  creature  turns  to  a  manifold  murderer.  Othello  is  nothing  in 
comparison, — he  had  a  handkerchief  to  show,  and  the  insinuations  of  Iago, — Leontes 
has  not  a  word  to  say  for  himself.  It  goes  on  to  the  Third  Act  with  steadily  increas¬ 
ing  madness,— then  comes  the  rebound.  If  up  to  this  point  Shakespeare  reveals  his 
boundless  art  in  portraying  elemental  passion,  then  of  a  sudden  he  betrays  the  weak¬ 
ness  peculiar  to  him  in  the  denouement.  The  mental  conversion  of  Leontes,  who  has 
just  called  the  Delphic  Oracle  a  lie  and  a  fraud,  is  accomplished  in  two  lines !  This 
is  intolerable.  A  man  who  has  been  raving  mad  through  three  Acts  cannot  become 
sane  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye ;  we  do  not  believe  it.  [The  long  speech  of  Leontes 
following  his  conversion]  is  painfully  and  psychologically  false.  Hereupon  sixteen 
years  elapse,  and  then  comes  the  enchanting  Fourth  Act  with  its  charming  vision  of 
Perdita  and  that  genuine  Shakespearian  character,  Autolycus.  Everywhere  the  uncon¬ 
fined  play  of  sovereign  genius.  No  sooner  have  we  resigned  ourselves  unrestrainedly 
to  it,  when,  alack  !  the  Fifth  Act  yields  another  monstrosity.  Leontes  has  repented. 
We  must  well  believe  it,  although  it  may  be  permitted  to  doubt  whether  sixteen  years 
must  not  either  put  penitence  asleep  or  wear  away  the  penitent.  Enough,  Leontes, 
deeply  stricken,  still  bears  in  mind  his  wife  so  shamefully  slandered  by  him  and  be¬ 
lieved  to  be  dead.  And  Hermione?  The  royal,  exalted  Hermione,  who  in  the  First 
Act,  especially  in  the  Trial-scene,  is  on  a  level  with  the  grandest  that  Shakespeare 
has  created,  who  walks  in  the  ranks  of  innocent,  afflicted,  injured  women,  whose  suf¬ 
fering  souls  no  one  but  Shakespeare  has  laid  so  bare,  this  Hermione,  still  loving  her 
husband,  when  she  is  again  to  appear  before  him,  consents  to  this  farce  of  a  statue. 
Fully  to  realise  the  blemish  of  it  all,  the  impossibility  of  the  situation,  just  picture 
Desdemona  on  a  pedestal.  Can  a  loving  wife  after  sixteen  years  of  separation  play 
such  a  comedy  ?  If  she  still  loves  him  with  the  old  strength  must  not  her  heart  fly 
to  meet  him,  yearning  to  break  every  fetter  ?  .  .  .  What  trace  is  there  here  of  a 
»  Tale  ’  ?  is  it  not  avoided  almost  on  purpose  ?  If  some  friendly  god  had  watched 
over  the  poor  ill-treated  one  for  sixteen  years  in  a  death-like  sleep,  and  then,  when 
the  cycle  was  complete,  had  awakened  her  to  a  fairer  life, — who  would  not  have  will¬ 
ingly  accepted  it  ?  Who  does  not  look  with  a  tender  awe  at  the  glass  coffin  wherein 
the  lovely  princess  slumbers  in  the  hut  of  the  dwarfs,  after  she  has  tasted  the  poi¬ 
soned  apple  of  the  wicked  stepmother?  To  whom  is  the  slumber,  even  longer,  of 
The  Sleeping  Beauty,  and  of  her  whole  castle,  incredible  ?  Freed  from  the  fetters 
of  the  flesh  we  glide  with  true  delight  into  the  dazzling  realm  of  wonder.  But  here, 
_ is  not  every  charm  put  to  flight  with  the  ever-recurring,  dense,  rationalistic  prepa¬ 
ration  of  the  scene  ?  Instead  of  using  some  means  full  of  the  miraculous,  Shake¬ 
speare  lets  Paulina  play  Providence.  Thus  the  scaffolding  creaks  in  all  its  joints; 


376 


APPENDIX 


human  passion  and  grandeur  are  inconceivably  mingled  with  the  affectation  of  a 
comedian.  Our  tragic  sympathy,  our  moral  indignation  has  been  quickened, — but 
she,  whom  we  commiserated,  trifles  away  our  sympathy  with  a  living  statue  which 
she  represents,  and  the  man,  for  whom  we  wished  the  heaviest  punishment,  garners 
the  fairest  harvest  of  indulgent  fate.  A  plot  which  should  have  been  treated  only  as 
a  tragedy,  is,  without  intrinsic  justification,  conducted  to  a  superficial  end  of  recon¬ 
ciliation.  Happily  the  poet  appeases  us  with  a  hundred  wondrous  details.  The 
Hermione  of  the  earlier  part  is  innocent  grandeur  itself ;  Paulina,  harsh  and  ready  in 
deed  and  word,  is  thoroughly  original.  And  he  who  can  contemplate  the  lovely  scene 
of  the  little  Mamillius,  the  genial  boldness  wherewith  the  droll  Autolycus  turns  every 
situation  to  use,  finally  the  whole  Fourth  Act  with  its  charming  love  of  Perdita  and 
Florizel, — he  who  can  contemplate  all  this  without  delight  is  beyond  human  help. 
The  sheep-shearing  festival  abounds  in  humour  and  life,  and  overflows  with  flowery 
beauties.  It  is  one  of  the  loveliest  pearls  from  the  clearest,  stillest  depths  in  the  lyric 
soul  of  Shakespeare. 

[All  the  first  part  of  this  Essay  is  devoted  to  proving  that  the  Hovel  written  by 
Greene  ( John  Greene  in  the  German)  is  a  finer  work  as  a  story  than  The  Winters 
T ale.  It  would  have  been  needless  to  translate  it,  inasmuch  as  it  has  been  antici¬ 
pated  by  Mrs  Lennox. — Ed.] 

Louis  Lewes  ( Shakespeare's  Frauengestalten,  Stuttgart,  1893,  p.  326):  For  six¬ 
teen  years  Hermione  permits  her  husband  and  the  world  to  believe  that  she  is  dead, 
and,  only  when  her  daughter  has  been  found,  does  she,  in  the  celebrated  Statue 
scene,  return  to  life  and  to  her  penitent  husband.  This  conduct  has  been  pronounced 
heartless  and  unnatural.  The  reproach  is  unmerited.  Hermione’s  husband  with 
base  suspicion  has  mistrusted  her  faithfulness,  and  thereby  forfeited  her  respect. 
She  has  been  publicly  branded,  her  innocent  daughter  exposed  to  a  horrible  death, 
her  promising  son  is  dead,  killed  by  her  disgrace.  For  such  injuries  and  pain  a  mere 
tardy  acknowledgement  of  her  innocence  is  no  sufficing  compensation ;  the  instant 
repentance  of  her  husband  does  not  suffice  again  to  restore  him  to  a  place  in  her 
heart.  Can  the  high-souled  wife,  in  royal  array,  again  walk  proudly  at  a  Court  which 
had  witnessed  her  degradation,  childless,  widowed  in  heart  by  the  unworthiness  of 
that  husband  to  whom  she  will  be  a  constant  reproach,  an  ever  present  humiliation  ? 
Therein  is  neither  true  feeling  nor  nature.  Wounded  in  heart  and  soul,  nothing  re¬ 
mained  to  her  but  to  retire  from  life,  not  to  brood  over  her  injuries,  but  to  learn  for¬ 
giveness,  and  through  a  penitence  long  sustained  by  her  husband,  to  have  him  become 
worthy  of  her. 


Georg  Brandes  (  William  Shakespeare ,  1896,  p.  932) :  In  the  mode  and  manner 
in  which  the  relationship  between  Florizel  and  Perdita  is  portrayed,  there  are  certain 
peculiarities  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  work  of  Shakespeare’s  youth,  but  which 
again  appear  in  the  description  of  Ferdinand  and  Miranda  in  The  Tempest,  namely, 
a  certain  aloofness  from  the  world,  a  certain  tenderness  for  those  who  may  still  hope 
and  yearn  for  happiness,  a  renunciation,  as  it  were,  by  the  author  of  all  thought  of 
happiness  for  himself.  He  is  standing  above  and  beyond  the  band  who  hope.  When 
in  earlier  days  he  portrayed  love,  the  poet  stood  on  the  same  level  with  the  lovers;  it 
is  so  now  no  longer;  they  are  now  regarded  with  a  father’s  eye.  He  is  looking  down 
on  them  from  above. 

[If  the  foregoing  be  not  gossamer  fancy,  as  is  not  unlikely,  it  is  a  fresh  illustration 


FRENCH  CRITICISMS — MftlZlkRES 


377 


in  this,  the  latest  work  on  Shakespeare  of  any  magnitude  from  foreign  hands,  of  the 
difficulty,  almost  the  impossibility,  of  comprehending  Shakespeare,  except  in  broad, 
lines,  which  besets  those  whose  native  tongue  is  not  that  which  Shakespeare  spoke. 
—Ed.] 


FRENCH  CRITICISMS 

A.  MfcziftRES  [Shakespeare,  ses  CEuvres,  etc.,  Paris,  1865,  p.  428):  One  of  the 
most  striking  marks  of  this  tendency  of  the  poet  [to  soften  tragic  outlines]  is  the  in¬ 
dulgence  which  he  accords  to  the  courtiers  whom  he  had  so  often  covered  with  ridi¬ 
cule  in  his  comedies  and  with  contempt  in  his  tragedies.  In  The  Winter’s  Tale  he 
endows  them  with  generous  sentiments  and  with  virtues.  Not  one  of  them  does  he 
represent  as  either  approving  of  the  suspicions  of  Leontes  against  his  wife  or  as  en¬ 
couraging  them,  but  on  the  contrary  they  testify  a  profound  respect  for  the  queen,  and 
all  endeavour  to  vindicate  the  crime  whereof  she  is  unjustly  accused.  Ah,  rare  ex¬ 
ample  of  courage  in  a  court  where  the  will  of  the  master  is  law,  and  where  the  fear 
of  offending  him  is  greater  than  that  of  crushing  the  innocent !  It  is  the  very  wife 
of  a  courtier,  it  is  Paulina,  who  fills  the  most  noble  role  in  the  play  when  she  takes 
up  the  defence  of  Hermione,  when  she  braves  the  anger  of  the  king  by  presenting 
to  him  his  new-born  babe,  and  when  she  overwhelms  him  with  reproaches  after  the 
supposed  death  of  the  queen.  And  withal  she  knows  when  to  stop  and  not  abuse  her 
good  qualities,  for  the  poet  will  have  nothing  exaggerated,  not  even  excellence.  .  .  . 

[Page  429.]  The  pastoral  scene,  introduced  into  The  Winter’s  Tale  as  in  Cym- 
beline,  is  not  intended  to  set  off  the  vices  of  the  court.  It  is  a  simple  picture  of 
country  manners  which  the  poet  adorns  with  natural  colours,  and  which  he  every¬ 
where  embellishes  with  the  poetic  presence  of  Perdita.  I  cannot  go  so  far  as  to  say, 
with  some  critics,  that  herein  is  found  a  chef-d' ceuvre  of  the  Eclogue.  On  the  contrary, 
what  proves  that  Shakespeare  does  not  take  the  peasants  of  his  comedy  seriously,  is 
that  he  repeatedly  mystifies  them  through  the  cunning  of  Autolycus,  and  that  the  two 
chief  characters  of  the  bucolic  scenes,  Florizel  and  Perdita,  are,  neither  the  one  nor 
the  other,  peasants.  The  graceful  and  charming  language  of  Perdita  proves  nothing 
in  favour  of  the  country,  for  she  expresses  herself  thus  naturally  only  because  by  her 
birth  she  belongs  to  the  highest  class  of  society.  Her  style  no  more  resembles  the 
genuine  pastoral  manner  than  she  herself  resembles  a  peasant.  If  her  supposed 
father  and  brother  are  types  traced  from  nature,  as  they  seem  to  be,  assuredly  she 
neither  speaks  nor  thinks  en  campagnarde,  inasmuch  as  she  has  nothing  in  common 
with  them.  She  introduces,  therefore,  a  foreign  element  into  the  eclogue.  Seeing 
that  this  is  so,  how  can  it  be  said  that  it  is  a  model  of  its  class  ?  A  genuine  eclogue 
is  not  set  forth  with  princes  and  princesses  in  disguise.  Do  not  let  us  try  to  give  to  a 
simple  play  of  the  imagination,  to  a  romantic  tale  divided  into  Acts,  the  serious  cha¬ 
racter  of  a  chef-d' ceuvre.  Let  us  gather  the  flowers  which  a  great  genius  has  sown 
along  his  wandering  path,  but  do  not  by  any  means  let  us  attempt  to  arrange  them 
into  a  bouquet.  In  very  sooth,  Shakespeare  has  here  no  more  written  a  pastoral  than 
a  comedy  or  a  tragedy.  He  touches  the  three  kinds,  but  does  not  settle  in  one.  For 
my  part,  I  admire  all  the  beauties  of  detail  which  this  play  contains,  but  I  see  there 
only  what  really  is, — a  triple  outline,  where  we  acknowledge  the  hand  of  a  master. 
I  find  there  a  rapid  sketch  of  three  pieces,  whereof  none  is  perfect. 


378 


APPENDIX 


E.  Montegut  ( CEuvres  Completes  de  Shakespeare ,  Paris,  1867,  vol.  iii,  p.  242) : 
Of  all  the  transformations  which  the  characters  in  Greene’s  novel  underwent,  cer¬ 
tainly  the  most  curious  is  that  of  Pandosto.  Ordinary  jealousy,  jealousy  pure  and 
simple,  such  as  we  commonly  see,  cannot  be  explained  by  such  a  story,  thought  Shake¬ 
speare  to  himself ;  either  the  story  is  false,  and  this  is  the  epithet  it  deserves  if  it  re¬ 
mains  as  Greene  tells  it,  or  else  it  is  true  only  of  a  particular  shade  of  jealousy  which 
must  be  determined  and  illustrated.  It  is  evident  that  to  treat  it  as  he  has  done,  this 
king  must  be,  of  necessity,  a  thoroughly  sensual  man,  dominated  by  his  temperament, 
and,  like  all  such  men,  incapable  of  reflection,  and  the  slave  of  his  imagination. 
Men  of  flesh  and  of  blood  can  neither  read  the  souls  of  others  nor  their  own,  for  the 
violence  of  their  bestiality  is  such,  that  they  identify  their  own  emotions  with  the  emo¬ 
tions  of  others.  This  very  domination  of  the  flesh  which  begets  jealousy  in  Leontes 
could  just  as  well  under  other  circumstances  have  begotten  a  credulous  confidence, 
and  have  made  him,  the  case  occurring,  as  blind  to  the  faults  of  his  wife  as  he  is  blind 
to  her  innocence.  Another  particular :  to  men  of  this  character,  the  difference  between 
physical  love  and  moral  love  does  not  exist,  hence  the  demonstration  of  their  feelings 
exceeds  the  bounds  of  all  measure  and  all  decency.  If  we  are  to  judge  by  appear¬ 
ances,  we  can  believe  that  they  love  even  more  deeply  than  men  of  a  more  moral 
character ;  for  they  are,  of  necessity,  forced  to  misuse  the  resources  which  this  sensu¬ 
ousness  supplies  to  the  passion  which  controls  them :  such  as  tears,  convulsions,  rage, 
humiliating  supplications,  prayers  of  repentance.  Thus  it  is  with  Leontes.  He  loved 
Hermione  less  with  his  soul  than  with  his  senses.  Violent  and  impetuous  as  a  brute, 
like  a  brute  he  is  also  weak.  His  repentance  is  as  sudden  as  his  fault ;  but  in  his 
repentance,  as  in  his  fault,  he  inspires  the  same  sentiment  of  scorn,  for  he  betrays  in 
both  the  lower  nature.  A  moment  ago  he  excited  our  indignation,  and  we  shrugged 
our  shoulders ;  now  he  excites  our  pity.  Leontes  would  have  tried  in  vain, — it  would 
have  been  absolutely  impossible  for  him, — to  excite  horror  and  dismay;  for  he  is,  what 
Italians  so  fitly  call,  una  bestia,  with  all  the  shades  of  dulness,  indecency,  and  good 
nature  which  this  word  conveys. 

Accordingly  the  most  remarkable  stroke  of  genius  in  this  play  of  Shakespeare  is 
that  he  turned  only  into  a  comedy  a  subject  which  could  furnish  the  most  sombre  of 
tragedies.  He  understood  admirably  that  however  violent  and  tragic  were  the  acts, 
such  a  character  would  be  necessarily  comic.  Indeed,  so  comic,  that  it  is  exactly  the 
one  which  our  Moli^re  has  drawn  in  Sganarelle ,  ou  le  Cocu  xtnaginaire.  Leontes  is 
formidable  otherwise  than  the  poor  bourgeois  of  MoliSre,  for  his  folly  is  supplied  with 
far  different  means  of  action ;  but  they  are  brothers,  if  not  in  rank  yet  in  nature,  and 
their  souls  plunge  into  the  same  grotesque  element. 

Francois- Victor  Hugo  ( CEuvres  Completes  de  Shakespeare,  1868,  p.  38) :  From 
its  earliest  publication  this  play  has  been  the  subject  of  a  mistake ;  placed  by  the  ed¬ 
itors  of  the  First  Folio  in  the  list  of  Comedies,  it  has  been  accepted  according  to  its 
label,  and  held  to  be  an  old  wife’s  tale  or  as  a  light  and  fanciful  improvisation,  and 
not,  as  it  should  have  been,  one  of  the  most  serious  and  profound  dramas  of  the  poet. 
The  Winter's  Tale  is  no  comedy ;  it  is  a  tragedy,  more  tragic  even  than  Cymbeline. 
Assuredly  the  death  of  Antigonus,  and  far  more  that  of  Mamillius,  move  us  more  deeply 
than  the  death  of  Cloten.  But  it  is  not  alone  by  this  double  catastrophe  that  The 
l Winters  Tale  is  a  drama;  it  is  so  by  its  general  composition,  by  its  impassioned  tone, 
and  by  the  ascending  scale  of  its  chief  scenes.  Therein  Shakespeare’s  style  is  no 
longer  that  of  Much  Ado  about  Nothing.  In  this  latter  comedy  Shakespeare  care- 


UNITY  OF  TIME,  PLACE,  AND  ACTIO  A 


379 


fully  spares  the  spectator  all  painful  emotions ;  he  admits  him  beforehand  into  the  se¬ 
cret  of  all  situations,  whereby  the  spectator,  already  set  at  ease  by  the  very  title  of  the 
play,  need  never  distress  himself  over  imaginary  misfortunes  whereof  he  foresees  the 
issue.  When  Claudio  leaves  us  to  pray  at  the  tomb  of  his  betrothed,  we  never  let 
ourselves  be  moved  at  this  grief ;  we  know  the  tomb  is  empty ;  we  have  been  ex¬ 
pressly  told  that  Hero  is  not  dead,  and  that  at  the  decisive  moment  she  will  reappear. 
But  on  the  contrary  in  The  Winter's  Tale,  the  poet  keeps  the  secret  to  himself ;  not 
for  a  single  instant  does  he  admit  us  to  the  councils  of  Fate.  He  wishes  us  to  be 
involved  in  the  despair  of  his  characters ;  he  would  have  us,  like  Leontes,  believe  in 
the  death  of  Hermione,  and  to  the  very  last  he  leaves  us  the  dupes  of  Paulina’s 
device.  Hence  it  is  that  the  ddnoument  is  profoundly  solemn.  Then,  then  our 
anxiety  is  at  its  height;  and  when  the  statue  stirs,  when  marble  becomes  flesh,  when 
the  queen  descends  from  the  pedestal,  it  cannot  be  but  that  we  are  present  at  some 
magic  invocation  by  a  supernatural  power,  and  at  this  unexpected  resurrection,  we 
feel  an  indescribable  emotion  of  wonder  and  surprise. 


UNITY  OF  TIME,  PEACE,  AND  ACTION 

Pope  ( Preface ,  1725,  p.  xx) :  From  what  has  been  said,  there  can  be  no  question 
but  had  Shakespear  published  his  works  himself  (especially  in  his  latter  time,  and 
after  his  retreat  from  the  stage)  we  should  not  only  be  certain  which  are  genuine ;  but 
should  find  in  those  that  are,  the  errors  lessened  by  some  thousands.  If  I  may  judge 
from  all  the  distinguishing  marks  of  his  style,  and  his  manner  of  thinking  and  writ¬ 
ing,  I  make  no  doubt  to  declare  that  those  wretched  plays,  Pericles,  Locrine,  Sir  John 
Oldcastle,  Yorkshire  Tragedy,  Lord  Cromwell,  The  Puritan,  and  London  Prodigal, 
cannot  be  admitted  as  his.  And  I  should  conjecture  of  some  of  the  others  (partic- 
ticularly  Love's  Labour’s  Lost,  The  Winter’s  Tale,  and  Titus  Andronicus),  that  only 
some  characters,  single  scenes,  or  perhaps  a  few  particular  passages,  were  of  his 
hand.  [To  the  foregoing  plays  in  parenthesis,  Pope  added  in  his  Second  Edition : 
‘  and  a  thing  called  The  Double  Falsehood ,'  a  play  now  generally  supposed  to  have 
been  written  by  Theobald,  but  published  by  Theobald  as  Shakespeare’s. — Ed.] 

Dryden  [quoted  by  Malone  from  ‘  the  Essay  at  the  end  of  the  second  Part  ’  of 
The  Conquest  of  Granada\  :  Witness  the  lameness  of  their  plots  [the  plots  of 
Shakespeare  and  Fletcher]  ;  many  of  which,  especially  those  which  they  wrote  first, 
(for  even  that  age  refined  itself  in  some  measure,)  were  made  up  of  some  ridiculous 
incoherent  story,  which  in  one  play  many  times  took  up  the  business  of  an  age.  I 
suppose  I  need  not  name,  Pericles,  Prince  of  Tyre,  nor  the  historical  plays  of 
Shakespeare ;  besides  many  of  the  rest,  as  The  Winter’s  Tale,  Love's  Labour’s  Lost, 
Measure  for  Measure,  which  were  either  grounded  on  impossibilities,  or  at  least  so 
meanly  written,  that  the  comedy  neither  caused  your  mirth,  nor  the  serious  part  your 
concernment. 

Malone  ( Preliminary  Remarks,  p.  233) :  None  of  our  author’s  plays  has  been 
more  censured  for  the  breach  of  dramatic  rules  than  The  Winter’s  Tale.  In  con¬ 
firmation  of  what  Mr  Steevens  has  remarked  in  another  place  : — ‘  that  Shakespeare 


APPENDIX 


3  So 

‘  was  not  ignorant  of  these  rules,  but  disregarded  them,’ — it  may  be  observed,  that  the 
laws  of  the  drama  are  clearly  laid  down  by  a  writer  once  universally  read  and  ad¬ 
mired,  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  who,  in  his  Defence  of  Poesie,  1595,  has  pointed  out  the 
very  improprieties  into  which  our  author  has  fallen  in  this  play.  After  mentioning 
the  defects  of  the  tragedy  of  Gorboduc ,  he  adds :  ‘  But  if  it  be  so  in  Gorboducke, 
‘  how  much  more  in  all  the  rest  ?  where  you  shall  haue  Asia  of  the  one  side,  and 
‘  Affricke  of  the  other,  and  so  many  other  vnder-kingdomes,  that  the  Player  when  he 
«  comes  in,  must  euer  begin  telling  where  hee  is,  or  else  the  tale  will  not  be  conceiued. 
*  [Now  you  shall  haue  three  Ladies  vvalke  to  gather  flowers,  and  then  we  must  beleeue 
‘  the  stage  to  bee  a  garden.  By  and  by  we  heare  newes  of  shipwracke  in  the  same 
‘  place,  then  we  are  too  blame  if  we  accept  it  not  for  a  rocke.  Vpon  the  backe  of 
‘  that  comes  out  a  hideous  monster  with  fire  and  smoke,  and  then  the  miserable  be- 
’  holders  are  bound  to  take  it  for  a  caue :  while  in  the  meane  time  two  armies  flie  in, 

‘  represented  with  foure  swords  and  bucklers,  and  then  what  hard  hart  will  not  receiue 
‘  it  for  a  pitched  field  ?]  Now  of  time  they  are  much  more  liberal.  For  ordinarie  it 
‘  *s>  that  two  young  Princes  fall  in  lone,  after  many  trauerses  she  is  got  with  child, 

‘  deliuered  of  a  faire  boy :  he  is  lost,  groweth  a  man,  falleth  in  love,  &  is  readie  to  get 
‘  another  child  :  &  all  this  in  2  houres  space  :  which  how  absurd  it  is  in  sence,  euen 
‘  sence  may  imagine  :  [&  Art  hath  taught,  &  all  ancient  exaples  iustified,  &  at  this 
day  the  ordinary  Players  in  Italic  will  not  erre  it.  Yet  wTil  som  bring  in  an  exam- 
‘  pie  of  Eunuch  in  Terence ,  that  containeth  matter  of  2  dayes,  yet  far  short  of  twentie 
‘  yeares.  1  rue  it  is,  &  so  was  it  to  be  played  in  two  dayes,  and  so  fitted  to  the  time 
‘  it  set  forth.  And  though  Plautus  haue  in  one  place  done  amisse,  let  vs  hit  it  with 
‘  him,  and  not  misse  with  him.  But  they  will  say,  how  then  shall  wee  set  forth  a 
1  storie  which  containes  both  many  places,  and  many  times  ?  And  do  they  not  know 
'  that  a  Tragedie  is  tied  to  the  lawes  of  Poesie,  and  not  of  Historic.’— ed.  1598,  p. 
514.  See,  also,  notes  on  IV,  i,  8. — Ed.] 

I  know  of  no  place  more  appropriate  than  here,  to  bring  in  Dr  Johnson’s  mas¬ 
terly  defence  of  Shakespeare’s  alleged  violation  of  the  Law  of  Unity.  It  was  not 
written  with  especial  reference  to  The  Winter's  Tale,  but  is  in  his  general  Preface, 
which  every  Shakespeare  student  should  read  over  and  over  again: _ 

‘  It  will  be  thought  strange  [p.  xxiv]  that,  in  enumerating  the  defects  of  [Shake¬ 
speare],  I  have  not  mentioned  his  neglect  of  the  Unities ;  his  violation  of  those  laws 
which  have  been  instituted  and  established  by  the  joint  authority  of  poets  and  of 
critics. 

‘  For  his  ofher  deviations  from  the  art  of  writing,  I  resign  him  to  critical  justice, 
without  making  any  other  demand  in  his  favour,  than  that  which  must  be  indulged 
to  all  human  excellence ;  that  his  virtues  be  rated  with  his  failings.  But,  from  the 
censure  which  this  irregularity  may  bring  upon  him,  I  shall,  witlTdue  reverence  to 
that  learning  which  I  must  oppose,  adventure  to  try  how  I  can  defend  him. 

11  is  histories,  being  neither  tragedies  nor  comedies,  are  not  subject  to  any  of  their 
laws;  nothing  more  is  necessary  to  all  the  praise  which  they  expect,  than  that  the 
changes  of  action  be  so  prepared  as  to  be  understood,  that  the  incidents  be  various 
and  affecting,  and  the  characters  consistent,  natural,  and  distinct.  No  other  Unity 
is  intended,  and  therefore  none  is  to  be  sought. 

‘  In  his  other  works  he  has  well  enough  preserved  the  Unity  of  Action.  He  has 
not,  indeed,  an  intrigue  regularly  perplexed  and  regularly  unravelled;  he  does  not 
endeavour  to  hide  his  design  only  to  discover  it,  for  this  is  seldom  the  order  of  real 


UNITY  OF  TIME,  PLACE,  AND  ACTION 


381 


events,  and  Shakespeare  is  the  poet  of  nature  :  But  his  plan  has  commonly  what 
Aristotle  requires,  a  beginning,  a  middle,  and  an  end ;  one  event  is  concatenated 
with  another,  and  the  conclusion  follows  by  easy  consequence.  There  are  perhaps 
some  incidents  that  might  be  spared,  as  in  other  poets  there  is  much  talk  that  only 
fills  up  time  upon  the  stage ;  but  the  general  system  makes  gradual  advances,  and 
the  end  of  the  play  is  the  end  of  expectation. 

‘  To  the  Unities  of  Time  and  Place  he  has  shown  no  regard,  and  perhaps  a  nearer 
view  of  the  principles  on  which  they  stand  will  diminish  their  value,  and  withdraw 
from  them  the  veneration  which,  from  the  time  of  Corneille ,  they  have  very  gener¬ 
ally  received,  by  discovering  that  they  have  given  more  trouble  to  the  poet  than 
pleasure  to  the  auditor. 

‘  The  necessity  of  observing  the  Unities  of  Time  and  Place  arises  from  the  sup¬ 
posed  necessity  of  making  the  drama  credible.  The  critics  hold  it  impossible,  that 
an  action  of  months  or  years  can  be  possibly  believed  to  pass  in  three  hours ;  or  that 
the  spectator  can  suppose  himself  to  sit  in  the  theatre,  while  ambassadors  go  and 
return  between  distant  kings,  while  armies  are  levied  and  towns  besieged,  while  an 
exile  wanders  and  returns,  or  till  he  whom  they  saw  courting  his  mistress,  shall  la¬ 
ment  the  untimely  fall  of  his  son.  The  mind  revolts  from  evident  falsehood,  and 
fiction  loses  its  force  when  it  departs  from  the  resemblance  of  reality. 

‘  From  the  narrow  limitation  of  time  necessarily  arises  the  contraction  of  place. 
The  spectator,  who  knows  that  he  saw  the  first  act  in  Alexandria ,  cannot  suppose 
that  he  sees  the  next  in  Rome ,  at  a  distance  to  which  not  the  dragons  of  Medea 
could,  in  so  short  a  time,  have  transported  him ;  he  knows  with  certainty  that  he  has 
not  changed  his  place ;  and  he  knows  that  place  cannot  change  itself ;  that  what 
was  a  house  cannot  become  a  plain ;  that  what  was  Thebes  can  never  be  Persepolis. 

*  Such  is  the  triumphant  language  with  which  a  critic  exults  over  the  misery  of  an 
irregular  poet,  and  exults  commonly  without  resistance  or  reply.  It  is  time  therefore 
to  tell  him,  by  the  authority  of  Shakespeare ,  that  he  assumes,  as  an  unquestionable 
principle,  a  position,  which,  while  his  breath  is  forming  it  into  words,  his  understand¬ 
ing  pronounces  to  be  false.  It  is  false,  that  any  representation  is  mistaken  for  real¬ 
ity;  that  any  dramatic  fable  in  its  materiality  was  ever  credible,  or,  for  a  single 
moment,  was  ever  credited. 

‘  The  objection  arising  from  the  impossibility  of  passing  the  first  hour  at  Alexan¬ 
dria,  and  the  next  at  Rome,  supposes  that  when  the  play  opens  the  spectator  really 
imagines  himself  at  Alexandria ,  and  believes  that  his  walk  to  the  theatre  has  been 
a  voyage  to  Egypt,  and  that  he  lives  in  the  days  of  Antony  and  Cleopatra.  Surely 
he  that  imagines  this,  may  imagine  more.  He  that  can  take  the  stage  at  one  time 
for  the  palace  of  the  Ptolemies,  may  take  it  in  half  an  hour  for  the  promontory  of 
Actinm.  Delusion,  if  delusion  be  admitted,  has  no  certain  limitation ;  if  the  spec¬ 
tator  can  be  once  persuaded  that  his  old  acquaintance  are  Alexander  and  Ccesar, 
that  a  room  illuminated  with  candles  is  the  plain  of  Pharsalia,  or  the  bank  of  Gran- 
icus,  he  is  in  a  state  of  elevation  above  the  reach  of  reason,  or  of  truth,  and,  from 
the  heights  of  empyrean  poetry,  may  despise  the  circumscriptions  of  terrestrial  na¬ 
ture.  There  is  no  reason  why  a  mind  thus  wandering  in  ecstasy  should  count  the 
clock,  or  why  an  hour  should  not  be  a  century  in  that  calenture  of  the  brains  that 
can  make  a  stage  a  field. 

‘  The  truth  is,  that  the  spectators  are  always  in  their  senses,  and  know,  from  the 
first  act  to  the  last,  that  the  stage  is  only  a  stage,  and  that  the  players  are  only  players. 
They  come  to  hear  a  certain  number  of  lines  recited  with  just  gesture  and  elegant 


382 


APPENDIX 


modulation.  The  lines  relate  to  some  action,  and  an  action  must  be  in  some  place; 
but  the  different  actions  that  complete  a  story  may  be  in  places  very  remote  from 
each  other;  and  where  is  the  absurdity  of  allowing  that  space  to  represent  first 
Athens,  and  then  Sicily,  which  was  always  known  to  be  neither  Sicily  nor  Athens, 
but  a  modern  theatre. 

‘  By  supposition,  as  place  is  introduced,  time  may  be  extended ;  the  time  required 
by  the  fable  elapses  for  the  most  part  between  the  acts ;  for,  of  so  much  of  the  action 
as  is  represented,  the  real  and  poetical  duration  is  the  same.  If,  in  the  first  act, 
preparations  for  war  against  Mitkridates  are  represented  to  be  made  in  Rome,  the 
event  of  the  war  may,  without  absurdity,  be  represented,  in  the  catastrophe,  as  hap¬ 
pening  in  Pontus ;  we  know  that  there  is  neither  war,  nor  preparation  for  war ;  we 
know  that  we  are  neither  in  Pome  nor  Pontus-,  that  neither  Mitkridates  nor  Lucul- 
lus  are  [«c]  before  us.  The  drama  exhibits  successive  imitations  of  successive 
actions,  and  why  may  not  the  second  imitation  represent  an  action  that  happened 
years  after  the  first ;  if  it  be  so  connected  with  it  that  nothing  but  time  can  be  sup¬ 
posed  to  intervene.  Time  is,  of  all  modes  of  existence,  most  obsequious  to  the 
imagination;  a  lapse  of  years  is  as  easily  conceived  as  a  passage  of  hours.  In  con¬ 
templation  we  easily  contract  the  time  of  real  actions,  and  therefore  willingly  permit 
it  to  be  contracted  when  we  only  see  their  imitation.  .  .  . 

‘  A  play  read,  affects  the  mind  like  a  play  acted.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  the 
action  is  not  supposed  to  be  real,  and  it  follows  that  between  the  acts  a  longer  or 
shorter  time  may  be  allowed  to  pass,  and  that  no  more  account  of  space  or  duration 
is  to  be  taken  by  the  auditor  of  a  drama,  than  by  the  reader  of  a  narrative,  before 
whom  may  pass  in  an  hour  the  life  of  a  hero  or  the  revolution  of  an  empire. 

*  Whether  Shakespeare  knew  the  unities  and  rejected  them  by  design,  or  deviated 
from  them  in  happy  ignorance,  it  is,  I  think,  impossible  to  decide  and  useless  to 
enquire.  We  may  reasonably  suppose,  that,  when  he  rose  to  notice,  he  did  not  want 
the  counsels  and  admonitions  of  scholars  and  critics,  and  that  he  at  last  deliberately 
persisted  in  a  practice,  which  he  might  have  begun  by  chance.  As  nothing  is  essen¬ 
tial  to  the  fable,  but  Unity  of  Action,  and  as  the  Unities  of  Time  and  Place  arise 
evidently  from  false  assumptions,  and,  by  circumscribing  the  extent  of  the  drama, 
lessen  its  variety,  I  cannot  think  it  much  to  be  lamented,  that  they  were  not  known 
to  him,  or  not  observed  :  Nor,  if  such  another  poet  could  arise,  should  I  very  vehe¬ 
mently  reproach  him,  that  his  first  act  passed  at  Venice,  and  his  next  at  Cyprus. 
Such  violations  of  rules  merely  positive,  become  the  comprehensive  genius  of 
Shakespeare,  and  such  censures  are  suitable  to  the  minute  and  slender  criticism  of 
Voltaire.  .  .  . 

‘  The  result  of  mY  enquiries,  in  which  it  would  be  ludicrous  to  boast  of  impar¬ 
tiality,  is  that  the  Unities  of  Time  and  Place  are  not  essential  to  a  just  drama,  that 
though  they  may  sometimes  conduce  to  pleasure,  they  are  always  to  be  sacrificed 
to  the  nobler  beauties  of  variety  and  instruction ;  and  that  a  play,  written  with  nice 
observation  of  critical  rules,  is  to  be  contemplated  as  an  elaborate  curiosity,  as  the 
product  of  superfluous  and  ostentations  art,  by  which  is  shewn,  rather  what  is  pos¬ 
sible,  than  what  is  necessary. 

‘  He  that>  without  diminution  of  any  other  excellence,  shall  preserve  all  the  unities 
unbroken,  deserves  the  like  applause  with  the  architect,  who  shall  display  all  the 
orders  of  architecture  in  a  citadel,  without  any  deduction  from  its  strength ;  but  the 
principal  beauty  of  a  citadel  is  to  exclude  the  enemy ;  and  the  greatest  graces  of  a 
play,  are  to  copy  nature  and  instruct  life. 


UNITY  OF  TIME,  PLACE,  AND  ACTION 


583 

‘  Perhaps,  what  I  have  here  Dot  dogmatically  but  deliberately  written,  may  recall 
the  principles  of  the  drama  to  a  new  examination.  I  am  almost  frightened  at  my 
own  temerity ;  and  when  I  estimate  the  fame  and  strength  of  those  who  maintain 
the  contrary  opinion,  am  ready  to  sink  down  in  reverential  silence ;  as  AStieas  with¬ 
drew  from  the  defence  of  Troy ,  when  he  saw  Neptune  shaking  the  wall,  and  Juno 
heading  the  besiegers.’ 

It  will  not  be  out  of  place,  I  trust,  to  give  here  an  extract  from  the  Dramaturgic 
of  Lessing,  the  finest  Shakespeare -scholar  Germany  has  given  us.  It  was  written  in 
1767,  two  years  after  Dr  Johnson’s  Preface,  just  quoted,  and  is  one  of  those  sledge¬ 
hammer  blows,  with  which,  delivered  in  the  interest  of  Shakespeare,  Lessing  demol¬ 
ished  Voltaire  and  Voltaire’s  influence  in  Germany : 

‘  It  is  one  thing  to  circumvent  rules,  another  to  observe  them.  The  French  do 
4  the  former,  the  latter  was  understood  only  by  the  ancients. 

4  Unity  of  Action  was  the  first  dramatic  law  of  the  ancients ;  Unity  of  Time  and 
4  Place  were  mere  consequences  of  the  former  which  they  would  scarcely  have  ob- 
4  served  more  strictly  than  exigency  required  had  not  the  combination  with  the  Chorus 
4  arisen.  For  since  their  actions  required  the  presence  of  a  large  body  of  people  and 
4  this  concourse  always  remained  the  same,  who  could  go  no  further  from  their  dwell- 
4  ings  nor  remain  absent  longer  than  is  customary  to  do  from  mere  curiosity,  they  were 
4  almost  obliged  to  make  the  scene  of  Action  one  and  the  same  spot,  and  confine  the 
4  Time  to  one  and  the  same  day.  They  submitted  bona  fide  to  this  restriction ;  but 
4  with  a  suppleness  of  understanding  such  that  in  seven  cases  out  of  nine  they  gained 
4  more  than  they  lost  thereby.  For  they  used  this  restriction  as  a  reason  for  simpli- 
4  fying  the  action  and  to  cut  away  all  that  was  superfluous,  and  thus,  reduced  to  essen- 
4  tials,  it  became  only  the  ideal  of  an  action  which  was  developed  most  felicitously  in 
4  this  form  which  required  the  least  addition  from  circumstances  of  time  and  place. 

4  The  French,  on  the  contrary,  who  found  no  charms  in  true  Unity  of  Action,  who 
4  had  been  spoilt  by  the  wild  intrigues  of  the  Spanish  School,  before  they  had  learnt 
4  to  know  Greek  simplicity,  regarded  the  Unity  of  Time  and  Place  not  as  conse- 
4  quences  of  Unity  of  Action,  but  as  circumstances  absolutely  needful  to  the  repre- 
4  sentation  of  an  action,  to  which  they  must  therefore  adapt  their  richer  and  more 
4  complicated  actions  with  all  the  severity  required  in  the  use  of  a  Chorus,  which, 
4  however,  they  had  totally  abolished  When  they  found  how  difficult,  nay,  at  times, 
4  how  impossible  this  was,  they  made  a  truce  with  the  tyrannical  rules  against  which 
4  they  had  not  the  courage  to  rebel.  Instead  of  a  single  place,  they  introduced  an 
4  uncertain  place,  under  which  we  could  imagine  now  this,  now  that  spot;  enough,  if 
4  the  places  combined  were  not  too  far  apart  and  none  required  special  scenery,  so 
4  that  the  same  scenery  could  fit  the  one  about  as  well  as  the  other.  Instead  of  the 
4  unity  of  a  day,  they  substituted  unity  of  duration,  and  a  certain  period  during  which 
4  no  one  spoke  of  sunrise  or  sunset,  or  went  to  bed,  or  at  least  did  not  go  to  bed  more 
4  than  once ;  however  much  might  occur  in  the  space,  they  allowed  it  to  pass  as 
4  one  day. 

4  Now  no  one  would  have  objected  to  this ;  for  unquestionably  even  thus,  excellent 
4  plays  can  be  made,  and  the  proverb  says :  hew  the  wood  where  it  is  smallest.  But 
4  I  must  also  allow  my  neighbour  the  same  privilege.  I  must  not  always  show 
4  him  the  thickest  part,  and  cry,  “You  must  cut  there!  That  is  where  I  cut!” 
4  Thus  the  French  critics  all  exclaim,  especially  when  they  speak  of  the  dramatic 
4  works  of  the  English.  What  a  to-do  they  then  make  of  regularity,  that  regularity 


384 


APPENDIX 


‘  which  they  had  made  so  easy  for  themselves !  But  I  am  weary  of  dwelling  on  this 
‘  point ! 

‘  As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  Voltaire’s  and  Maffei’s  Merope  may  extend  over  eight 
‘  days  and  the  scene  be  laid  in  seven  places  in  Greece  !  if  only  it  had  the  beauties  to 
‘  make  me  forget  these  pedantries  !  The  strictest  observation  of  rules  cannot  outweigh 
‘  the  smallest  fault  in  a  character.’ — [Mr  Beasley’s  and  Miss  Zimmern’s  translation, 
Bohn’s  Series,  p.  369.] 


DURATION  OF  ACTION 

In  the  ‘  fierce  light  which  beats  ’  on  Shakespeare’s  plays  the  time  over  which  the 
action  extends  has  not  escaped  scrutiny.  To  count  the  evening  and  morning  of  the 
First  day,  and  of  the  Second,  and  of  the  Third,  and  so  on,  requires,  it  might  be  sup¬ 
posed,  no  great  skill  beyond  a  careful  reading  of  the  play,  and  an  elementary  know¬ 
ledge  of  arithmetic.  But  in  carrying  out  this  simple  process  it  is  found  that  some¬ 
thing  more  is  needed  than  a  mere  enumeration  on  the  fingers ;  a  strange  interlacing 
of  past  and  present  time  is  revealed ;  yesterdays  are  crowded  into  to-day,  and  to-day 
is  swept  backward  into  the  past ;  yet  no  jar  is  noted  in  the  steady  onward  movement 
of  time.  In  Othello,  probably  the  most  striking  example,  by  counting  the  time  in  the 
right  butterwoman’s  rank  to  market,  we  find  that  from  the  hour  when  Othello  lands 
in  Cyprus  to  the  minute  when  his  hands  stop  the  breath  of  Desdemona,  barely  thirty- 
six  hours  of  solar  (not  dramatic)  time  have  passed.  In  The  Merchant  of  Venice , 
Shylock  s  bond  for  three  months  runs  its  full  course  in  three  days,  yet  nothing  amiss 
is  perceived.  Something  more,  then,  than  simple  arithmetic  is  needed.  This  strange 
compression  of  days  into  hours,  and  expansion  of  hours  into  days,  cannot  be  fortui¬ 
tous,  it  must  be  the  effect  of  art.  It  behooves  us,  therefore,  to  trace,  if  we  can,  the 
artist’s  work. 

To  all  who  have  read  the  preceding  volumes  of  this  edition,  what  has  just  been 
said  is  familiar  enough.  The  subject,  therefore,  has  been  only  thus  briefly  recalled. 

In  the  present  play,  owing  to  its  plot,  but  little  necessity  exists  for  any  unusual 
treatment  of  dramatic  time.  Like  other  *  Tales,’  its  march  is  direct  and  onward. 
And  yet  there  is  one  regard  wherein  we  feel  the  need  of  Shakespeare’s  thaumaturgy. 

A  pronounced  feature  of  the  play  is  the  sudden  onset  of  the  jealousy  of  Leontes. 
It  cannot  be  overlooked.  It  strikes  every  reader.  There  is  no  gradual  development 
of  the  passion,  as  in  Othello ;  there  is  no  growth ;  almost  as  swift  as  thought  Leontes 
is  at  the  height  of  frenzy.  Whether  this  is  intentional  on  Shakespeare’s  part,  or  care¬ 
lessness,  or  because,  as  has  been  suggested  by  Detghton,  the  novel  of  Greene, 
wherein  the  jealousy  is  of  a  gradual  growth,  was  so  familiar  to  Shakespeare  that  he 
imagined  it  was  as  familiar  to  his  auditors,  no  one  can  ever  know.  But,  after  the 
attack  of  mania  has  once  set  in,  I  think  we  can  detect  an  intention  to  make  us  lose 
sight  of  the  electric  flash  with  which  it  apparently  began,  and,  apart  from  the  memory 
of  its  utter  groundlessness,  which  neither  can,  nor  should,  be  obliterated,  to  make  us 
glide  insensibly  into  a  belief  that  the  jealousy  is  really  the  result  of  long  observation 
by  Leontes,  who  has  been  for  many  a  day  past  watching  the  conduct  of  Hermione, 
and  that  her  victory  over  the  resolution  of  Polixenes  to  depart,  was  all  that  was  needed 
to  set  the  long  smouldering  passion  in  a  blaze.  It  almost  seems  as  though  in  this 


D  UR  A  TION  OF  A  CTION 


385 

play  Shakespeare  had  disdained  to  show  us  a  gradual  growth  of  jealousy  as  in  Othello , 
but  that,  after  imparting  to  its  earliest  manifestation  a  dramatic  suddenness,  he  was 
conscious  of  his  power  to  sway  us  at  his  will  and  to  make  us  accept  this  jealousy  of 
Leontes  as  really  gradual  and  natural,  that  is,  as  natural  as  such  an  unnatural  frenzy 
can  be  made.  That  Shakespeare  did  not  wholly  over-rate  his  power  is  found  in 
the  fact  that  some  critics  have  gone  so  far  as  to  suppose  that  Hermione  had  been 
actually  imprudent  in  her  behaviour  toward  Polixenes. 

The  first  note  transferring  the  present  into  the  past  is  struck  in  an  Aside,  where 
Leontes  says,  in  his  conversation  with  Camillo,  ‘  ’tis  far  gone  when  I  shall  gust  it 
‘  last !’  Be  it  that  this  is  merely  Leontes’s  imagination,  it  conveys,  nevertheless,  an 
impression  of  a  gradual  growth  of  gossip,  busy  for  many  a  day  throughout  the  palace 
and  even  abroad,  concerning  acts  of  the  Queen  in  the  past,  which  Leontes  is  the  last 
to  notice.  The  impression  may  be  but  a  mere  vanishing  touch,  yet  it  is  felt  and 
leaves  a  mark.  Again,  Leontes  speaks  in  wrath  of  ‘  seeing  a  game  played  home,’ 
and  that  ‘rumour  cannot  be  mute,’  and  then,  his  frenzy  at  white  heat,  he  unfolds 
picture  after  picture  which  his  memory  supplies  of  scenes,  which,  grossly  misinter¬ 
preted  as  we  know  they  must  be,  we  have  to  accept  as  drawn  from  actions  which 
happened  before  the  opening  of  the  play : — 

‘  Is  whispering  nothing? 

Is  leaning  cheek  to  cheek  ?  is  meeting  noses  ? 

Kissing  with  inside  lip  ?  stopping  the  career 
Of  laughter,  with  a  sigh  ? — a  note  infallible 
Of  breaking  honesty, — horsing  foot  on  foot  ? 

Skulking  in  corners  ?  wishing  clocks  more  swift  ? 

Hours,  minutes  ?  noon,  midnight  ?’ 

It  may  be  urged  that  it  is  only  now,  in  the  retrospect,  that  Leontes  thus  puts  a 
wicked  interpretation  on  the  innocent  actions  of  Hermione.  How  do  we  know? 
The  mere  fact  that  he  recalls  them,  shows  that  they  must  have  made  some  impression 
on  him  at  the  time.  We  all  know  that  they  are  the  wild  distortions  of  madness,  but 
when  we  listen  to  the  play,  these  allusions  serve  the  purpose  of  lessening  the  sudden¬ 
ness  of  the  madman’s  jealousy.  Although  we  do  not  actually  see  the  growth  of  his 
jealousy,  what  might  have  been  its  stages  are  made  to  pass  in  review  before  us. 
Herein  lies  the  only  need  that  I  can  detect,  in  this  play,  of  any  art  in  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  dramatic  time,  and  herein  also  the  only  evidences  of  it.  Deighton  has  cited 
nearly  all  of  these  passages  as  indications  that  the  growth  of  Leontes’s  jealousy  had 
been  really  gradual.  I  have  merely  added  their  effect  in  regard  to  the  dramatic 
time. 

Mr  P.  A.  Daniel  has  made  a  ‘  Time-Analysis  ’  of  this  Play  (New  Shakspere  Soc. 
Trans.,  1877-79,  P-  1 77)  whereof  the  synopsis  is  as  follows: — 

Day  I.  Act  I,  i  and  ii. 

“  2.  Act  II,  i. 

An  interval  of  twenty-three  days. 

“  3.  Act  II,  ii  and  iii,  and  Act  III,  i. 

“  4.  Act  III,  ii. 

An  interval.  Antigonus’s  voyage  to  Bohemia. 

“  5.  Act  III,  iii. 

An  interval  (Act  IV,  i)  of  sixteen  years. 


25 


386 


APPENDIX 


Day  6.  Act  IV,  ii  and  iii. 

“  7.  Act  IV,  iv. 

An  interval.  The  journey  to  Sicilia. 

“  8.  Act  V,  i-iii. 

According  to  this  computation  the  ‘  Play  comprises  eight  days  represented  on  the 
‘  stage,  with  intervals.’ 

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  there  are  but  seven  days,  and  that  Mr  Daniel  has  not 
sufficiently  extended  the  first  day.  Mr  Daniel  says  in  effect : — 

‘  Day  I.  Act  I,  sc.  i.  Camillo  and  Archidamus  meet  and  converse. 

“  Act  I,  sc.  ii.  Polixenes  yields  to  Hermione’s  request  to  prolong  his  visit. 
‘  Leontes,  smitten  with  jealousy,  engages  Camillo  to  poison  Polixenes.  Camillo  reveals 
‘  the  plot  to  Polixenes,  and  together  they  fly  from  Sicilia  that  same  night. 

‘Day  2.  Act  II,  sc.  i.  Leontes  orders  Hermione  to  be  imprisoned  pending  the 
1  return  of  Cleomenes  and  Dion,  whom  he  has  dispatched  to  Delphos. 

‘  I  am  not  sure  that  a  separate  day  should  be  given  to  this  scene ;  but,  on  the 
‘  whole,  the  proposed  departure  of  Polixenes  and  Camillo  on  the  night  of  the  first 
'  day,  and  the  mission  since  then ,  of  Cleomenes  and  Dion  to  Delphos,  make  this 
‘  division  probable.’ 

I  believe  the  sequence  of  events  to  be  rather  as  follows :  While  Leontes  is  unfold¬ 
ing  his  jealousy  to  Camillo,  Polixenes  and  Hermione  are  walking  in  the  garden ;  when 
they  have  finished  their  stroll,  they  separate ;  Hermione  goes  to  her  apartments,  and 
Polixenes  goes  to  his,  but  on  the  way  meets,  first,  Leontes  coming  away  from  Camillo, 
and,  next,  Camillo  himself,  from  whom  he  learns  of  the  plot  against  his  life.  Camillo 
begs  him  to  leave  ‘  to-night,’  supposing  that  some  time  would  be  consumed  in  getting 
the  ships  ready,  but  when  Polixenes  says  that  his  ships  are  even  then  ready  and  had 
been  so  for  two  days,  Camillo  concludes  by  begging  him  ‘  to  take  the  urgent  hour,’ 
that  is,  the  hour  that  was  even  then  pressing  upon  them.  They  accordingly  fly  at 
once  with  the  utmost  haste ;  one  of  the  lords  says  afterward  ‘  he  never  saw’  men  scour 
*  so  on  their  way,  he  eyed  them  even  to  their  ships,’  which  he  could  not  have  done 
had  it  been  in  the  dark  night.  In  the  meanwhile,  Leontes,  after  parting  from 
Camillo,  and  under  the  full  sway  of  his  fury,  determines  to  have  divine  sanction 
for  his  procedure,  and  accordingly  dispatches  Cleomenes  and  Dion  to  Delphos ;  he 
then  goes  to  Hermione’s  apartment,  possibly  to  upbraid  her  and  to  tell  her  of  his  ap¬ 
peal  to  the  God.  On  the  threshold  he  is  told  of  the  flight  of  Polixenes,  and  Camil- 
lo’s  treachery  is  disclosed  to  him ;  then  follows  Hermione’s  imprisonment  as  an  ac¬ 
complice  in  high  treason,  and  the  day,  on  which  the  play  opens,  ends.  Clearly  the 
whole  action  thus  far  has  consumed  not  more  than  four  or  five  hours.  It  would  be 
monstrous  to  suppose  that  after  his  maniacal  outburst  in  his  interview  with  Camillo, 
Leontes  could  have  seen  Hermione,  or  have  talked  with  her  in  the  old  familiar  way, 
or  that  he  could  have  disguised  that  hatred  which  he  could  not  refrain  from  display¬ 
ing  to  Polixenes,  although  he  had  just  promised  Camillo  that  he  would  seem  friendly 
to  him.  He  afterward  says  that  he  could  find  no  rest  night  or  day,— and  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  on  the  first  night  of  the  out-break  of  his  madness  he  could  rest  without 
seeking  Hermione,  and  revealing  to  her  his  fury  at  her  infidelity  is  to  show  little 
knowledge,  I  fear,  of  human  nature.  And  yet  this  supposition  must  be  made  if  W’e 
are  to  assume  that  Polixenes  fled  that  night  and  that  Leontes  knew  nothing  of  the 
flight  till  the  next  day,  when  he  was  about  to  visit  Hermione’s  apartments. 

Mr  Daniel  himself  doubts,  as  we  have  seen,  his  correctness  in  assigning  two  days 
to  this  much  of  the  action.  He  was  misled,  I  think,  by  Camillo’s  ‘  to-night,’  and  did 


MUSIC 


38  7 


not  give  sufficient  weight  to  ‘  the  urgent  hour.’  With  the  exception,  then,  of  changing 
‘  eight  days  ’  to  seven,  all  the  rest  of  his  computation  appears  to  be  right. 


MUSIC 

There  have  been  in  this  Play  six  Songs  set  to  music : — 

‘  When  daffodils  begin  to  peer.’ — IV,  iii,  1. 

‘  But  shall  I  go  mourn  for  that,  my  dear.’ — IV,  iii,  17. 

‘  Jog-on,  jog-on,  the  footpath  way.’ — IV,  iii,  125. 

‘  Lawn,  as  white  as  driven  snow.’ — IV,  iv,  250. 

*  Get  you  hence,  for  I  must  go.’ — IV,  iv,  324. 

‘  Will  you  buy  any  tape  ?’ — IV,  iv,  345. 

Of  these,  the  music  of  only  two  is  of  an  earlier  date  than  the  middle  of  the  last 
century.  These  two  are  :  ‘  Jog-on,  jog-on,  the  footpath  way,’  and  ‘  Lawn,  as  white  as 
‘  driven  snow.’  For  the  names  of  the  composers  of  the  music  for  the  remaining  six, 
the  student  is  referred  to  ‘A  List  of  All  the  Songs  &>  Passages  in  Shakspere  which 
‘  have  been  set  to  Music,'  published  by  the  New  Sh.  Soc.  London,  1884.  Of  the  two 
just  mentioned,  the  tune  of  ‘  Jog-on,  jog-on,’  etc.  is  the  earlier ;  it  is  found,  according 
to  Chappell  (p.  2ii),in  ‘  The  Dancing  Master,  from  1650  to  1698,  called  Jog  on, 
‘  and  also  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  Virginal  Book  under  the  name  of  Hans  kin.'  ( Queen 
Elizabeth's  Virginal  Book  has  a  misleading  title.  It  is  a  manuscript  in  the  Fitz- 
william  Museum  at  Cambridge,  and  Chappell  says  (p.  xiv),  ‘  can  never  have  been  the 
‘  property  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  It  is  written  throughout  in  one  handwriting,  and  in 
‘that  writing  are  dates  1603,  1605,  and  1612.’)  Another  name  for  the  tune  is  Sir 
Francis  Drake,  or  Eighty-eight. 

The  words  of  the  Song  are  in  The  Antidote  against  Melancholy,  1661 ;  the  first 
stanza  is  the  same  as  that  which  Autolycus  sings ;  the  last  is  as  follows  : — ‘  Cast  care 
‘  away,  let  sorrow  cease,  A  fig  for  melancholy ;  Let’s  laugh  and  sing,  or,  if  you  please, 
‘  We’ll  frolic  with  sweet  Dolly.’ 

Both  Knight  and  Chappell  give  the  musical  notation,  but  the  simplest  arrange¬ 
ment  appears  to  be  that  in  Shakespeare  and  Music,  by  Edw.  W.  Naylor,  London, 
1896,  p.  192,  as  follows  : — 


i — t-=i 

_ 1 - , 

-r 

m  J — ” - r 

t J 

Jog  on,  jog  on,  th 

rf* — l — d — ----- — 

;  foot  -  path  way,  And 

mer  -  rily  hent  the  stile  -  a :  A 

-1 

U-h  -  » 

-  *  \  it  J.  11 

mer  -  ry  heart  goes  all  the  day,  Your  sad  tires  in  a  mile  -  a. 

The  second  song  is  ‘  Lawn,  as  white  as  driven  snow.’  The  music  for  this  is  found 
in  Wilson’s  Cheerfull  Ayres  or  Ballads,  Oxford,  1660.  The  composer  is  John  Wil¬ 
son  himself,  and  although  the  date  is  somewhat  late,  yet  the  fact  that  there  is  ground 
for  believing  that  John  Wilson  as  a  boy  was  the  identical  ‘  Jack  Wilson  ’  who,  as  Bal- 


APPENDIX 


338 

thazar,  sang,  *’  Sigh  no  more,  ladies,  sigh  no  more,’  etc.  in  Much  Ado ,  brings  us  very- 
near  to  Shakespeare. 

It  is  here  reproduced  by  Levytype,  as  was  Ariel’s  song  in  The  Tempest  (p.  352 
of  this  ed.),  and  for  the  same  reason : — 


Ctrttm  Primu.  t  ^4  } 


IS: 


J.  Jf'ilfon. 


Awne  as  white  as  driven  Snow,  Cyprefle  black  as  ere  was  Crow, 

t — J 




Cloves  as  fweetas  Damaske  Rofes,  Maskes  for  Faces  and  for  Nofe*,  Bugle  Braceletts 



Necklace  Amber,  Perfumes  for  a  Ladyes  Chamber,  Golden  Coyfes- and  ftonu- 


5: 


-chers  for  my  Ladds,  for  :1I:  To  give  their  Deer’s  Pinns  and  Poting  (licks 


— i: 


—1=3 




Pinns  ;[j:  And  poting  flicks  of  fteele  what  Maids  lack  what  jjj: 

5?~|rT  - — ^ - 1 - - — *■  ft— +-a - - ^ 



4  * 

ife=t§fiiS=iIf; 


from  head  to  hee'e,  what 


iurnt  evn 


JORDAN'S  BALLAD 


389 



r«i 

-T'S  /*> 



rjr 


Hit- 


Come  buy  of  mee  come,  Come  buy  come  buy,  buy  Ladd*  or  clfe  your 


-AT-  »  r-t— ft - z - - - 

. ■..!  —  ■  ■■  - -  .  ' 

l  it?.  1 - r  t - ar  .  

s=-= 

P-—  ■  i- --  — — — - 

- — - 

Lafles  cry  come  buy. 


‘  Poting  sticks  ’  is  not  a  misprint  for  ‘  poaking-sticks,’  but  for  putting  sticks,  as 
these  instruments  were  sometimes  called. — Ed. 


JORDAN’S  BALLAD 

In  Collier’s  Second  Edition,  a  ballad  from  the  Royal  Arbor  of  Loyal  Poesie,  1664, 
is  given  in  full.  It  was  written  by  Thomas  Jordan,  and  the  main  incidents  of  The 
Winter's  Tale  form  the  subject.  It  is  as  devoid  of  interest  as  of  rhythm.  Collier’s 
feeble  excuse  for  introducing  it  is  :  ‘  to  show  how  much  at  that  date  the  incidents  of 

•  Shakespeare’s  drama  had  gone  out  of  popular  recollection.’  At  the  conclusion  of 
the  Ballad,  whereof  the  scene  is  laid  in  Padua  and  Parma,  Collier  thinks  that  ‘  it  de- 

<  serves  remark  ’  that  ‘  in  Jordan’s  time  the  error  of  making  Bohemia  a  sea-coast  country 

•  had  become  so  apparent,  that  he  [Jordan]  felt  it  necessary,  even  when  addressing  him- 

•  self  to  the  population  of  the  thoroughfares  of  London,  to  make  [a  change  in  locality]. 

<  The  close  relationship  established  by  James  I.  between  England  and  Bohemia  had 

•  called  general  attention  to  the  geographical  situation  of  the  latter.  In  our  own  day, 

<  it  has  been  thought  necessary  to  restore  what  some  may  consider  “  dramatic  pro- 

•  “  priety,”  and  at  the  same  time  to  smother  the  poetry  and  pathos  of  Shakespeare 
‘  in  the  trumpery  of  tinsel  and  the  daubery  of  scene-painting.  It  is  the  greatest 
‘  literary  blessing  that  could  have  been  conferred  on  our  nation,  that  Shakespeare 
‘  wrote  at  a  period  when  the  mechanical  deficiencies  of  his  art  in  a  manner  com- 

<  pelled  him  to  gratify  the  ears  rather  than  glut  the  eyes  of  his  contemporaries. 
‘  It  cannot  be  too  often  stated,  that  from  the  period  of  the  introduction  of  scenery 

<  we  date  the  decline  of  English  dramatic  poetry.’ 


ACTORS 

Boaden  ( Life  of  Kemble,  ii,  314):  It  was  on  the  24th  of  this  month  [March, 
1802]  that  Mr  Kemble  presented  his  revival  of  The  Winter’s  Tale,  in  all  the  splen¬ 
dor  of  decoration  and  power  of  acting,  that  he  could  impress  upon  it.  In  Paulina’s 
chapel  Mrs  Siddons  stood  as  one  of  the  noblest  statues  that  even  Grecian  taste  ever 


390 


APPENDIX 


invented.  The  figure  composed  something  like  one  of  the  Muses,  in  profile.  The 
drapery  was  ample  in  its  folds,  and  seemingly  stony  in  its  texture.  Upon  the  magical 
words,  pronounced  by  Paulina  :  ‘  Music  ;  awake  her  !  strike  !’  the  sudden  action 
of  the  head  absolutely  startled. ,  as  though  such  a  miracle  really  vivified  the  mar¬ 
ble  ;  and  the  descent  from  the  pedestal  was  equally  graceful  and  affecting.  In 
Leontes  Mr  Kemble  was  everything  that  either  taste  or  feeling  could  require ;  and 
the  affection  of  Paulina  never  had  a  representative  equal  to  Mrs  Powell.  The  Per- 
dita  was  a  very  delicate  and  pretty  young  lady  of  the  name  of  Plickes,  thus  much 
I  remember  of  her ;  but  whether  she  had  more  or  fewer  of  the  requisites  than  other 
candidates  for  this  lovely  character,  I  am  now  unable  to  decide.  I  incline  to  think 
that  this  part  is  one  of  the  few  upon  the  stage  that  never  was  adequately  performed. 
It  is  so  difficult,  at  the  proper  age  of  the  debutante,  to  find  a  simplicity,  almost  rustic, 
combining  with  the  princely  impulses  that  urge  their  way  either  to  brave  disaster,  or 
partake  the  kindling  wonders  of  unexpected  restoration.  Our  stage  princesses  are  so 
seldom  personally  at  their  ease,  and  are  too  sensible  of  an  audience,  to  be  much  like 
the  royal  virgin.  Our  Perdita  seems,  in  spite  of  the  Fifth  Act  of  the  play,  condemned 
never  to  be  found.  Perhaps  no  revival  ever  drew  greater  crowds  than  this  did. 

Campbell  ( Life  of  Mrs  Siddons,  ii,  264):  On  the  25th  of  March,  1802,  Mrs 
Siddons  for  the  first  time  performed  Hermione.  .  .  .  She  must  have  long  foreseen  the 
transcendant  charm  which  her  performance  would  bestow  on  [this  part]  ;  yet  there 
was  a  policy  in  reserving  it  for  the  years  of  her  professional  appearance  when  her 
form  was  becoming  too  matronly  for  the  personation  of  juvenile  heroines.  At  the 
same  time,  she  still  had  beauty  enough  left  to  make  her  so  perfect  in  the  statue-scene, 
that  assuredly  there  was  never  such  a  representative  of  Hermione.  Mrs  Yates  had 
a  sculpturesque  beauty  that  suited  the  statue,  I  have  been  told,  as  long  as  it  stood 
still ;  but,  when  she  had  to  speak,  the  charm  was  broken,  and  the  spectators  wished 
her  back  to  her  pedestal.  But  Mrs  Siddons  looked  the  statue,  even  to  literal  illusion ; 
and,  whilst  the  drapery  hid  her  lower  limbs,  it  showed  a  beauty  of  head,  neck,  shoul¬ 
ders,  and  arms,  that  Praxiteles  might  have  studied.  This  statue-scene  has  hardly  its 
parallel  for  enchantment  even  in  Shakespeare’s  theatre.  The  star  of  his  genius  was 
at  its  zenith  when  he  composed  it ;  but  it  was  only  a  Siddons  that  could  do  justice  to 
its  romantic  perfection.  The  heart  of  every  one  who  saw  her  when  she  burst  from 
the  semblance  of  sculpture  into  motion,  and  embraced  her  daughter,  Perdita,  must 
throb  and  glow  at  the  recollection. 

It  so  happened,  however,  that  our  great  actress,  whilst  performing  a  part,  in  which 
she  will  never  have  her  equal,  very  narrowly  escaped  from  a  death  more  than  fanci¬ 
fully  tragic.  I  have  heard  her  say,  that  she  could  never  think  of  The  Winter's  Tale 
without  a  palpitation  of  her  heart,  from  the  recollection  of  the  incident  to  which  she 
alludes  in  the  following  letter :  ‘  The  other  night  had  very  nearly  terminated  all  my 

*  exertions ;  for,  whilst  I  was  standing  for  the  statue  in  The  Winter's  Tale ,  my 
‘  drapery  flew  over  the  lamps  which  were  placed  behind  the  pedestal ;  it  caught  fire, 

‘  and,  had  it  not  been  for  one  of  the  scene-men,  who  most  humanely  crept  on  his  knees 
‘  and  extinguished  it,  without  my  knowing  anything  of  the  matter,  I  might  have  been 

*  burnt  to  death,  or,  at  all  events,  I  should  have  been  frightened  out  of  my  senses. 

*  Surrounded  as  I  was  with  muslin,  the  flame  would  have  run  like  wildfire.  The 
‘  bottom  of  the  train  was  entirely  burned.  But  for  the  man’s  promptitude,  it  would 
‘  seem  as  if  my  fate  would  have  been  inevitable.  I  have  well  rewarded  the  good 
‘  man,  and  I  regard  my  deliverance  as  a  most  gracious  interposition  of  Providence.’ 


A  C TORS— LA  D  Y  MAR  TIN 


391 


Lady  Martin  (p.  390) :  I  was  called  upon  to  play  Hermione  very  soon  after  my 
dlbut.  I  was  still  very  young,  and  by  my  years  and  looks  most  unfit  even  to  appear 
as  the  mother  of  young  Mamillius.  Why  Mr  Macready  selected  me  for  the  task  I 
could  not  imagine,  and  most  gladly  would  I  have  declined  it.  But  his  will  was  law. 
Any  remonstrance  or  objection  was  met  by  reasons  and  arguments  so  broad  and 
strong, — you  were  so  earnestly  reminded  of  your  duty  to  sacrifice  yourself  to  the 
general  good,  and  the  furtherance  of  the  effort  he  was  making  to  regenerate  the 
drama, — that  there  was  nothing  left  but  to  give  way.  All  you  could  urge  seemed  so 
small,  so  merely  personal.  Therefore  play  Hermione  I  must,  even  as  I  had  not  long 
after  to  play  Constance  of  Bretagne,  a  still  severer  trial  and  much  greater  strain  upon 
my  young  shoulders.  Hermione  was  a  character  which  had  not  then  come  within 
the  circle  of  my  favorite  Shakespearian  heroines.  It  was,  therefore,  quite  new  to  me. 
Mrs  Warner  had  been  for  years  the  recognised  Hermione  of  the  London  stage.  On 
this  occasion  she  was  cast  for  Paulina,  a  character  for  which  nature  had  eminently 
fitted  her  by  a  stately  figure,  fine  voice,  and  firm,  earnest  manner.  How  admirably 
she  acted  Emilia  in  Othello  I  must  ever  remember,  especially  the  way  she  turned  on 
Othello  in  the  last  scene,  in  which  Mr  Macready  was  also  very  grand.  On  the  audi¬ 
ence,  who  could  see  their  looks  and  gestures,  the  impression  they  made  must  have 
been  very  great  indeed.  I,  as  the  smothered  Desdemona,  could  hear  only. 

My  first  appearance  as  Hermione  is  indelibly  imprinted  on  my  memory  by  the 
acting  of  Mr  Macready,  as  I  have  described  it  in  the  statue  scene.  Mrs  Warner  had 
rather  jokingly  told  me,  at  one  of  the  rehearsals,  to  be  prepared  for  something  extra¬ 
ordinary  in  his  manner,  when  Hermione  returned  to  life.  But  prepared  I  was  not, 
and  could  not  be,  for  such  a  display  of  uncontrollable  rapture.  I  have  tried  to  give 
some  idea  of  it;  but  no  words  of  mine  could  do  it  justice.  It  was  the  finest  burst 
of  passionate  speechless  emotion  I  ever  saw,  or  could  have  conceived.  My  feelings 
being  already  severely  strained,  I  naturally  lost  something  of  my  self-command,  and 
as  Perdita  and  Florizel  knelt  at  my  feet  I  looked,  as  the  gifted  Sarah  Adams  *  after¬ 
wards  told  me,  ‘  like  Niobe,  all  tears.’  Of  course,  I  behaved  better  on  the  repetition 
of  the  play,  as  I  knew  what  I  had  to  expect  and  was  somewhat  prepared  for  it ;  but 
the  intensity  of  Mr  Macready’s  passion  was  so  real,  that  I  could  never  help  being 
moved  by  it,  and  feeling  much  exhausted  afterwards. 

The  Winter's  Tale  makes  heavy  demands  upon  the  resources  of  a  theatre  both  in 
actors  and  in  mise  en  seine.  It  was  therefore  only  in  such  cities  as  Dublin,  Glasgow, 
and  Edinburgh  that  I  was  able  to  have  it  acted.  But  in  all  these  cities,  even  with 
such  inadequate  resources  as  they  supplied,  the  play  used  to  produce  a  profound  im¬ 
pression.  The  sympathies  of  my  audience  for  the  suffering  Hermione  were  reflected 
back  upon  me  so  warmly  as  to  make  me  feel  that  they  entered  into  my  conception  of 
her  beautiful  nature.  There,  as  in  London,  the  statue  scene  always  produced  a  re¬ 
markable  effect.  This  I  could  feel  in  the  intense  hush,  as  though  every  one  present 
<  held  his  breath  for  a  time.’  In  Edinburgh,  upon  one  occasion,  I  have  been  told  by 
a  friend  who  was  present  that,  as  I  descended  from  the  pedestal  and  advanced  toward 
Leontes,  the  audience  simultaneously  rose  from  their  seats,  as  if  drawn  out  of  them 

*  This  sweet  accomplished  lady  wrote  many  poems  and  hymns.  Her  drama,  in 
blank  verse,  founded  on  the  story  of  ‘  Vivia  Perpetua,’  one  of  the  first  Christian  mar¬ 
tyrs,  was  greatly  admired  in  a  wide  literary  circle.  Her  beautiful  hymn  *  Nearer,  my 
«  God,  to  Thee,’  we  all  know,  and  are  moved  by,  when  sung  in  our  churches,  as  it 
often  is. 


APPENDIX 


,392 

by  surprise  and  reverential  awe  at  the  presence  of  one  who  bore  more  of  heaven  than 
of  earth  about  her.  I  can  account  for  this  only  by  supposing  that  the  soul  of  Her- 
mione  had  for  the  time  entered  into  mine,  and  ‘so  divinely  wrought,  that  one  might 
‘  almost  say,’  with  the  old  poet,  my  ‘  body  thought.’  Of  course  I  did  not  observe 
this  movement  of  the  audience,  for  my  imagination  was  too  full  of  what  I  felt  was 
then  in  Hermione’s  heart,  to  leave  me  eyes  for  any  but  Leontes.  You  may  judge  of 
the  pleasure  it  was  to  play  to  audiences  of  this  kind.  As  ‘  there  is  a  pleasure  in  po- 
‘  etic  pains,  which  only  poets  know,’  so  there  is  a  pleasure  in  the  actor’s  pains,  which 
only  actors  know,  who  have  to  deal  with  the  ‘  high  actions  and  high  passions  ’  of 
which  Milton  speaks.  Unless  they  know  these  pains,  and  feel  a  joy  in  knowing  them, 
their  vocation  can  never  rise  to  the  level  of  an  art. 

The  Scotchman  (Edinburgh,  3d  March,  1847)  •'  Miss  Helen  Faucit  has,  in 
Hermione,  given  life  to  another  of  ‘  Shakespeare’s  Women,’  in  embodying  whom  her 
genius  seems  alone  to  find  its  full  scope.  .  .  .  Here,  as  in  all  Miss  Faucit’s  delinea¬ 
tions,  while  other  performers  force  us  back  on  our  imagination,  we  feel  that  our  imag¬ 
ination  has  been  raised  into  a  loftier  region,  and  our  critical  apprehension  widely  ex¬ 
panded.  The  character  is  one  with  which  only  the  most  refined  womanly  nature  can 
identify  itself,  at  the  same  time  that  it  demands  from  the  artist  the  most  subtle  powers 
of  execution,  and  affords  scope  for  touching  the  deepest  chords  of  imaginative  emo¬ 
tion.  The  characteristic  features  of  Hermione,  as  expressed  by  Miss  Faucit  in  the 
early  scenes,  of  confiding  openness  of  disposition,  frank  in  its  spotless  purity,  and 
loving  her  lord  so  entirely  that  she  loves  nothing  else  but  for  his  sake,  prepare  us  for 
the  shock  of  his  insane  jealousy,  and  for  the  reconciliation  at  the  close  of  the  play, 
which,  without  a  love  so  absolute,  must  have  been  impossible.  In  her  worst  agony 
this  devotion  to  Leontes  is  apparent.  .  .  .  The  Trial  Scene  was  throughout  fine,  grand, 
and  majestic,  with  a  majesty  consonant  with  the  sweetness  and  mild  dignity  of  the 
character  as  shown  in  the  previous  scenes.  We  can  only  advert  to  the  striking  effect 
produced  by  Miss  Faucit’s  expression  and  attitude,  when  she  rises  from  the  chair, 
forgetting  all  physical  weakness  in  the  earnestness  of  her  emotion,  with  the  words  : 

‘  If  powers  divine 

Behold  our  human  actions,  as  they  do, 

I  doubt  not  then  but  innocence  shall  make 
False  accusation  blush,  and  tyranny 
Tremble  at  patience.’ 

Raphael’s  pencil  might  have  caught  inspiration  here.  We  were  reminded  at  first 
of  his  Saint  Cecilia,  but  so  great  a  variety  of  expression  and  perfect  gesture  succeeded 
that  all  comparison  or  suggestion  was  quickly  lost.  But  the  triumph  of  the  perform¬ 
ance,  perhaps  the  crowning  achievement  of  all  Miss  Faucit’s  performances,  is  the  last 
scene.  The  thrill  that  passed  through  the  audience  on  the  first  raising  of  the  curtain 
from  the  seeming  statue,  told  how  intensely  the  spiritual  beauty  of  Miss  Faucit’s  at¬ 
titude  and  expression  was  felt.  It  is  not  only  no  praise,  it  is  altogether  unfit  to  say 
they  were  statue-like.  What  statue  was  ever  like  that  form?  What  statue  ever 
breathed  out  the  soul  that  modulated  that  face  ?  It  was  the  realizing  of  a  sculptor’s 
hopeless  dream.  There  was  there  the  symmetry  of  the  most  consummate  statue,  but, 
superadded  to  this,  there  were  also  the  flowing  outline  and  living  colour  which  accom¬ 
pany  only  life.  The  spectator  became  an  actor  in  the  scene,  and  all  ‘  Held  their  breath 


ACTORS— LADY  MARTIN 


393 


‘  for  a  time.’  The  turning  of  the  head,  and  the  earnest  gaze  of  the  full  eyes  by  which 
Miss  Faucit,  with  the  skill  of  a  great  artist,  breaks  the  transition  from  repose  to  mo¬ 
tion,  was  magical  in  effect,  and  made  the  suspended  blood  to  throb.  And  when  she 
descended  from  the  pedestal,  with  a  slow  and  gliding  motion,  and  wearing  the  look 
of  a  being  consecrated  by  long  years  of  prayer  and  sorrow  and  seclusion,  it  seemed 
to  us  (and  we  cannot  have  been  singular)  as  if  we  looked  upon  a  being  almost  too 
pure  to  be  gazed  on  with  unveiled  eyes.  What  words  can  paint  the  mingled  expres¬ 
sion  of  wistfulness,  of  regret,  of  forgiving  sadness,  with  which  she  gazed  on  Leontes  ? 
The  memory  of  all  that  fearful  wrong — her  slandered  honour — her  dead  son — her 
outcast  daughter — her  long  years  of  isolation  and  grief — was  to  be  read  on  that  won¬ 
drous  spirit-face,  and  with  it  a  forgiveness  that  one  felt  to  be  divine.  The  penitence 
and  ‘  saint-like  sorrow  ’  of  Leontes  in  ‘  that  wide  gap  of  time,’  during  which  he  had 
mourned  *  The  sweet’st  companion  that  e’er  man  Bred  his  hopes  out  of,’  had  purified 
him  again,  so  that  even  she  might  hold  out  her  hand  in  token  that  he  might  approach 
her.  He  takes  the  outstretched  hand, — his  touch  brings  back  all  the  woman  into  her 
heart,  and  she  falls  upon  his  neck  with  a  tenderness  exceeding  that  of  former  days. 
In  the  mingling  of  this  strong  human  affection  with  an  elevation  so  lofty  and  spiritual, 
there  was  a  moral  impressiveness  beyond  all  that  we  have  experienced.  It  seemed 
as  if  that  stillness  should  never  be  broken, — as  if  we  could  not  bear,  for  a  season,  at 
least, — to  hear  the  utterance  of  a  creature  that  looked  and  moved  so, — upon  the  earth, 
but  not  of  it.  The  solemn  tone  of  Hermione’s  feelings  appeared  to  communicate 
itself  to  the  audience,  and  they  felt  with  what  fitness  and  beauty  Shakespeare  con¬ 
fines  her  words  to  a  blessing  on  her  daughter.  We  write  warmly,  and  yet  we  feel 
how  poor  and  meagre  all  words  must  be  to  express  the  exquisite  beauty  of  this  scene. 
Parts  may  be  indicated,  but  how  portray  the  continuous  beauty  of  each  phase  of 
feeling,  each  modulation  of  gesture  ?  Poetry,  painting,  sculpture, — the  best  of  each, 
— and  something  more  than  these,  were  there. 

Dublin  University  Magazine  (April,  1848) :  Must  we  think  that  Shakespeare 
had  no  foreboding  of  future  Juliets,  who  should  lend  a  more  than  silver  sweetness  to 
the  tremulous  passion-laden  accents  of  maiden  love;  of  future  Imogens,  investing 
that  ‘  most  perfect  wife  ’  with  a  dignity,  and  grace,  and  delicate  tenderness,  beautiful 
as  the  ideal  being  revealed  to  his  inward  eye  in  his  hour  of  inspiration  ?  Scott,  we 
know,  declared  that  some  of  his  own  conceptions  were  reflected  from  the  stage  with 
force  beyond  what  he  had  himself  believed  to  be  inherent  in  them.  Is  it,  then,  too 
much  to  suppose,  if  Shakespeare  had  witnessed  a  Barry,  a  Pritchard,  or  a  Siddons, 
he  might  have  acknowledged  that  the  creations  of  his  own  thought  received  from 
their  impersonation  a  charm  more  exquisite,  and  a  more  vivid  completeness  ?  It 
could  not,  indeed,  have  been  otherwise,  if  these  illustrious  performers  fulfilled,  as 
they  did,  the  great  purpose  of  their  art,  ‘  to  hold,  as  ’twere,  the  mirror  up  to  nature.’ 
For  never  yet  did  fancy  portray  womanhood  so  fair,  but  a  real  woman,  endowed  with 
the  intense  sympathies  of  genius,  and  inspired  for  the  time  with  the  soul  of  Juliet  or 
Desdemona,  must  have  eclipsed  the  ideal  dream.  Not  one,  but  all  the  faculties  are 
charmed,  ‘  Verse  ceases  to  be  airy  thought,  And  sculpture  to  be  dumb.’  The  breast 
thrills,  while  the  imagination  is  rapt,  and  the  memory  is  enriched  for  ever,  with  a 
vision,  the  mere  poet’s  painting.  Let  any  one  who  doubts  this  see  Rachel  or  Helen 
Faucit,  and  if  he  does  not  straightway  renounce  his  heresy,  let  him  distrust  not  the 
genius  of  these  gifted  artists,  but  his  own  capacity. 

In  this  matter,  one  illustration  is  worth  pages  of  argument.  Let  us  then  take  one 


394 


APPENDIX 


from  many,  which  present  themselves  among  the  impersonations  of  the  latter  of  these 
ladies, — Hermione,  in  the  last,  or  as  it  is  called,  the  statue-scene  in  The  Winter’s  Tale. 
Two  acts  have  intervened  since  the  outraged  queen  has  been  left  for  dead, — slain, 
as  it  seemed,  by  the  tidings  of  her  boy’s  death,  that  crowning  stroke  to  her  affliction. 
The  actress  has,  therefore,  in  a  manner,  lost  her  hold  upon  the  sympathies  of  her 
audience,  which  it  is  important  to  retain  without  interruption.  She  has,  moreover, 
throughout  this  long  scene,  not  one  word  allotted  to  her,  and  yet  upon  her  its  whole 
interest  depends.  Here  is  a  task  for  genius  and  skill, — to  engage  the  very  souls  of 
the  audience,  and  to  transport  them,  without  the  aid  of  tone  or  gesture,  so  thoroughly 
into  the  scene,  that  the  words  of  Leontes  and  Perdita  shall  be  the  very  echo  of  their 
own  thoughts  and  emotions.  A  reader  of  high  imaginative  power  may,  perhaps,  be 
able  to  do  this  in  some  measure  for  himself ;  but  still  his  picture  will  be  vague  and 
soulless, — a  mere  colourless  phantom,  in  contrast  to  the  thrilling  reality  which  this 
great  actress  places  before  us,  and  which  words,  must,  alas !  be  ever  inadequate  to 
portray.  Let  us,  however,  essay  the  sketch. 

We  pass  into  the  scene,  conscious  that  it  is  no  1  dead  likeness  ’  that  we  are  to  be 
shown ;  but  how  little  anticipating  to  see  the  form  so  instinct  with  thought,  and 
almost  spiritual  beauty,  which  the  withdrawal  of  the  curtain  reveals  !  At  once,  with 
electric  force,  an  awe  strikes  us,  like  that  which  subdues  Leontes  to  silence,  as  noted 
by  Paulina  thus  : — ‘  I  like  your  silence  :  it  the  more  shows  off  Your  wonder.’  Her¬ 
mione  stands  before  us  as  she  appeared  to  Antigonus  in  his  dream,  1  In  pure  white 
‘  robes,  like  very  sanctity.’  We  think  not  then  of  the  symmetry  of  form,  the  perfec¬ 
tion  of  outline,  so  far  beyond  the  rarest  achievements  of  art.  For  the  spirit  which 
breathes  from  the  face,  where  grief  has  long  grown  calm,  and  suffering  brightened 
into  a  heavenly  pity,  in  the  pure  world  of  thought  where  she  has  sojourned  during 
‘that  wide  gap  of  time,’ — the  spirit  which  bears  within  it  so  much  of  heaven,  with 
all  that  is  best  of  earth,  alone  possesses  our  every  faculty.  We  feel  how  impossible 
it  is  for  Perdita  not  to  kneel,  as  she  does,  before  a  presence  so  saintly  and  august. 
Our  gaze  is  riveted  with  the  intensity  of  fascination,  and,  like  Leontes,  we  would  fain 
dwell  upon  the  vision  for  ever.  Serene,  majestic,  spirit-like,  it  stands  before  us, — the 
the  perfection  of  sculpture,  yet  more ;  for  ‘  What  fine  chisel  Did  ever  so  cut  breath  ?’ 
Stand  ever  so !  is  the  dominant  thought,  so  unwilling  are  we  that  a  spell  so  exquisite 
should  be  broken.  Anon  the  solemn  music  begins  to  sound,  which  Shakespeare  knew 
so  well  to  employ  in  resolving  one  high-strung  mood  into  another;  and  Hermione, 
turning  her  averted  head,  gazes  with  full,  sad  eyes— oh,  so  full,  and  sad,  and  tender! 
— upon  Leontes.  Other  motion  were  for  a  time  too  sudden.  A  little  space,  which 
Shakespeare  has  filled  up  with  a  few  lines  from  Paulina,  and  Hermione  descends 
from  her  pedestal,  and  advances,  gliding,  like  no  thing  of  earth,  towards  her  awe¬ 
stricken  lord.  You  see  she  has  forgiven  him,  and,  oh,  how  divinely  shows  that  for¬ 
giveness  in  the  deep  calm  eyes  1  The  anguish  of  these  sixteen  winters  (less  had  been  in¬ 
sufficient)  has  expiated  his  sin.  All  this  we  see  and  feel,  and  yet  no  sound  has  escaped 
those  earnest  lips,  for  Hermione  is  now  at  a  point  beyond  words— and,  in  looking  at 
the  actress  here,  we  are  grateful  that  it  is  so,— for  we  dare  not  listen  yet  to  the  voice 
of  what  has  bowed  us  with  so  much  awe.  What  wonder,  then,  that  Leontes  recoils 
from  a  thing  so  radiantly  pure,  and  fears  to  take  the  hand  that  is  extended  in  token 
of  forgiveness  !  Nay,  says  Paulina—1  Nay,  present  your  hand  ;  When  she  was  young, 

1  you  woo’d  her;  now  in  age  Is  she  become  the  suitor.’ 

And  who  shall  paint  the  forgiveness,  the  tenderness,  the  mingled  pity  and  joy  of 
the  look  with  which  she  welcomes  him  to  her  embrace  ?  The  long,  long  night  of 


ACTORS— MARY  ANDERSON 


395 


sorrow  is  past, — the  dawn  of  joy  has  come, — a  sacred,  tempered  joy,  more  exquisite 
for  the  trials  out  of  which  it  has  grown.  ‘  She  hangs  about  his  neck,’  and  then  the 
fountain  of  her  words  is  again  unsealed,  and  most  fitly  are  her  words  those  of  solemn 
blessing.  ‘  You  gods,  look  down  And  from  your  sacred  vials  pour  your  grace  Upon 
4  my  daughter’s  head  1’  She  ceases,  and  with  the  close  of  this  strain  of  heavenly 
music  the  solemnized  hearts  of  the  spectators  are  free  to  beat  once  more. 

The  Glasgow  Herald  (14  March,  1848) :  The  charm  and  fascination  of  Her- 
mione  consists  in  the  celebrated  Statue-scene ;  and  there  the  taste  and  genius  of  Miss 
Faucit  shone  forth  in  their  fullest  lustre.  Whoever  has  not  witnessed  that  exquisite 
performance  has  not  seen  the  finest  combination  of  Grecian  sculpture,  Italian  paint¬ 
ing,  and  British  acting,  that  has  in  our  day  been  seen  on  the  stage.  It  was  absolute 
perfection.  The  graceful  figure,  motionless  and  pale  as  marble,  arrayed  in  the  finest 
classic  folds,  and  displaying  to  the  highest  advantage  the  fine  arms  and  beautiful  con¬ 
tour  of  the  actress,  riveted  every  eye  when  the  curtain  was  withdrawn.  So  complete 
was  the  illusion,  so  still  the  figure,  so  sightless  the  eyeballs,  that  you  seemed  insensibly 
to  forget  it  was  a  living  being  who  stood  before  you ;  and  when  amidst  the  melody  of 
music,  she  turned  her  head  towards  the  king,  the  whole  house  started  as  if  struck  by 
an  electric  shock,  or  as  if  they  had  seen  the  dead  arise. 

The  Glasgow  Citizen  (April,  1848) :  Miss  Helen  Faucit’s  delicate  prepara¬ 
tory  management  of  the  first  scene  in  which  she  appears,  though  of  a  character  less 
strongly  marked,  surprised  and  delighted  us  nearly  as  much  as  any  after  part  of  the 
performance.  .  .  .  We  had  there  before  us  to  the  life  ‘  the  very  woman,’  too  happy  in 
herself  and  her  domestic  relations  not  to  wish  to  communicate  a  portion  of  her  happi¬ 
ness  to  all  with  whom  she  is  brought  in  contact.  Nothing  could  possibly  be  more 
skilful  than  the  method  by  which  she  contrived, — while  in  nothing  ‘  overstepping  the 
‘  modesty  of  nature  ’  and  of  the  wife, — to  assume  towards  Polixenes  that  air  of 
caressing  entreaty  and  half-coquettish  fondness  which  should  at  once  exhibit  her 
own  right  feminine  anxiety  to  please,  and  afford  a  true  dramatic  justification  of  the 
unworthy  suspicions  of  her  husband.  .  .  .  We  really  do  not  know  what  to  say  in  order 
to  speak  worthily  of  the  statue  scene.  ...  It  was  the  most  entrancing  thing  we  ever 
remember  to  have  seen, — actually  suspending  the  blood,  and  taking  the  breath  away. 
It  was  something  supernatural  almost ;  and  till  the  descent  was  fully  accomplished, 
and  the  stone  turned  to  palpable  woman  again,  something  of  a  fine  fear  sat  upon  us 
like  a  light  chilliness. 


Mary  Anderson 

Charles  Henry  Luders  ( Mary  Anderson  in  The  Winter’s  Tale,  The  American, 
19  January,  1889)  :  From  the  first  note  of  the  Overture  to  the  last  recall  of  the  star, 
beauty  reigns  supreme.  The  costumes,  designed  by  eminent  artists,  the  suburb  stage- 
settings,  coloured  so  as  to  harmonise  perfectly  with  the  hues  of  the  costumes,  and 
themselves  the  work  of  artists  foremost  in  their  profession ;  softly  blended  lights  so 
disposed  as  to  enhance  the  effect  of  every  stage  picture  ;  music  and  song  rising,  fall¬ 
ing,  and  melting  away  in  the  distance ;  beautiful  women  and  children  lounging  or 
disporting  themselves  upon  the  striped  and  spotted  skins  of  wild  beasts ;  handsome 
men  moving  in  and  out  among  the  fluted  columns  of  a  king’s  palace ;  jeweled  slaves. 


396 


APPENDIX 


picturesque  musicians  with  strange,  old-world  instruments  set  to  their  lips  for  the 
breathing  of  sweet  melodies ;  flowers,  incense,  and  the  wine  of  happy  hearts ; — these 
are  some  of  the  choice  dishes  of  this  feast  of  loveliness.  After  all  these  splendours, 
how  gloomy  seem  the  dark  corridors  of  the  prison,  in  one  of  whose  cells  lies  the 
falsely  accused  Hermione.  Then  the  sombre  Court  of  Justice  with  its  imposing  array 
of  soldiery,  its  noisy,  pushing,  quarrelling  mob  of  on-iookers ;  the  cold  cruelty  of  the 
king,  and  the  sweet,  pale  face  of  his  victim.  .  .  .  That  a  great  success  was  achieved 
by  Miss  Anderson  in  the  Fourth  Act,  when,  as  Perdita,  she  led  the  ritica  fada,  or 
long  dance,  the  dance  of  the  shepherds  and  shepherdesses,  there  is  not  the  slightest 
doubt.  ...  It  is  worth  travelling  miles  to  see,  as  a  marvel  of  conception,  arrangement, 
and  execution ;  and  it  is  with  genuine  regret  that  one  sees  the  fawn-skin  coats  of  the 
pipe-players  vanish  among  the  trees  on  the  hill-side  after  the  last  note  of  their  instru¬ 
ments  has  died  away.  Miss  Anderson’s  dancing  is  a  revelation  of  sylph-like  grace 
and  joyous  abandonment  to  the  spirit  of  innocent  revelry.  It  possesses  an  indefinable 
and  irresistible  charm.  .  .  .  Of  Miss  Anderson’s  acting  throughout  the  play  there  is 
little  to  be  said  but  commendation.  While  her  slender  physique  and  maidenly  beauty 
fit  more  naturally  into  the  part  of  Perdita,  her  portrayal  of  the  character  of  Hermione 
is  a  beautiful  and  touching  piece  of  acting,  finished  and  elaborated  with  much  skill 
and  artistic  insight.  In  the  closing  sce.ne,  in  which  she  appears  as  the  mock  statue 
that  comes  to  life  to  gladden  the  repentant  king,  she  is  a  feast  for  the  eye,  and  brings 
to  a  befitting  close  a  surpassingly  lovely  impersonation. 

William  Winter  ( Shadows  of  the  Stage ,  New  York,  1892,  i,  105)  :  Mary  An¬ 
derson  doubled  the  characters  of  Hermione  and  Perdita.  This  had  not  been  con¬ 
spicuously  done  until  it  was  done  by  her,  and  her  innovation,  in  that  respect,  was  met 
with  grave  disapproval.  The  moment  the  subject  is  examined,  however,  objection  to 
that  method  of  procedure  is  dispelled.  Hermione,  as  a  dramatic  person,  disappears 
in  the  middle  of  the  Third  Act  and  comes  no  more  until  the  end  of  the  piece,  when 
she  emerges  as  a  statue.  Her  character  has  been  entirely  expressed  and  her  part  in 
the  action  of  the  drama  has  been  substantially  fulfilled  before  she  disappears.  There 
is  no  intermediate  passion  to  be  wrought  to  a  climax,  nor  is  there  any  intermediate 
mood,  dramatically  speaking,  to  be  sustained.  The  dramatic  environment,  the  dra¬ 
matic  necessities  are  vastly  unlike,  for  example,  those  of  Lady  Macbeth, — one  of  the 
hardest  of  all  parts  to  play  well,  because  exhibited  intermittently,  at  long  intervals, 
yet  steadily  constrained  by  the  necessity  of  cumulative  excitement.  The  repre¬ 
sentative  of  Lady  Macbeth  must  be  identified  with  that  character,  whether  on  the 
stage  or  off,  from  the  beginning  of  it  to  the  end.  Hermione,  on  the  contrary,  is  at 
rest  from  the  moment  when  she  faints  upon  receiving  information  of  the  death  of  her 
boy.  A  lapse  of  sixteen  years  is  assumed,  and  then,  standing  forth  as  a  statue,  she 
personifies  majestic  virtue  and  victorious  fortitude.  When  she  descends  from  the 
pedestal  she  silently  embraces  Leontes,  speaks  a  few  pious,  maternal,  and  tranquil 
lines  (there  are  precisely  seven  of  them  in  the  original,  but  Mary  Anderson  added 
two  from  Airs  Well),  and  embraces  Perdita,  whom  she  has  not  seen  since  the  girl’s 
earliest  infancy.  This  is  their  only  meeting,  and  little  is  sacrificed  by  the  use  of  a 
substitute  for  the  daughter  in  that  scene.  Perdita’s  brief  apostrophe  to  the  statue  has 
to  be  cut,  but  it  is  not  missed  in  the  representation.  The  resemblance  between 
mother  and  daughter  heightens  the  effect  of  illusion,  in  its  impress  equally  upon 
fancy  and  vision ;  and  a  more  thorough  elucidation  is  given  than  could  be  provided 
m  any  other  way  of  the  spirit  of  the  comedy.  It  was  a  judicious  and  felicitous 


ACTORS— MARY  ANDERSON 


39  7 


choice  that  the  actress  made  when  she  selected  these  two  characters,  and  the  fact  that 
her  impersonation  of  them  carried  a  practically  disused  Shakespearian  comedy  through 
a  season  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  nights  at  the  Lyceum  Theatre  in  London  furnishes 
an  endorsement  alike  of  her  wisdom  and  her  ability.  She  played  in  a  stage  version 
of  the  piece,  in  five  acts,  containing  thirteen  scenes,  arranged  by  herself. 

While  Mary  Anderson  was  acting  these  two  parts  in  London,  the  sum  of  critical 
opinion  seemed  to  be  that  her  performance  of  Perdita  was  better  than  her  perform¬ 
ance  of  Hermione ;  but  beneath  that  judgement  there  was,  apparently,  the  impression 
that  Hermione  is  a  character  fraught  with  superlatively  great  passions,  powers,  and 
qualities,  such  as  are  only  to  be  apprehended  by  gigantic  sagacity  conveyed  by  her- 
culanean  talents  and  skill.  .  .  .  But  in  truth  Hermione,  although  a  stronger  part  than 
Perdita,  is  neither  complex,  dubious,  nor  inaccessible ;  and  Mary  Anderson,  although 
more  fascinating  in  Perdita,  could  and  did  rise,  in  Hermione,  to  a  noble  height  of 
tragic  power, — an  excellence  not  possible  for  her,  nor  for  anybody,  in  the  more 
juvenile  and  slender  character.  .  .  . 

In  Hermione  is  seen  a  type  of  the  celestial  nature  in  woman — infinite  love,  infinite 
charity,  infinite  patience.  Such  a  nature  is  rare;  but  it  is  possible,  it  exists,  and 
Shakespeare,  who  depicted  everything,  did  not  omit  to  portray  that.  To  comprehend 
Hermione  the  observer  must  separate  her  absolutely  and  finally  from  association  with 
the  passions.  .  .  .  Her  mind  predominates.  Her  life  is  in  the  affections,  and  therefore 
is  one  of  thought.  She  sees  clearly  the  facts  of  her  experience  and  condition,  and 
knows  exactly  how  those  facts  look  in  the  eyes  of  others.  She  is  one  of  those  per¬ 
sons  who  possess  a  keen  and  just  prescience  of  events,  who  can  look  far  into  the 
future  and  discern  those  resultant  consequences  of  the  present  which,  under  the  ope. 
ration  of  inexorable  moral  law,  must  inevitably  ensue.  Self-poised  in  the  right  and 
free  from  the  disturbing  force  of  impulse  and  desire,  she  can  await  the  justice  of  time ; 
she  can  live,  and  she  can  live  in  the  tranquil  patience  of  resignation.  True  majesty 
of  the  person  is  dependent  on  repose  of  the  soul,  and  there  can  be  no  repose  of  the 
soul  without  moral  rectitude  and  a  far-reaching,  comprehensive,  wise  vision  of  events. 
Mary  Anderson  embodied  Hermione  in  accordance  with  that  ideal. 

The  conspicuous,  predominant,  convincing  artistic  beauty  in  Mary  Anderson’s 
impersonation  of  Hermione  was  her  realisation  of  the  part,  in  figure,  face,  presence, 
demeanour,  and  temperament.  .  .  .  She  made  you  conscious  of  the  presence  of  a 
queen.  This,  obviously,  is  the  main  thing, — that  the  individuality  shall  be  imperial, 
not  merely  wearing  royal  attire,  but  being  invested  with  the  royal  authenticity  of  di¬ 
vine  endowment  and  consecration.  .  .  .  The  delivery  of  Hermione’s  defensive  speeches 
was  profoundly  earnest  and  touching.  The  simple  cry  of  the  mother’s  breaking  heart, 
and  the  action  of  veiling  her  face  and  falling  like  one  dead,  upon  the  announcement 
of  the  prince’s  death,  were  perfect  denotements  of  the  collapse  of  a  grief-stricken 
woman.  The  skill  with  which  the  actress,  in  the  monument  scene, — which  is  all 
repose  and  no  movement, — contrived  nevertheless  to  invest  Hermione  with  steady 
vitality  of  action,  and  to  imbue  the  crisis  with  a  feverish  air  of  suspense,  was  in  a 
high  degree  significant  of  the  personality  of  genius. 

It  is  one  thing  to  say  that  Mary  Anderson  was  better  in  Perdita  than  in  Hermione, 
and  another  thing  to  say  that  the  performance  of  Perdita  was  preferred.  Everybody 
preferred  it, — even  those  who  knew  that  it  was  not  the  better  of  the  two ;  for  every¬ 
body  loves  the  sunshine  more  than  the  shade.  Hermione  means  grief  and  endur¬ 
ance.  Perdita  means  beautiful  youth  and  happy  love.  It  does  not  take  long  for  an 
observer  to  choose  between  them.  Suffering  is  not  companionable.  .  .  .  The  perform- 


398 


APPENDIX 


ance  of  Hermione  was  higher  and  more  significant  than  that  of  Perdita.  But  the 
higher  form  of  art  is  not  always  the  most  alluring, — never  the  most  alluring  when 
youthful  beauty  smiles  and  rosy  pleasure  beckons  another  way.  All  hearts  respond 
to  happiness.  By  her  presentment  of  Perdita  the  actress  became  the  glittering  image 
and  incarnation  of  glorious  youthful  womanhood  and  fascinating  joy.  No  exercise 
of  the  imagination  was  needful  to  her  in  that.  There  was  an  instantaneous  corre¬ 
spondence  between  the  part  and  the  player.  The  embodiment  was  as  natural  as  a 
sunbeam.  Shakespeare  has  left  no  doubt  about  his  meaning  in  Perdita.  The  speeches 
of  all  around  her  continually  depict  her  fresh  and  piquant  loveliness,  her  innate  su¬ 
periority,  her  superlative  charm ;  while  her  behaviour  and  language  as  constantly 
show  forth  her  nobility  of  soul.  .  .  . 

In  the  thirty-seven  plays  of  Shakespeare  there  is  no  strain  of  the  poetry  of  senti¬ 
ment  and  grace  essentially  sweeter  than  that  which  he  has  put  into  the  mouth  of  Per¬ 
dita;  and  poetry  could  not  be  more  sweetly  spoken  than  it  was  by  Mary  Anderson  in 
that  delicious  scene  of  the  distribution  of  the  flowers.  The  actress  evinced  compre¬ 
hension  of  the  character  in  every  fibre  of  its  being,  and  she  embodied  it  with  the 
affluent  vitality  of  splendid  health  and  buoyant  temperament, — presenting  a  creature 
radiant  with  goodness  and  happiness,  exquisite  in  natural  refinement,  piquant  with 
archness,  soft,  innocent,  and  tender  in  confiding  artlessness,  and,  while  gleeful  and 
triumphant  in  beautiful  youth,  gently  touched  with  an  intuitive  pitying  sense  of  the 
thorny  aspects  of  this  troubled  world.  The  giving  of  the  flowers  completely  be¬ 
witched  her  auditors.  The  startled  yet  proud  endurance  of  the  king’s  anger  was  in 
an  equal  degree  captivating.  Seldom  has  the  stage  displayed  that  rarest  of  all  combi¬ 
nations,  the  passionate  heart  of  a  woman  with  the  lovely  simplicity  of  a  child.  Noth¬ 
ing  could  be  more  beautiful  than  she  was  to  the  eyes  that  followed  her  lithe  figure 
through  the  merry  mazes  of  her  rustic  dance, — an  achievement  sharply  in  contrast 
with  her  usually  statuesque  manner.  It  ‘  makes  old  hearts  fresh  ’  to  see  a  spectacle 
of  grace  and  joy,  and  that  spectacle  they  saw  then  and  will  not  forget.  The  value 
of  those  impersonations  of  Hermione  and  Perdita,  viewing  them  as  embodied  inter¬ 
pretations  of  poetry  was  great,  but  they  possessed  a  greater  value  and  a  higher 
significance  as  denotements  of  the  guiding  light,  the  cheering  strength,  the  elevating 
loveliness  of  a  noble  human  soul.  They  embodied  the  conception  of  the  poet,  but  at 
the  same  time  they  illumined  an  actual  incarnation  of  the  divine  spirit.  They  were 
like  windows  to  a  sacred  temple,  and  through  them  you  could  look  into  the  soul  of  a 
true  woman,— always  a  realm  where  thoughts  are  gliding  angels,  and  feelings  are  the 
faces  of  seraphs,  and  sounds  are  the  music  of  the  harps  of  heaven. 

Mme.  de  Navarro  [Miss  Mary  Anderson]  ( A  Few  Memories,  1896,  p.  243) : 
The  Winter's  Tale  had  never  been  a  very  successful  play.  .  .  .  In  studying  the  play,  the 
reason  of  its  non-success  appeared  to  me  to  be  the  undue  prominence  given  to  several 
of  the  less  important  characters,  and  the  comparatively  short  and  interrupted  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  two  heroines,  which  breaks  the  continued  interest  of  the  spectator.  The 
first  difficulty  was  to  cut  these  secondary  parts  without  marring  the  beauty  or  meaning 
of  the  text;  and  the  next,  to  keep  alive  the  sympathies  of  the  audience  with  both 
Hermione  and  Perdita  from  beginning  to  end.  ...  As  to  keeping  alive  an  unbroken, 
interest  in  the  mother  and  child,  who  are  separated  for  the  best  part  of  two  acts,  I 
thought,  after  careful  consideration,  that  the  best  way  was  to  follow  the  suggestion  of 
Mr  Thomas  Hall,  and  have  the  two  parts  played  by  the  same  person,  my  chief  author¬ 
ity  for  doing  so  being  the  strong  resemblance  between  Hermione  and  Perdita. 


GARRICK'S  VERSION 


399 


To  entrust  Perdita  to  a  person  unlike  the  queen  in  looks,  voice,  or  manner  would,  I 
thought,  give  the  lie  to  the  king’s  words  [where  he  says  that  he  thought  of  Hermione 
when  he  looked  at  Perdita],  lessen  the  interest  in  the  last  two  acts,  and,  from  an 
acting  point  of  view,  spoil  the  continuity  of  the  play.  Had  doubling  the  parts  necessi¬ 
tated  cutting  out  the  important  speeches  of  either  character,  the  idea  would  have  been 
abandoned.  But  as  only  six  of  Perdita’s  lines  were  sacrificed,  I  did  not  feel  guilty 
of  any  vandalism  in  doing  so.  We  produced  the  play  for  the  first  time  in  Nottingham, 
to  celebrate  Shakespeare’s  birthday.  It  proved  a  great  success  with  the  people  of  that 
city  and  with  the  numerous  Londoners  who  came  especially  to  see  it. 

My  surprise  and  disappointment  may  be  imagined  when,  in  the  following  Septem¬ 
ber,  it  was  not  received  with  any  marked  enthusiasm  on  its  first  night  in  London.  .  .  . 
I  heard  that  many  of  the  ‘  first-nighters  ’  voted  it  dull  and  heavy,  and  prophesied  that 
it  could  not  run  for  more  than  two  weeks.  My  pet  play  looked  very  like  a  failure. 
But  after  that,  ‘  the  actor’s  greatest  judge,’ — the  public, — continued  to  fill  the  house 
nightly,  and  received  it  with  increasing  warmth.  It  kept  the  stage  for  a  hundred 
and  sixty-four  nights ;  and  had  not  my  tenancy  of  the  Lyceum  then  expired,  it  would 
probably  have  run  on  for  another  hundred. 


GARRICK’S  VERSION: 

Florizel  and  Perdita 

All  of  Garrick’s  share  is  given  on  the  following  pages. 

At  the  first  performance  of  Florizel  and  Perdita,  the  part  of  Leotites  was  taken  by 
Garrick;  Polixenes,  by  Havard;  Hermione  by  Mrs  Pritchard,  and  Perdita  by 
Mrs  Cibber.  The  Prologue  is  as  follows : — 

To  various  things  the  stage  has  been  compar’d, 

As  apt  ideas  strike  each  humorous  bard  : 

This  night,  for  want  of  better  simile, 

Let  this  our  Theatre  a  Tavern  be  :  >- 

The  poets  vintners,  and  the  waiters  we.  J 

So  as  the  cant,  and  custom  of  the  trade  is, 

You’re  welcome  Gem' min;  kindly  welcome,  ladies. 

To  draw  in  customers,  our  bills  are  spread ;  [Shewing  a  Play-bill. 

You  cannot  miss  the  sign,  ’tis  Shakespear's  Head. 

From  this  same  head,  this  fountain-head  divine, 

For  different  palates,  springs  a  different  wine ! 

In  which  no  tricks,  to  strengthen,  or  to  thin  ’em — 

Neat  as  imported, — no  French  brandy  in  ’em — 

Hence  for  the  choicest  spirits  flow  Champaign  ;  \ 

Whose  sparkling  atoms  shoot  thro’  every  vein,  V 

Then  mount  in  magic  vapours  to  th’  enraptur’d  brain !  ) 

Hence  flow  for  martial  minds  potations  strong : 

And  sweet  love  potions,  for  the  fair  and  young. 

For  you,  my  hearts  of  oak,  for  your  regale  [  To  the  upper  gallery 
There’s  good  old  English  stingo,  mild  and  stale. 


400 


APPENDIX 


For  high  luxurious  souls,  with  luscious  smack, 

There’s  Sir  John  Falstaff,  is  a  butt  of  sack : 

And  if  the  stronger  liquors  more  invite  ye, 

Bardolph  is  gin,  and  Pistol  aqua  vitae. 

But  shou’d  you  call  for  Falstaff,  where  to  find  him 
He’s  gone,* — nor  left  one  cup  of  sack  behind  him. 

Sunk  in  his  elbow-chair,  no  more  he’ll  roam 
No  more  with  merry  wags  to  East  cheap  come ; 

He’s  gone, — to  jest,  and  laugh,  and  give  his  sack  at  home. 

As  for  the  learned  critics,  grave  and  deep, 

Who  catch  at  words,  and  catching  fall  asleep ; 

Who  in  the  storms  of  passion, — hum, — and  haw  ! 

For  such,  our  master  will  no  liquor  draw, — 

So  blindly  thoughtful,  and  so  darkly  read, 

They  take  Tom  Duffy's  for  the  Shakespear ' s  head. 

A  vintner  once  acquir’d  both  praise  and  gain 
And  sold  much  perry  for  the  best  champaign. 

Some  rakes  this  precious  stuff  did  so  allure ; 

They  drank  whole  nights — what’s  that  ? — when  wine  is  pure. 

‘  Come,  fill  a  bumper,  Jack  !  ’ — ‘  I  will,  my  lord.’ — 

‘  Here’s  cream  ! — damn’d  fine  ! — immense  !  upon  my  word  !’ 

*  Sir  William,  what  say  you  ?’ — ‘  The  best,  believe  me, — 

‘  In  this — Eh,  Jack  ! — the  devil  can’t  deceive  me.’ 

Thus  the  wise  critic  too  mistakes  his  wine, 

Cries  out  with  lifted  hands  ‘  Tis  great ! — divine  !’ 

Then  joggs  his  neighbour,  as  the  wonders  strike  him ; 

1  This  Shakespear  !  Shakespear  ! — Oh,  there's  nothing  like  him 
In  this  night’s  various,  and  enchanted  cup, 

Some  little  perry' s  mixt  for  filling  up. 

The  five  long  acts  from  which  our  three  are  taken 
Stretch’d  out  to  sixteen  years,  lay  by,  forsaken. 

Lest  then  this  precious  liquor  run  to  waste, 

’Tis  now  confin’d  and  bottled  for  your  taste. 

’Tis  my  chief  wish,  my  joy,  my  only  plan 
To  lose  no  drop  of  that  immortal  man ! 


Scene  I. —  The  Court  of  Bohemia. — Enter  Camillo  and  a  Gentleman. 

Cam.  The  Gods  send  him  safe  passage  to  us ;  for  he  seems  embarked  in  a  tem¬ 
pestuous  season. 

Gent.  I  pray  thee,  lord  Camillo,  instruct  me,  what  concealed  matter  there  is  in 
the  coming  of  Leontes  to  Bohemia,  should  so  wrap  our  king  in  astonishment  ? 

Cam.  Good  sign  your  knowledge  in  the  court  is  young,  if  you  make  that  your 
question. 

Gent.  I  would  not  be  thought  too  curious,  but,  I  prithee,  be  my  tutor  in  this 
matter. 


*  Mr  Quin  had  then  left  the  stage. 


GARRICK'S  VERSION 


401 


Cam.  To  be  short  then, — Give  it  thy  hearing,  for  my  tale  is  well  worthy  of  it : 
these  two  kings,  Leontes  of  Sicily  and  Polixenes  of  Bohemia ,  were  trained  together 
in  their  childhoods,  and  there  rooted  betwixt  ’em  such  an  affection  as  could  not  choose 
but  branch  as  it  grew  up.  One  unhappy  summer  (and  full  sixteen  as  unhappy  have 
followed  it)  our  Polixenes  went  to  repay  Sicily  the  visitation  he  justly  owed  him. — 
Most  royally,  and  with  the  utmost  freedom  of  society,  was  he  entertained  both  by 
Leontes ,  and  his  queen  Hermione ;  a  lady,  whose  bodily  accomplishments  were  un¬ 
paralleled,  but  by  those  of  her  own  mind.  The  free  strokes  of  youth  and  gaiety,  in 
her  extended  civility  to  Polixenes  (pleased  as  she  was  to  see  her  lord  delighted)  bred 
in  him  suspicion  of  her  conduct. 

Gent.  And  that  is  an  evil  weed,  that  once  taking  root,  needs  no  manure. 

Cam.  I  then  waited  about  the  person  of  Leontes,  and  was  alone  thought  worthy 
the  participation  of  his  jealousy.  Into  my  bosom  he  disgorged  his  monstrous  secret, 
with  no  tenderer  injunction  than  to  take  off  his  innocent,  abused  guest  by  poison. 

Gent.  To  kill  Polixenes  ! 

Cam.  Even  so. — What  could  I  do  ?  What  ran  evenest  with  the  grain  of  my 
honesty  I  did,  and  have  not  since  repented  me : — whispered  Polixenes  of  the  mat¬ 
ter, — left  my  large  fortunes,  and  my  larger  hopes  in  Sicily,  and  on  the  very  wing  of 
occasion  flew  with  him  hither,  no  richer  than  my  honour;  and  have  since  been  ever 
of  his  bosom. 

Gent.  I  tremble  for  the  poor  queen,  left  to  the  injuries  of  a  powerful  king,  and  si 
jealous  husband. 

Cam.  Left,  too,  in  her  condition !  for  she  had  some  while  promised  an  heir  to 
Sicily,  and  now,  mark  me, — for  the  occasion — 

Gent.  Cannot  surpass  my  attention. 

Cam.  Scarcely  settled  in  Bohemia  here,  we  are  alarmed  with  the  arrival  of 
Paulina  (that  excellent  matron,  and  true  friend  of  her  unhappy  queen)  from  whom 
we  too  soon  learn  how  sad  a  tragedy  had  been  acted  in  Sicily,— the  dishonoured 
Hermione  clapped  up  in  prison,  where  she  gave  the  king  a  princess,— the  child  (the 
innocent  milk  yet  in  her  innocent  mouth),  by  the  king’s  command,  exposed;  exposed 
even  on  the  desarts  of  this  kingdom, — our  Polixenes  being  falsely  deemed  the  father. 

Gent.  Poor  babe  !  unhappy  queen  !  tyrant  Leontes  ! 

Cam.  What  blacker  title  will  you  fix  upon  him,  when  you  shall  hear  that  Her¬ 
mione,  in  her  weak  condition  (the  child-bed  privilege  denied,  which  belongs  to 
women  of  all  fashion),  was  hauled  out  to  an  open  mockery  of  trial ;  that  on  this  in¬ 
human  outrage  (her  fame  being  killed  before)  she  died ; — in  the  very  prison  where 
she  was  delivered,  died;  and  that  on  her  decease,  Paulina  (whose  free  tongue  was 
the  king’s  living  scourge  and  perpetual  remembrancer  to  him  of  his  dead  queen)  fled 
with  her  effects,  for  safety  of  her  life,  to  Bohemia  here — I  tire  you? 

Gent.  My  king  concerned,  I  am  too  deeply  interested  in  the  event,  to  be  indif¬ 
ferent  to  the  relation. 

Cam.  All  this  did  Leontes  in  defiance  of  the  plain  answer  of  the  oracle,  by  him 
consulted  at  Delphi;  which  now,  after  sixteen  years  occurring  to  his  more  sober 
thoughts,  he  first  thinks  it  probable,  then  finds  it  true,  and  his  penitence  thereupon  is 
as  extreme,  as  his  suspicions  had  been  fatal.  In  the  course  of  his  sorrows,  as  we 
are  informed,  twice  attempted  on  his  life ;  and  this  is  now  his  goad  to  the  present 
expedition;  to  make  all  possible  atonement  to  his  injur’d  brother  Bohemia,  and 
to  us  the  fellow-sufferers  in  his  wrongs;  we  must  break  off,— the  king  and  good 
Paulina — 


26 


402 


APPEND  LX 


Enter  Polixcnes  and  I’aulina. 

Polix.  Weep  not  now,  Paulina,  so  long-gonc-by  misfortunes;  this  strange  and 
unexpected  visit  from  Leontes,  calls  all  your  sorrows  up  anew;  but,  good  Paulina, 
be  satisfied  that  heaven  has  willed  it  so.  That  sixteen  years  absence  should  pass 
unnoticed  by  this  king,  without  exchange  of  gifts,  letters,  or  embassies;  and  now  ! — 
I  am  minut'd  as  thou  art ;  but  not  grieved — 

Paul.  Grudge  me  not  a  tear  to  the  memory  of  my  queen,  my  royal  mistress;  and 
there  dies  my  resentment ;  now,  Leontes ,  welcome. 

Felix.  Nobly  resolved;  of  him  think  we  no  more  of  [«V]  till  he  arrives. 

Cam.  Hail,  royal  Sir.  If  the  king  of  Sicily  escape  this  dreadful  tempest,  I  shall 
esteem  him  a  favourite  of  the  gods,  and  his  penitence  effectual. 

Felix.  Of  that  fatal  country  Sicily  and  of  its  penitent  (as  we  must  think  him) 
and  reconciled  king,  my  brother  (whose  loss  of  his  most  precious  queen  and  child  are 
even  now  afresh  lamented),  1  prithee,  speak  no  more: — say  to  me,  when  saw’st  thou 
prince  Eloristl,  ray  son  ?  Fathers  are  no  less  unhappy,  their  issue  not  being  gracious, 
than  they  are  in  losing  ’em,  when  they  have  approved  their  virtues. 

Cam.  Sir,  it  is  three  days  since  I  saw  the  Prince ;  what  his  happier  affairs  may 
be  are  to  me  unknown.  [The  dialogue  now  continues  as  in  IV,  ii,  32  to  55  word  for 
word  except  that  musingly  is  adopted  for  ‘  missingly  ’  and  angel  for  ‘Angle  ’  in  line 
47.  Instead  of  departing  after ‘we  must  disguise  ourselves’  in  line  55  the  scene 
continues  thus :] 

Paul.  Lest  your  royalty  be  discovered  by  the  attendance  of  any  of  your  own  train, 
my  steward,  Dion ,  shall  provide  disguises,  and  accompany  your  design  with  all  secrecy. 

Felix.  It  is  well  advised — I  will  make  choice  of  some  few  to  attend  us,  who 
shall  wait  at  distance  from  the  cottage — you  instruct  Dion  in  the  matter,  while  we 
prepare  ourselves,  [Exit  Polix.  and  Cam. 

Paul.  What  fire  is  in  my  ears !  can  it  be  so  ? 

Or  are  my  senses  cheated  with  a  dream  ? 

Leontes  in  Bohemia  ! — O  most  welcome, 

My  penitent  liege — my  tears  were  those  of  joy. 

Paulina,  for  her  royal  mistress’  sake, 

Shall  give  thee  welcome  to  this  injured  coast; 

Such  as  the  riches  of  two  mighty  kingdoms, 

Bohemia  join'd  with  fruitful  Sicily, 

Would  not  avail  to  buy — Leontes,  welcome, 

Let  thy  stout  vessel  but  the  beating  stand 

Of  this  chaf’d  sea,  and  thou  art  whole  on  land.  [Exit  Paulina. 

[Scene  II  begins  with  the  Old  Shepherd’s  soliloquy  before  finding  Perdita,  III,  iii, 
66 :  ‘  1  would  there  were  no  age,’  etc.,  but,  of  course,  as  there  is  no  Perdita  to  be 
found,  the  Old  Shepherd’s  anxiety  is  merely  for  his  lost  sheep,  and  he  determines  to 
await  the  approach  of  his  son,  who  enters  terrified  at  the  storm  which  he  has  seen 
raging  at  sea,  and  continues  the  description  of  the  shipwreck  word  for  word  as  in  the 
original,  of  course  omitting  all  the  references  to  Antigonus  and  the  bear,  down  to 
line  1 17,  where  the  Old  Shepherd  says  *  Heavy  matters  !  heavy  matters !’  Thereupon 
the  dialogue  continues :] 

Clown,  Look !  look,  father — there  are  two  of  ’em  cast  ashore,  and  crawling  up 
the  rock, — now  they  are  down  again — poor  souls,  they  have  no  strength  to  keep  their 
hold ; — I  will  go  help  them. 


GARRICK'S  VERSION 


403 


Old  Shep.  Run,  run,  boy  !  thy  legs  are  youngest. 

Clown.  Stay,  they  have  found  the  road  to  the  beach,  and  come  toward  us. 

Old  Shep.  Some  rich  men,  I  warrant  ’em ;  that  are  poorer  than  we  now. 

Clown.  Lord,  father  !  look — they  are  out-landish  folk ;  their  fine  cloaths  are 
shrunk  in  the  wetting. 

Enter  Leontes,  supported  by  Cleomines. 

Cleom.  Bear  up,  my  liege  ; — again  welcome  on  shore. 

Leon.  Flatter  me  not, — In  death,  distinctions  cease — 

Am  I  on  shore ;  walk  I  on  land,  firm  land, 

Or  ride  I  yet  upon  the  billows  backs  ? 

Methinks  I  feel  the  motion — who  art  thou  ? 

Cleom.  Know  you  me  not  ? — Your  friend  Cleomines. 

Leon.  Where  are  my  other  friends  ? — What,  perished  all ! 

Cleom.  Not  a  soul  saved  !  ourselves  are  all  our  crew, 

Pilot,  shipmaster,  boatswain,  sailors,  all. 

Leon.  Laud  we  the  gods  !  Yet  wherefor  perish’d  they, 

Innocent  souls !  and  I,  with  all  my  guilt, 

Live  yet  to  load  the  earth  ? — O  righteous  Gods  ! 

Your  ways  are  past  the  line  of  man  to  fathom. 

Cleom.  Waste  not  your  small  remaining  strength  of  body 
In  warring  with  your  mind.  This  desart  waste 
Has  some  inhabitants, — Here’s  help  at  hand — 

Good  day,  old  man — 

Old  Shep.  Never  said  in  worse  time — a  better  to  both  your  worships — command 
us,  Sir. 

Clown.  You  have  been  sweetly  soaked;  give  the  Gods  thanks  that  you  are  alive 
to  feel  it. 

Leon.  We  are  most  thankful,  Sir. 

Cleom.  What  desarts  are  these  same  ? 

Old  Shep.  The  desarts  of  Bohemia. 

Leon.  Say’st  thou  Bohemia  ?  ye  Gods,  Bohemia  ! 

In  every  act  your  judgements  are  sent  forth 
Against  Leontes  ! — Here  to  be  wrecked  and  saved  ! 

Upon  this  coast ! — All  the  wrongs  I  have  done, 

Stir  now  afresh  within  me — Did  I  not 
Upon  this  coast  expose  my  harmless  infant 
Bid  Polixcnes  (falsely  deemed  the  father) 

To  take  this  child — O  hell-born  jealousy  ! 

All  but  myself  most  innocent — and  now 
Upon  this  coast — Pardon,  Hermione  ! 

’Twas  this  that  sped  thee  to  thy  proper  heaven ; 

If  from  thy  sainted  seat  above  the  clouds, 

Thou  see’st  my  weary  pilgrimage  thro’  life. 

Loath’d,  hated  life,  ’cause  unenjoy’d  with  thee — 

Look  down,  and  pity  me. 

Cleom.  Good  sir,  be  calm ; 

What’s  gone  and  what’s  past  help  should  be  past  grief ; 

You  do  repent  these  things  too  sorely. 

Leon.  I  can’t  repent  these  things;  for  they  are  heavier 


404 


APPENDIX 


Than  all  my  woes  can  stir ;  I  must  betake  me 
To  nothing  but  despair, — a  thousand  knees 
Ten  thousand  years  together,  naked,  fasting 
Upon  a  barren  mountain,  and  still  winter, 

In  storms  perpetual,  could  not  move  the  Gods 
To  look  this  way  upon  me. 

Clown.  What  says  he,  pray  ?  The  sea  has  quite  washed  away  the  poor  gentle¬ 
man’s  brains.  Come  bring  him  along  to  our  farm;  and  we’ll  give  you  both  a  warm 
bed,  and  dry  clothing. 

Cleom.  Friends,  we  accept  your  offer’d  courtesy. 

Come,  sir — bear  up — be  calm — compose  your  mind  ; 

If  still  the  tempest  rages  there,  in  vain, 

In  vain  the  Gods  have  saved  you  from  the  deep. 

Leon.  I’ll  take  thy  counsel,  friend ; — lend  me  thy  arm — Oh  Hermione  ! 

[Leans  on  him. 

Cleom.  Good  shepherd,  shew  us  to  the  cottage. 

Old  Shep.  This  way,  this  way— 

Clown.  And  now  the  storm’s  blown  over,  father;  we’ll  send  down  Nicholas  and 
his  fellow  to  pick  up  the  dead  bodies,  if  any  may  be  thrown  ashore,  and  bury  them. 

Old  Shep.  ’Tis  a  good  deed,  boy. — Help  the  gentlemen,  and  bring  them  after 
me-  [ Exeunt . 

[The  next  scene,  where  Autolycus  enters  singing,  is  the  same  throughout  as  IV, 
iii.  With  this  scene  the  First  Act  ends.  The  Second  Act  begins  with  IV,  iv,  which 
it  follows  literally,  with  omissions  merely  of  a  line  or  two  here  and  there  (the  longest 
is  the  omission  of  lines  93-122),  down  to  line  180,  where,  after  Perdita  has  said  ‘  I'll 
swear  for  ’em,’  the  Old  Shepherd  says  :] 

Come,  come,  daughter,  leave  for  awhile  these  private  dalliances,  and  love-whis¬ 
perings,  clear  up  your  pipes,  and  call,  as  custom  is,  our  neighbours  to  our  sheep¬ 
shearing. 

Perd.  I  will  obey  you. 

Song. 

Come ,  come,  my  good  shepherds ,  our  flocks  we  must  shear  ; 

In  your  holy  day  stats,  with  your  lassies  appear . 

The  happiest  of  folk  are  the  guiltless  and  free , 

And  who  are  so  guiltless,  so  happy  as  we  ? 

JVe  harbour  no  passions,  by  luxury  taught, 

We  practise  no  arts,  with  hypocrisy  fraught ; 

What  we  think  in  our  hearts,  you  may  read  in  our  eyes  ; 

For  knowing  no  falsehood,  we  need  no  disguise. 

By  mode  and  caprice  are  the  city  dames  led. 

But  we,  as  the  children  of  nature  are  bred ; 

By  her  hand  alone  we  are  painted  and  dress'd  ; 

For  the  roses  will  bloom  when  there's  peace  in  the  breast. 

That  giant,  ambition,  we  never  can  dread ; 

Our  roofs  are  too  low,  for  so  lofty  a  head  ; 

Content  and  sweet  cheerfulness  open  our  door, 

They  smile  with  the  simple,  and  feed  with  the  poor. 


GARRICK'S  VERSION 


405 


When  love  has  possess'd  us,  that  love  we  reveal, 

Like  the  flocks  that  we  feed,  are  the  passions  we  feel ; 

So,  harmless  and  simple  we  sport,  and  we  play, 

And  leave  to  fine  folks  to  deceive  and  betray. 

[Of  this  song,  Genest  says  (iv,  449)  that  as  ‘  Morgan’s  Florizel  and  Perdita  is 
‘  said  to  have  been  printed  in  1754*  Garrick  must  be  supposed  to  have  borrowed  Per- 
‘  dita’s  song  from  it.’  On  what  compulsion  must  Garrick  be  supposed  to  have  bor¬ 
rowed  this  song  from  Morgan  ? — it  is  neither  above  Garrick’s  abilities  nor  below  them; 
had  it  been  none  of  his  he  would  have  repudiated  it  quickly  enough,  when  the  in¬ 
cident  occurred  which  Genest  proceeds  to  quote :  ‘  Boswell,  in  his  Life  of  Johnson 
‘  (vol.  i,  p.  536),  says:  “Mrs  Thrale  then  praised  Garrick’s  talents  for  light  gay 
‘  “  poetry ;  and,  as  a  specimen,  repeated  his  song  in  Florizel  and  Perdita,  and  dwelt 
‘  “  with  peculiar  pleasure  on  this  line : 

“  I’d  smile  with  the  simple,  and  feed  with  the  poor.” 

‘  Johnson  :  “  Nay,  my  dear  lady,  this  will  never  do.  Poor  David !  Smile  with  the 
‘  “  simple.  What  folly  is  that?  And  who  would  feed  with  the  poor  that  can  help 

it  ?  No,  no ;  let  me  smile  with  the  wise,  and  feed  with  the  rich.”  I  repeated  this 
1  sally  to  Garrick,  and  wondered  to  find  his  sensibility  as  a  writer  not  a  little  irritated 
1  by  it.  To  soothe  him  I  observed,  that  Johnson  spared  none  of  us  ;  and  quoted  the 
‘passage  in  Horace,  in  which  he  compares  one  who  attacks  his  friends,  for  the  sake 
'of  a  laugh,  to  a  pushing  ox,  that  is  marked  by  a  bunch  of  hay  put  upon  his  horns: 
‘ fcenum  habet  in  cornu.  “Ay,”  said  Garrick,  vehemently,  “he  has  a  whole  mow  of 
‘  “  it.”  ’  As  Genest  points  out,  Mrs  Thrale  did  not  quote  the  line  correctly.  Had 
she  quoted  it  correctly,  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  Dr  Johnson  would  have  been 
silenced, — that  miracle  never  happened, — but  his  ‘sally’  might  have  taken  another 
shape  which  possibly  might  not  have  irritated  Garrick.  At  any  rale,  it  is  quite  un¬ 
likely  that  Garrick  would  have  felt  this  irritation  had  he  not  been  the  author. 
George  Daniel  (Oxberry’s  edition,  1823)  says  that  when  Kemble  brought  out  The 
Winter’s  Tale  in  1802  this  song  was  omitted,  and  in  its  place  Perdita  sang  the  fol¬ 
lowing  by  Sheridan : — 

“As  shepherds,  through  the  vapours  grey, 

Behold  the  dawning  light, 

Yet  doubt  if  ’tis  the  rising  day 
Or  meteor  of  the  night ; 

So  varying  passions  in  my  breast, 

My  former  calm  destroy ; 

With  hope  and  fear  at  once  opprest, 

I  tremble  at  my  joy.” 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  Song  the  original  text  is  resumed  at  line  181  and  con¬ 
tinues  as  far  as  Dorcas’s  little  tilt  with  Mopsa,  which  is  enlarged  by  a  dozen  lines 
of  witless,  rather  coarse  quarrelling  which  ends  with  the  assertion  by  Dorcas  ‘  that 
‘  some  folks  have  been  proud,  and  courtly,  and  falsehearted  ever  since  some  folk’s 
‘  father  found  a  pot  of  money  by  the  sea-side  here. — But  I  say  nothing.’  ‘  Come,. 


40 6 


APPENDIX 


'  come,  strike  up,’  says  the  Clown,  and  then  the  original  continues  to  line  350  where 
Autolycus,  the  Clown,  Dorcas  and  Mopsa  exeunt.  Then  instead  of  the  entrance  of 
a  servant,  as  in  the  original,  Leontes  and  Cleomines  ‘  enter  from  the  Farm-House:’] 
Cleom.  Why  will  you  not  repose,  Sir  ?  these  sports, 

The  idle  merriment  of  hearts  at  ease, 

But  ill  will  suit  the  colour  of  your  mind. 

Leon.  Peace — I  enjoy  them  in  a  better  sort — 

Cleomines,  look  on  this  pretty  damsel;  [ Pointing  to  Perdita. 

Haply  such  age,  such  innocence,  and  beauty. 

Had  our  dear  daughter  owned,  had  not  my  hand — 

Oh,  had  I  not  the  course  of  nature  stopped 
On  weak  surmise, — I  would  not  think  that  way — 

And  yet  I  must,  always,  and  ever  must. 

Cleom.  No  more,  my  liege — 

Leon.  Nay,  I  will  gaze  upon  her;  each  salt  drop 
That  trickles  down  my  cheek,  relieves  my  heart, 

Which  else  would  burst  with  anguish 

Polix.  \_to  Cam.].  Is  it  not  too  far  gone  ?  'tis  time  to  part  ’em ; 

He’s  simple,  and  tells  much,— how  now  fair  shepherd  [  To  Flor. 

\  our  heart  is  full,  etc.  [and  so  it  continues  as  in  the  original,  except  that  Leoutes 
joins  in  the  conversation,  dividing  some  of  the  speeches  of  Polixenes  and  Camillo, 
and  taking  the  whole  of  Polixenes’  speech  in  lines  447-455  :  ‘  By  my  white  beard,’ 
etc. ;  and  so  on,  until  Polixenes  discovers  himself,  and  at  the  words :  ‘  Thou,  a  scep- 
*  ter’s  heir,  That  thus  affect’st  a  sheep-hook !’  Leontes  exclaims  ( Amaz'd ) :] 

How !  Polixenes  !  what  misery  is  this  ? 

I  want  the  power  to  throw  me  at  his  feet, 

Nor  can  I  bear  his  eyes —  [Leon,  leans  on  Cleom.  and  they  go  apart. 

Polix.  And  thou,  old  traitor,  [etc. ;  at  the  end  of  this  speech  both  Polixenes  and 
Camillo  depart;  and  the  share  in  the  conversation  which  is  borne  in  the  original  by 
Camillo  is  now  borne  by  Leontes.  After  Perdita  has  said  ‘  I’ll  milk  my  ewes  and 
‘  weep,’  Leontes  comes  forward  and  says  *  How  now,  old  father,’  etc.  When  the  Old 
Shepherd  concludes  his  speech  and  Exit,  the  scene  continues :] 

Leon,  [to  Cleom.].  The  honest  wretch,  he  helpt  us  at  our  need — 

I  will  no  longer  vail  me  in  this  cloud, 

But  plead,  unmask’d,  this  good  old  shepherd’s  cause 
Before  my  own ;  e’en  at  Bohemia's  knees. 

Flor.  [to  Perd.].  Why  look  you  so  upon  me? 

I  am  but  too  sorry,  not  afraid ;  delay’d, 

But  nothing  altered ;  what  I  was,  I  am, 

And  ever  shall  be  thine,  my  Perdita  ! 

Perd.  Alas,  alas  !  my  lord;  these  hopes  are  fled ! 

I  low  often  have  I  told  you  ’twould  be  thus  ? 

IIow  often  said,  my  dignity  would  last 

But  ’till  ’twere  known.  [Florizel  replies  as  in  the  original;  Leontes,  bearing  Camil- 
lo’s  part,  says  to  Florizel :  ‘  This  is  desperate,  sir !’  and  the  latter  replies :] 

So  call  it ;  but  it  does  fulfill  my  vow ; 

I  needs  must  think  it  honesty ;  my  heart 
Is  anchor’d  here,  as  rooted  as  the  rocks, 

Who  stand  the  raging  of  the  roaring  deep, 


GARRICK'S  VERSION 


407 


Immoveable  and  fix’d — let  it  come  on  ! — 

I’ll  brave  the  tempest ! 

Perd.  Be  patient,  Doricles. 

Leon.  Passion  transports  you,  prince  ;  be  calm  a  while 
Nor  scorn  my  years  and  counsel,  but  attend : — 

My  lowly  seeming  and  this  outward  garment, 

But  ill  denote  my  quality  and  office, — 

Trust  to  my  words,  tho’  mystery  obscures  ’em — 

I  know  the  king  your  father,  and  if  time 
And  many  antecedents  (cease  foolish  tears) 

Have  not  effaced  my  image  from  his  breast, 

Perhaps  he’ll  listen  to  me. — I  am  sorry, 

Most  sorry,  you  have  broken  from  his  liking, 

Where  you  were  tied  in  duty ;  and  as  sorry 
Your  choice  is  not  so  rich  in  worth  as  beauty 
That  you  might  well  enjoy  her, — Prince,  you  know 
Prosperity ’s  the  very  bond  of  love 
Whose  fresh  complexion,  and  whose  heart  together 
Affliction  alters. 

Perd.  One  of  these  is  true, 

I  think  affliction  may  subdue  the  cheek, 

But  not  take  in  the  mind. 

Leon.  Yea,  say  you  so  ? 

There  shall  not  at  your  father’s  house,  these  sev’n  years, 
Be  bom  another  such. 

Flor.  O  reverend.  Sir ! 

As  you  would  wish  a  child  of  your  own  youth 
To  meet  his  happiness  in  love,  speak  for  me ; 

Remember  since  you  ow’d  no  more  to  time 

Than  I  do  now ;  and  with  thought  of  like  affections, 

Step  forth  my  advocate. 

Leon.  You  touch  me  deep, 

Deep,  to  the  quick,  sweet  prince ;  alas  !  alas  ! 

I  lost  a  daughter,  that  ’twixt  heaven  and  earth 
Might  thus  have  stood  begetting  wonder,  as 
Yon  lovely  maiden  does — of  that  no  more ; — 

I’ll  to  the  king  your  father, — this  our  compact, 

Your  honour  not  o’er  thrown  by  your  desires, 

I  am  friend  to  them  and  you. 

Flor.  Dear,  look  up : 

Tho’  fortune,  visible  an  enemy, 

Should  chase  us  with  my  father ;  power,  no  jot 
Hath  she  to  change  our  loves. 

Perd.  Alas,  my  lord, 

Bethink  yourself,  as  I  do  me.  Heav’n  knows, 

All  faults  I  make,  when  I  do  come  to  know  ’em 
I  do  repent — Alas !  I’ve  shown  too  much 
A  maiden’s  simpleness  ;  I  have  betray’d, 

Unwittingly  divorced  a  noble  prince 


[ Exit  Leon,  and  Cleom. 


408 


APPENDIX 


From  a  dear  father’s  love ;  have  caused  him  sell 
His  present  honour,  and  his  hop’d  reversion, 

For  a  poor  sheep-hook,  and  its  lowly  mistress, 

Of  lesser  price  than  that — beseech  you,  sir, 

Of  your  own  state  take  care,  drown  the  remembrance 
Of  me,  my  father’s  cot,  and  these  poor  beauties 
Wrong’d  by  your  praise  too  often. 

Flor.  My  Perdita, 

How  sweetly  thou  dost  plead  against  thyself? 

Let  us  retire,  my  love, — again  I  swear, 

Not  for  Bohemia  nor  the  pomp  that  may 
Be  there-cut  glean’d;  for  all  the  sun  sees,  or 
The  close  earth  wombs,  or  the  profound  seas  hide 
In  unknown  fathoms,  will  I  break  my  oath, 

To  thee,  my  fair  betroth’d, — with  thee  I’ll  fly 
From  stormy  regions,  and  a  lowering  sky ; 

Where  no  base  views  our  purer  minds  shall  move; 

And  all  our  wealth  be  innocence  and  love. 

Act  III. — Another  Part  of  the  Country. — Enter  Autolycus  in  rich  clothes. 

Autol.  How  fortune  drops  into  the  mouth  of  the  diligent  man !  See,  if  I  be  not 
transformed  courtier  again  ! — four  silken  gamesters,  who  attended  the  king,  and  were 
revelling  by  themselves,  at  some  distance  from  the  shepherds,  have  drank  so  plente- 
ously,  that  their  weak  brains  are  turned  topsy-turvy,— I  have  found  one  of  ’em,  an 
old  court  comrade  of  mine,  retired  from  the  rest,  sobering  himself  with  sleep  under 
the  shade  of  a  hawthorn;  I  made  use  of  our  ancient  familiarity  to  exchange  gar¬ 
ments  with  him:  the  pedler’s  clothes  are  on  his  back,  and  the  pack  by  his  side,  as 
empty  as  his  pockets,  for  I  have  sold  all  my  trumpery.  [Hereupon  the  soliloquy 
continues,  made  up  of  lines  680-700,  and  ending  with  773-775,  as  the  Clown  and 
Old  Shepherd  enter,  the  scene  then  continues  to  the  end  as  in  the  original.  The 
next  scene  opens  in  Paulina  s  house.  Enter  Paulina  and  a  gentleman.  J 

Paul.  Beseech  you,  Sir,  now  that  my  first  burst  of  joy  is  over,  and  my  ebbing 
spirits  no  longer  bear  down  my  attention,  give  my  ear  again  the  circumstances  of  this 
strange  story.  Leontes  arrived  1  escaped  from  the  fury  of  the  sea  !  vailed  in  the  sem¬ 
blance  of  a  poor  shepherd !  and  has  now  thrown  himself  into  the  arms  of  Polixenes  ! 
’tis  a  chain  of  wonders ! 

Gent.  Yet  the  tale  is  not  more  wonderful  than  true ;  I  was  present  at  the 
interview. 

Paul.  Speak,  Sir,  speak ;  tell  me  all. 

Gent.  Soon  as  our  king  returned  from  the  palace,  he  retired  with  the  good 
Camillo,  to  lament  the  unhappy  and  ill-placed  affection  of  his  son ;  yet,  as  gleams  of 
sunshine  oft  break  in  upon  a  storm,  so,  through  all  his  indignation,  there  burst  out 
at  intervals  paternal  love  and  sorrow ;  ’twas  brought  him  that  a  person  of  no  great 
seeming  intreated  admittance ;  a  refusal  was  returned  to  his  bold  request ;  but  the 
stranger,  unawed  by  this  discouragement,  advanced  to  the  king’s  presence ;  his  bold¬ 
ness  had  met  with  an  equal  punishment,  had  he  not  on  the  sudden  assumed  a  majesty 
of  mien  and  feature,  that  threw  a  kind  of  radiance  over  his  peasant  garb,  and  fixt  al1 
who  saw  him  with  silent  wonder  and  admiration. 

Paul.  Well,  but  Polixenes  ? 


GARRICK'S  VERSION 


409 


Gent.  He  stepped  forth  to  the  stranger;  but  ere  he  could  enquire  the  reasons  of 
his  presumption, — behold,  said  Leontes,  bursting  into  grief,  behold  [the  ?]  unhappy 
king,  that  much  hath  wronged  you, — behold  Leontes  ! — On  this  the  king  started  from 
him> — true,  I  have  wronged,  cried  Leontes  ;  but  if  penitence  can  atone  for  guilt,  be¬ 
hold  these  eyes,  wept  dry  with  honest  sorrow ; — this  breast,  rent  with  honest  anguish ; 
and  if  you  can  suspect  that  my  heart  yet  harbours  those  passions  which  once  infested 
it,  I  offer  it  to  your  sword ;  lay  it  open  to  the  day  ! 

Paul.  Oh,  the  force,  the  charm,  of  returning  virtue  ! 

Gent.  Its  charm  was  felt,  indeed,  by  the  generous  king ;  for  at  once  forgetting 
that  fatal  enmity  that  had  so  long  divided  them,  he  embraced  the  penitent  Leontes , 
with  the  unfeigned  warmth  of  one  who  had  found  a  long-lost  friend,  returned  beyond 
hope  from  banishment  or  death ;  while  Leontes ,  overwhelmed  with  such  unlooked- 
for  goodness,  fell  on  his  neck  and  wept ;  thus  they  stood  embracing  and  embraced, 
in  dumb  and  noble  sorrow  !  Their  old  friendship  being  thus  renewed,  Leontes  began 
his  intercession  for  prince  Florizel ;  but  Polixenes — break  we  off — here  comes  the  good 
Camillo ;  speak,  thou  bear’st  thy  tidings  in  thy  looks. 

Enter  Camillo. 

Cam.  Nothing  but  bonfires  ! — the  oracle  is  fulfilled  ! 

O  Paulina,  the  beatings  of  my  heart,  will  scarce 
Permit  my  tongue  to  tell  thee  what  it  bears. 

Paul.  I  know  it  all,  my  friend ;  the  King  of  Sicily  is  arrived. 

Cam.  Not  only  the  King  of  Sicily  is  arrived,  but  his  daughter,  his  long-lost 
daughter,  is  found. 

Paul.  Gracious  God,  support  me  !  his  daughter  found!  can  it  be?  how  was  she 
saved  ?  and  where  has  she  been  concealed  ? 

Cam.  That  shepherdess,  our  prince  has  so  long  and  so  secretly  affected,  proves 
Sicilia's  heiress ;  the  old  shepherd,  her  supposed  father,  delivered  the  manner  how 
he  found  her  on  the  coast,  produced  a  fardel,  in  which  are  incontested  proofs  of  every 
circumstance. 

Paul.  Can  this  be  true  ? 

Cam.  Most  true,  if  ever  truth  were  pregnant  by  circumstance.  [The  dialogue 
here  reverts  to  the  original  at  V,  ii,  32,  which  it  follows  literally,  except,  of  course, 
that  Camillo  takes  the  speeches  of  the  different  gentlemen,  and  all  mention  of  An- 
tigonus  and  the  bear  is  omitted.  At  the  close  Paulina  says  :] 

Camillo,  haste  thee ;  this  royal  assembly  is  entering  now  the  city.  Haste  thee 
with  Paulina's  greeting  to  the  double  majesty,  and  our  new-found  princess;  give 
them  to  know  I  have  in  my  keeping  a  statue  of  Hermione,  performed  by  the  most 
rare  master  in  Italy.  He,  so  near  to  Hermione,  has  done  Ilermione,  that  they  will 
speak  to  her,  and  stand  in  hope  of  answer.  Invite  them  to  the  sight  of  it,  put  thy 
message  into  what  circumstance  of  compliment  the  time  and  sudden  occasion  may 
admit,  and  return  with  best  speed  to  prepare  for  their  unprovided  entertainment. 

[Exit. 

Cam.  I  obey  you,  madam.  [Exeunt  severally. 

[The  scene  which  follows  is  the  latter  part  of  V,  ii,  where  Autolycus  meets  the 
Old  Shepherd  and  Clown  appearing  in  the  blossoms  of  their  fortune.  It  adheres  to 
the  original,  except  that  the  delicate  hint  conveyed  by  the  phrase  ‘  being  gently  con- 
‘  sidered  ’  is  here  amplified  to  an  open  demand  for  a  bribe :] 

Clown.  Thou  wilt  amend  thy  life  ? 


4io 


APPENDIX 


Autol.  Ay,  an’t  like  your  good  worship. 

Clown.  No,  it  does  not  like  my  worship  now ;  but  it  is  like  it  may  like  my  wor¬ 
ship  when  it  is  amended ;  therefore  have  heed  that  thou  dost  amend  it. 

Autol.  I  will,  an’t  like  you. 

Clown.  Give  me  thy  hand;  hast  nothing  in ’t?  am  not  I  a  gentleman?  I  must 
be  gently  considered, — am  not  I  a  courtier?  Seest  thou  not  the  air  of  the  Court  in 
these  enfoldings  ?  Hath  not  my  gait  in  it  the  measure  of  the  Court  ? 

Autol.  Here  is  what  gold  I  have,  Sir,— so,  I  have  bribed  him  with  his  own 

mone>'-  [Aside. 

Clown.  And  when  am  I  to  have  the  other  moiety  ?  and  the  young  man  in  pawn 
till  you  bring  it  me  ? 

Autol.  After  you  have  done  the  business,  Sir. 

Clown.  Well,  I’ll  swear  to  the  prince,  thou  art  as  honest  a  tall  fellow  as  any  in 
Bohemia  [and  so  forth  to  the  end  of  the  scene  as  it  stands  in  the  original.  The  next 
scene  and  last  is  a  combination.  It  opens  with  the  first  twenty-six  lines  of  V,  i,  where 
Cleomenes  remonstrates  with  Leontes  for  the  excessive  indulgence  of  his  grief;  here 
Polixenes  takes  the  speeches  of  Cleomenes ;  then  follow  three  or  four  lines  from  III, 
ii,  where  Paulina  apologises  for  her  freedom  of  speech.  Then  we  revert  to  V,  i,  60- 
65,  and  lastly  settle  down  on  V,  iii,  7  :  ‘  all  my  poor  services,’  etc.  At  line  51,  <  stand- 
*  *ng  1'ke  stone  with  thee,’  a  stage-direction  bids  Leontes  to  ‘  burst  into  tears.’  After 
Perdita  has  said  ‘  I  kneel  and  then  implore  her  blessing,’  Florizel  says  :] 

Rise  not  yet ; 

I  join  me  in  the  same  religious  duty; 

Bow  to  the  shadow  of  that  royal  dame, 

Who,  dying,  gave  my  Perdita  to  life 
And  plead  an  equal  right  to  blessing. 

Leon.  O  master-piece  of  art !  nature’s  deceived 
By  thy  perfection,  and  at  every  look 

My  penitence  is  all  afloat  again.  j-  \yeeps 

Cleom.  My  lord,  your  sorrow  was  too  sore  laid  on 
Which  sixteen  winters  cannot  blow  away 
So  many  summers  dry ;  scarce  any  joy 
Did  ever  so  long  live  ;  no  sorrow, 

But  kill’d  itself  much  sooner. 

Polix.  Dear,  my  brother 
Let  him  that  was  the  cause  of  this,  have  power 
To  take  off  so  much  grief  from  you,  as  he 
Will  piece  upon  himself. 

Perd.  Let  Perdita 

Put  up  her  first  request,  that  her  dear  father 
Have  pity  on  her  father,  nor  let  sorrow 
Second  the  stroke  of  wonder. 

Paul.  Indeed,  my  lord 

If  I  had  thought  the  sight  of  my  poor  image  [and  so  on,  as  in  the  original,  as  far  as 
where  Perdita  says,  line  105,  <  So  long  could  I  stand  by  a  looker-on,’  when  Florizel 
adds :  ‘  So  long  could  I  Admire  her  royal  image  stampt  on  thee,  Heiress  of  all  her 
‘  qualities.’  The  original  is  then  resumed,  and  continues  as  far  as  line  121,  where 
Paulina  says :  *  Strike  all  that  look  on  you  with  marvel !’  and  the  statue  descends. 
Thereupon :] 


GARRICK'S  VERSION 


411 


Leont.  [retiring].  Heavenly  Powers  ! 

Paul,  [to  Leont.].  Start  not ! — her  actions  shall  be  as  holy,  as 
You  hear  my  spell  is  lawful ;  do  not  shun  her, 

Until  you  see  her  die  again,  for  then 
You  kill  her  double ;  nay,  present  your  hand 
When  she  was  young,  you  wooed  her ;  now  in  age 
She  is  become  your  suitor. 

Leont.  Support  me,  Gods  ! 

If  this  be  more  than  visionary  bliss 
My  reason  cannot  hold  ;  my  wife  !  my  queen  ! 

But  speak  to  me,  and  turn  me  wild  with  transport, 

I  cannot  hold  me  longer  from  these  arms ; 

She’s  warm  !  she  lives  ! 

Polix.  She  hangs  about  his  neck  ; 

If  she  pertain  to  life,  let  her  speak  too. 

Perd.  O  Florizel !  [Perdita  leans  on  Florizel’s  bosom. 

Flor.  My  princely  shepherdess  ! 

This  is  too  much  for  hearts  of  thy  soft  mold. 

Leont.  Her  beating  heart  meets  mine,  and  fluttering  owns 
Its  long-lost  half ;  these  tears  that  choke  her  voice 

Are  hot  and  moist, — it  is  Hermione  !  [Embrace. 

Polix.  I’m  turned  myself  to  stone  1  where  has  she  liv’d  ? 

Or  how  so  stolen  from  the  dead  ? 

Paul.  That  she  is  living, 

Were  it  but  told  you,  should  be  hooted  at 
Like  an  old  tale ;  but  it  appears  she  lives, 

Tho’  yet  she  speak  not.  Mark  them  yet  a  little. 

’Tis  past  all  utterance,  almost  past  thought; 

Dumb  eloquence  beyond  the  force  of  words. 

To  break  the  charm, 

Please  you  to  interpose ;  fair  maiden,  kneel, 

And  pray  your  mother’s  blessing ;  turn,  good  lady, 

Our  Perdita  is  found,  and  with  her  found 
A  princely  husband,  whose  instinct  of  royalty, 

From  under  the  low  thatch  where  she  was  bred, 

Took  his  untutor’d  queen. 

Herm.  You  Gods  look  down 
And  from  your  sacred  vials  pour  your  graces 
Upon  their  princely  heads  ! 

Leont.  Hark  !  hark  !  she  speaks — 

O  pipe,  through  sixteen  winters  dumb  !  then  deem’d 
Harsh  as  the  raven’s  note ;  now  musical 
As  nature’s  song,  tun’d  to  th’  according  spheres. 

Herm.  Before  this  swelling  flood  o’erbear  our  reason. 

Let  purer  thoughts,  unmixed  with  earth’s  alloy, 

Flame  up  to  heaven,  and  for  its  mercy  shown 
Bow  we  our  knees  together. 

Leont.  Oh  !  if  penitence 
Have  power  to  cleanse  the  foul  sin-spotted  soul, 


412 


APPENDIX 


Leontes ’  tears  have  washed  away  his  guilt. 

If  thanks  unfeigned  be  all  that  you  require, 

Most  bounteous  Gods,  for  happiness  like  mine, 

Read  in  my  heart,  your  mercy’s  not  in  vain. 

Hertn.  This  firstling  duty  paid,  let  transport  loose 
My  lord,  my  king, — there’s  distance  in  those  names, — 

My  husband ! 

Leont.  O  my  Hermione  ! — have  I  deserved 
That  tender  name  ? 

Herm.  No  more ;  by  all  that’s  past 
Forgot  in  this  enfolding,  and  forgiven. 

Leont.  Thou,  matchless  saint ! — Thou  paragon  of  virtue ! 

Perd.  Oh,  let  me  kneel,  and  kiss  that  honoured  hand. 

Herm.  Thou  Perdita,  my  long-lost  child,  that  fill’st 
My  measure  up  of  bliss — tell  me,  my  own, 

Where  hast  thou  been  preserved  ?  where  lived  ?  how  found 

Bohemia's  court  ?  for  thou  shalt  hear,  that  I 

Knowing,  by  Paulina ,  that  the  oracle 

Gave  hope  thou  wast  in  being,  have  preserved 

Myself  to  see  the  issue. 

Paul.  There’s  time  enough 
For  that,  and  many  matters  more,  of  strange 
Import, — how  the  queen  escap’d  from  Sicily, 

Retired  with  me,  and  vailed  her  from  the  world — 

But  at  this  time  no  more ;  go,  go  together, 

Ye  precious  winners  all,  your  exultation 
Partake  to  every  one ;  I,  an  old  turtle, 

Will  wing  me  to  some  withered  bough,  and  there 
My  mate,  that’s  never  to  be  found  again, 

Lament,  ’till  I  am  lost. 

Leont.  No,  no,  Paulina , 

Live  bless’d  with  blessing  others, — my  Polixenes  !  [ Presenting  Polix.  to  Herm. 

What  ?  look  upon  my  brother ;  both  your  pardons, 

That  e’er  I  put  between  your  holy  looks 
My  ill-suspicion. — Come,  our  good  Camillo, 

Now  pay  the  duty  here, — thy  worth  and  honesty 

Are  richly  noted  and  here  justified 

By  us,  a  pair  of  kings;  and  last,  my  queen, 

Again  I  give  you  this  your  son-in-law, 

And  son  to  this  good  king  by  heaven’s  directing 

Long  troth-plight  to  our  daughter.  [Leon.,  Ilerm.,  and  Polix.  join  their  hands. 

Perd.  I  am  all  shame 
And  ignorance  itself,  how  to  put  on 
This  novel  garment  of  gentility, 

And  yield  a  patch’d  behaviour,  between 
My  country-level,  and  my  present  fortunes, 

That  ill  becomes  this  presence.  I  shall  learn, 

I  trust  I  shall  with  meekness, — but  I  feel, 

(Ah,  happy  that  I  do)  a  love,  an  heart 


GARRICK'S  VERSION 


413 


Unaltered  to  my  prince,  my  Florizel. 

Flor.  Be  still  my  queen  of  May,  my  shepherdess, 

Rule  in  my  heart ;  my  wishes  be  thy  subjects, 

And  harmless  as  thy  sheep. 

Leont.  Now,  good  Paulina , 

Lead  us  from  hence,  where  we  may  leisurely 
Each  one  demand,  and  answer  to  his  part 
Perform’d  in  this  wide  gap  of  time,  since  first 
We  were  dissevered — then  thank  the  righteous  Gods, 

Who,  after  tossing  in  a  perilous  sea, 

Guide  us  to  port,  and  a  kind  beam  display, 

To  gild  the  happy  evening  of  our  day.  [ Exeunt . 

[This  Statue-scene,  with  all  its  tinsel  sentiment,  retained  its  place  in  Mrs  Inch- 
bald’s  British  Drama,  in  Oxberry’s  (1823),  and  in  Cumberland’s  (n.  d.).] 

Garrick’s  success  with  Florizel  and  Perdita  inspired  one,  Charles  Marsh,  to  put 
forth  in  1756,  another  alteration  of  The  Winter's  Tale.  The  ambition  which  fired 
Marsh  (of  whom,  by  the  way,  Allibone  records  no  other  fact  than  that  he  wrote  this 
alteration  and  another  of  Cymbeline)  may  be  gathered  from  his  title  page,  which  bears 
the  following : — 

‘  Think’st  thou,  the  Swan  of  Avon  spreads  her  Wings, 

Her  brooding  Wings,  for  thee  alone  to  plume, 

And  nestle  there,  O  Garrick  ? — Thou  deserv’st 
Indeed,  much  cherishing :  thy  Melody 
Charms  ev’ry  Ear.  But  sure,  it  ill  beseems 
One  Cygnet,  thus  to  stretch  its  little  Pinions, 

Ambitiously  intent,  to  fill  that  Nest, 

Whose  roomy  Limits  well  may  shelter  Numbers.’ 

Marsh’s  chiefest  alteration  consists  in  opening  the  play  at  the  end  of  the  sixteen 
years  during  which  Hermione  has  been  imprisoned,  without  a  trial ;  nor  would  that 
trial  even  now  be  granted  to  her  wjre  it  not  that  life  in  Sicily  has  become  rather 
precarious,  certainly  uncomfortable,  owing  to  the  fact  that  ‘  volcanoes  ’  ‘  fraught  with 
‘  raging  fires  ’  ‘  issue  from  the  mouth  of  thund’ring  '/Etna  ’  and  ‘  tear  up  seated  rocks,’ 
while  ‘  large  Flakes  of  Embers  involve  in  pitchy  Clouds  the  dusky  Air !’  The  infer¬ 
ence  to  be  drawn  from  these  portents  is  clear  to  the  most  clouded  intellect  that  the 
gods  are  angry  because  of  Hermione’s  prolonged  imprisonment ;  and  that  of  course 
she  must  be  brought  to  instant  trial.  Leontes’  jealousy  is  set  forth  by  an  aged  cour¬ 
tier  with  a  remarkable  memory,  as  an  event  which  happened  in  his  youth.  The  rest 
of  the  play  is  a  gallimaufry  of  the  original,  and  as  it  was  never  acted,  as  far  as  I 
can  make  out,  I  think  we  can  dismiss  it  without  lasting  regret  or  more  space. 


414 


APPENDIX 


SCENERY  AND  COSTUME 

In  1856,  Charles  Kean  brought  out,  in  London,  a  noteworthy  reproduction  of 
The  Winter's  Tale.  Possibly,  no  play  of  Shakespeare  has  been  ever  acted  with 
more  scrupulous  fidelity  to  the  text  (even  emendations  from  Collier’s  MS,  when 
adopted,  were  carefully  noted)  or  with  more  laborious  zeal  in  representing  ancient 
classical  costumes  and  customs,  even  the  flowers  painted  on  the  scenes  were  copies 
of  Athenian  plants, — apparently  realism  could  no  further  go.  In  the  libretto  pre¬ 
pared  for  the  occasion,  at  the  end  of  each  Act  there  are  Notes,  compiled  from  the 
best  authorities,  concerning  Grecian  life  in  all  its  phases,  its  music,  its  dancing,  its 
musical  and  warlike  instruments,  its  religion,  its  festivals,  its  architecture,  its  theatres, 
etc.  etc.  From  the  Preface ,  written  by  Charles  Kean,  himself,  are  taken  the 
following  extracts: — 

*  It  is  evident  that  when  an  attempt  is  made  to  combine  truth  with  history,  conflict¬ 
ing  epochs  cannot  all  be  illustrated;  and  I  have  therefore  thought  it  permissible  to 
select  a  period  which,  while  it  accords  with  the  spirit  of  the  play,  may  be  consid¬ 
ered  the  most  interesting,  as  well  as  the  most  instructive.  The  pivot  on  which  the 
story  revolves  is,  in  fact,  the  decision  pronounced  by  the  Oracle  of  Delphi ;  and  tak¬ 
ing  this  incident  as  the  corner-stone  of  the  whole  fabric,  I  have  adopted  a  period 
when  Syracuse,  according  to  Thucydides,  had,  from  a  mere  Doric  colony,  increased 
in  magnificence  to  a  position  in  no  way  inferior  to  that  of  Athens  herself  when  at  the 
summit  of  her  political  prosperity.  An  opportunity  is  thus  afforded  of  reproducing  a 
classical  era,  and  placing  before  the  eyes  of  the  spectator,  tableaux  vivants  of  the 
private  and  public  life  of  the  ancient  Greeks,  at  a  time  when  the  arts  flourished  to  a 
perfection,  the  scattered  vestiges  of  which  still  delight  and  instruct  the  world.  As¬ 
suming  that  the  civilization  of  Athens  was  reflected  by  Syracuse,  I  feel  that  no  period 
could  have  been  selected  more  interesting  and  suggestive,  or  more  likely  to  give  addi¬ 
tional  zest  to  those  who  wish  to  contemplate  the  manners  and  habits  of  a  country  once 
“  the  centre  of  ancient  civilisation  and  the  fruitful  mother  of  so  many  sons,”  but  which 
can  now,  alas !  boast  of  nothing  beyond  its  history  and  its  ruins. 

‘  To  connect  the  country  knows  as  “  Bohemia”  with  an  age  so  remote,  would  be 
impossible ;  I  have  therefore  followed  the  suggestion  of  Sir  Thomas  Hanmer,  by  the 
substitution  of  Bithyma.  The  difference  of  name  in  no  way  affects  the  incidents 
or  metre  of  the  play,  while  it  enables  me  to  represent  the  costume  of  the  inhabit¬ 
ants  of  Asia  Minor  at  a  corresponding  period,  associated  so  intimately  with  Greece, 
and  acquiring  additional  interest  from  close  proximity  to  the  Homeric  kingdom  of 
Troy. 

‘  The  Phrygian  dress  presents  a  marked  distinction  between  the  two  races  that  con¬ 
stitute  the  chief  actors  in  the  drama,  while  at  the  same  time  scope  is  afforded  for  the 
introduction  of  customs  common  to  both.  A  leading  instance  is  furnished  in  the  pas¬ 
toral  scene  of  the  Fourth  Act,  where  the  festivities  applicable  to  the  season  of  sheep¬ 
shearing  take  place,  and  in  which  Shakespeare  brings  in,  for  the  purpose  of  a  dance, 
twelve  rustics,  “  who  have  made  themselves  all  men  of  hair,  and  called  themselves 
“  Satyrs.”  I  have  here  ventured  to  introduce  one  of  those  festivals  in  honour  of 
Bacchus,  known  under  the  title  of  Dionysia,  wherein  similar  disguises  were  used, 
while  the  actors  indulged  in  mad  enthusiasm  and  extravagant  merriment. 

*  ^or  *'le  purpose  of  presenting  with  closer  accuracy  the  domestic  manners  of  the 
period,  Leontes  and  his  Queen  Hermione,  together  with  their  Kingly  guest,  are  first 
discovered,  towards  the  termination  of  a  Feast,  on  the  evening  before  the  intended 


SCENERY  AND  COSTUME 


415 


departure  of  Polixenes.  As  dancing  and  music  invariably  formed  a  portion  of  such 
entertainments,  a  representation  of  the  celebrated  Pyrrhic  Dance ,  so  popular  through¬ 
out  the  principal  states  of  Greece  for  its  martial  character,  has  been  attempted. 

‘  Later  in  the  play,  Time,  as  Chorus,  has  been  restored,  in  accordance  with  the 
poet’s  conception.  .  .  .  To  carry  out  the  idea,  a  classical  figure,  more  in  accordance 
with  the  character  of  the  play  as  now  represented,  has  been  preferred  to  the  ordinary 
old  man  with  his  scythe  and  hour-glass,  who  was  unknown  in  classic  ages.  Chronos, 
the  ancient  representative  of  Time,  has  been  chosen,  and  I  have  ventured  to  associate 
him  with  an  allegorical  tableau  of  Luna  and  the  Stars  (personified),  sinking  before 
the  Car  of  Phoebus,  which  rises  with  all  its  attributes  of  splendour.  Each  figure  is 
taken  from  an  antique,  or  from  the  works  of  Flaxman. 

*  The  theatre  at  Syracuse  has  been  selected  for  the  ceremony  of  the  trial  of  Her- 
mione,  as  it  is  known  that  in  Greece  such  edifices  were  frequently  used  for  legislative 
or  judicial  proceedings,  and  an  opportunity  is  thus  afforded  for  the  introduction  of  a 
scenic  display,  equally  novel  and  interesting. 

‘  To  give  completeness  to  the  whole,  an  endeavour  has  been  made  to  assimilate  the 
music  to  the  action.  As  all  writers  on  the  subject  afford  but  meagre  information,  the 
difficulty  here  becomes  very  great ;  nevertheless,  using  such  authorities  as  we  possess, 
including  the  Hymn  to  Apollo,  which  many  consider  genuine  Greek,  and  the  descrip¬ 
tions  given  by  Dr  Burney  and  other  eminent  Professors,  Mr  J.  L.  Hatton  has  com¬ 
posed  the  overture,  entre-actes,  and  incidental  airs,  with  the  exception  of  the  Hymn, 
which  is  played  at  the  opening  of  the  Second  Scene  of  the  First  Act,  during  the 
progress  of  the  Banquet.  .  .  .  Although  spectacular  effects  have  been  introduced,  it  has 
only  been  where  such  are  in  accordance  with  the  subject  and  incidents  of  the  play.  .  .  . 
The  combination  may  be  considered  less  an  exhibition  of  pageantry  appealing  to  the 
eye,  than  an  illustration  of  history  addressed  to  the  understanding.’ 

[The  following  are  the  Costumes  : — ] 

Leontes  (First  Dress). — From  a  Figure  of  the  Lycian  King,  Jobates,  on  a 
Vase  in  the  Hamilton  Collection.  Engraved  in  Tischbein’s  Hamilton  Vases, 
i,  pi.  I. 

Leontes  (Second  Dress). — The  black  Himation,  or  Mantle,  was  the  peculiar 
sign  of  mourning  among  the  Greeks  of  the  most  refined  period. 

Antjgonus  (First  Dress). — From  a  Figure  of  Priam,  on  a  Vase  in  the  Museum 
of  the  Vatican.  Museum  Gregorianum,  ii,  tav.  60. 

Camillo  (Second  Dress). — From  Figure  of  a  Paedagogos,  on  a  Vase  belonging 
to  the  Due  de  Blacas,  Paris.  Panofka,  Mus6e  Blacas,  pi.  7. 

Autolycus  (First  Dress). — Wears  the  felt  cap,  still  used  in  Asia  Minor. 

“  (Second  Dress). — Hamilton  Vases,  i,  pi.  43. 

“  (Third  Dress). — From  a  Vase,  engraved  in  Gerhard’s  Auserlesene 
Vasenbilder,  taf.  166. 

Cleomenes  and  Dion. — From  Figures  of  the  Dioscuri  consulting  the  Oracle  at 
Delphi.  Engraved  in  Gerhard’s  Denkmalcr  und  Forschungen,  taf.  59. 

First  Attendant. — From  a  Figure  published  as  Ulysses,  by  Millin,  Peintures 
de  Vases  Antiques,  i,  pi.  14. 

Second  Attendant. — From  a  Figure  on  a  Vase  in  the  British  Museum,  repre¬ 
senting  the  story  of  Pelops  and  Hippodamia. 

Second  Lord. — From  a  Figure  of  Castor  on  the  celebrated  Vase,  painted  by 
Meidias,  in  the  British  Museum. 

Polixenes  (First  Dress). — From  a  Figure  on  a  large  Vase  at  Naples,  repre- 


416 


APPENDIX 


senting  a  company  of  tragedians  at  full  dress  rehearsal.  Monumenti  inediti 
deW  Instituto  di  Roma.  Atlas,  iii,  tav.  31. 

The  Tiara  from  a  Figure  of  Minos  on  a  Vase  in  Munich.  Millin,  Tombeaux 
de  Canosa,  pi.  7. 

Polixenes  (Second  Dress). — From  a  Figure  of  Castor  on  a  large  Vase  at  Naples, 
belonging  to  M.  Jatta,  representing  the  Dioscuri  with  Talos. 

Mariner. — From  a  Figure  of  Charon  wearing  the  Exomis,  a  one-sleeved  dress, 
on  an  Athenian  Lecythus  Vase,  found  at  Athens.  Engraved  in  Stackelberg, 
Graber  der  Hellenen ,  pi.  47. 

Old  Shepherd  wears  the  Bardocucullus,  a  Hood  seen  in  statues  of  Telesphorus, 
the  same  as  the  Capote  of  the  modern  Greeks. 

The  Clown  wears  the  thick  casing  still  used  by  the  Shepherds  of  Asia  Minor. 

Heralds,  Squires,  and  Officers  of  the  Court. — From  a  Vase  in  the  Louvre, 
representing  the  departure  of  Achilles  and  Patroclus,  and  the  combat  between 
Achilles  and  Telephus.  Millingen,  Unedited  Monuments,  and  Hope’s  Cos¬ 
tumes,  pi.  81. 

The  Elders  of  the  Council. — Paintings  in  Tischbein’s  Hamilton  Vases,  pis. 
3,  20,  and  54.  And  Gerhard’s  Vases  et  Coupes,  taf.  23  and  24. 

Guards. — From  a  Vase  in  the  Brit  Mus.,  representing  the  departure  of  Lycaon. 
Engraved  by  G.  Scharf  in  Smith’s  Smaller  Diet,  of  Ant.,  s.  v.  Arma. 

Officers. — From  a  Vase  at  Naples,  representing  the  Fall  of  Troy.  Afuseo 
Borbonico,  xiv,  tav.  41. 

Mamillius. — From  a  Vase  in  the  Collection  of  Mr  Rogers.  The  Toy  from  an 
actual  Greek  one  in  terra  cotta,  preserved  in  the  Brit.  Mus. 

Trumpeters. — With  the  Laseion,  or  curtained  shield,  from  Vases  in  the  Brit. 
Mus.  Nos.  756,  757,  and  873. 

Men  with  Skins  over  their  Heads,  from  an  Ancient  Cameo.  Tassie’s  Gems, 
No.  4867. 

Attendants  on  Polixenes. — From  a  painted  Vase,  representing  King  Midas 
with  his  Attendants. — Atlas  of  the  Monumenti  dell'  Instituto  di  Roma,  i,  pi. 
50,  and  a  Vase  at  Rome. — Gerhard’s  Auserlesene  Vasenbilder,  taf.  166. 

The  Butler,  or  Symposiarch. — From  a  Vase  at  Berlin.  Gerhard’s  Vases  et 
Coupes,  taf.  20. 

Musicians. — From  the  Frieze  of  the  Parthenon. — Pompeian  Paintings.  The 
walls  of  a  tomb  in  the  Necropolis  at  Tarquinii,  and  painted  Vases  in  the 
Brit.  Mus. 

Florizel  and  Bithynian  Shepherds. — Adapted  from  the  dress  of  the  beau¬ 
tiful  Phrygian  youth,  Atys.  Zoega’s  Bassi-rilievi,  tav.  13 ;  and  Hope’s  Cos¬ 
tumes,  pi.  19. 

Florizel. — From  a  Figure  of  Paris  on  a  Vase  found  at  Ruvo,  now  in  the 
Carlsruhe  Collection.  Gerhard’s  Vases  Apuliens,  taf.  D. 

Time  was  personified  by  the  Greeks  under  the  name  Chronos,  a  later  version  of 
Kronos,  and  under  that  of  sEvum.  The  one  was  represented  in  Ancient  Art, 
with  the  head  veiled  and  holding  the  Falx,  or  pruning  hook ;  the  other  of 
terrible  aspect,  with  key  and  sceptre.  Both  Figures  were  provided  with 
wings.  Vide  Pompeian  painting,  Museo  Borbonico,  ix,  tav.  26 ;  The  Apo¬ 
theosis  of  Homer  in  the  Brit.  Mus. ;  and  a  sculpture  in  the  Villa  Albani,  at 
Rome,  engraved  in  Zoega’s  Bassi-rilievi,  tav.  59. 

The  Group  of  Silene,  the  Moon,  sinking  into  the  Ocean,  and  the  Stars  setting, 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK 


417 


is  composed  from  Greek  Bas-reliefs  relating  to  Endymion ;  from  paintings 
found  in  Tombs  at  Canosa,  and  a  beautiful  Vase  Painting  in  the  Mus£e 
Blacas,  at  Paris. 

The  Rising  Phcebus. — From  the  centre  of  the  Shield  of  Achilles,  by  Flax- 
man,  and  a  Vase  in  the  Imperial  Collection  of  Vienna,  engraved  in  Gerhard’s 
A rchaologische  Zeitung ,  No,  20. 

Hermione. — From  a  Painted  Vase  in  the  Royal  Museum  at  Berlin,  represent¬ 
ing  the  Marriage  of  Hercules  and  Hebe. — Gerhard’s  Vases  Apuliens,  taf.  15. 

Perdita. — From  a  Painted  Vase  at  Naples,  representing  a  Sacrifice  to  Venus. — 
Millingen,  Peintures  Antiques  de  Vases  Grecs,  pi.  41. 

Paulina. — From  a  personage  of  high  rank  on  a  Vase  in  the  Hamilton  Collec¬ 
tion.  Tischbein,  i,  pi.  9. 

Emilia. — From  Vase  Paintings. — Gerhard,  Antike  Bildwerke,  taf.  17,  and 
Tischbein’s  Hamilton  Vases,  i,  pi.  15. 

Satyrs. — From  a  Statue  of  Silenus  in  the  Palazzo  Gentili,  at  Rome. — Gerhard, 
Antike  Bildwerke,  taf.  cv.,  No.  3. 

Swineherds. — From  a  Mosaic  found  in  the  Tablinum  of  the  house  of  the 
Tragic  Poet  at  Pompeii. — Museo  Borbonico,  ii,  tav.  56. 

Rustic  Boys  with  Bells. — From  Bassi-rilievi  in  the  Capitol  and  the  Vatican, 
at  Rome. — Foggini,  Museum  Capitolinum,  iii,  pi.  49;  and  Visconti,  Mus.  Pio 
Clem,  iv,  tav.  20. 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK,  Etc. 

In  this  Edition  the  attempt  is  made  to  give,  in  the  shape  of  Textual  Notes,  on 
the  same  page  with  the  Text,  all  the  Various  Readings  of  The  Winter's  Tale,  from 
the  Second  Folio,  down  to  the  latest  critical  Edition  of  the  play;  then,  as  Commen¬ 
tary,  follow  the  Notes  which  the  Editor  has  thought  worthy  of  insertion,  not  only 
for  the  purpose  of  elucidating  the  text,  but  at  times  as  illustrations  of  the  History  of 
Shakespearian  criticism.  In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  discussions  of  subjects, 
which  on  the  score  of  length  could  not  be  conveniently  included  in  the  Commentary. 


LIST  OF  EDITIONS  COLLATED  IN  THE  TEXTUAL  NOTES. 


The  Second  Folio 

..  ..  [F]  ..  .. 

.  .  1632 

The  Third  Folio 

.  .  .  .  [F,]  .  . 

.  .  .  .  1664 

The  Fourth  Folio 

•  •  •  •  [FJ  •  • 

.  .  1685 

N.  Rowe  (First  Edition).  . 

.  .  .  .  [Rowe  i] 

.  .  1709 

N.  Rowe  (Second  Edition) 

.  .  .  .  [Rowe  ii]  .  . 

..  1714 

A.  Pope  (First  Edition)  .  . 

.  .  .  .  [Pope  i] 

.  .  1723 

A.  Pope  (Second  Edition)  .  . 

.  .  .  .  [Pope  ii]  .  . 

.  .  1728 

L.  Theobald  (First  Edition)  .  . 

.  .  .  .  [Theob.  i] 

•  •  1733 

L.  Theobald  (Second  Edition) 

.  .  .  .  [Theob.  ii]  .  . 

.  .  1740 

Sir  T.  Hanmer . 

.  .  [Han.] 

.  .  1744 

W.  Warburton . 

.  .  [Warb.] 

. .  1747 

Dr  Johnson  . 

.  .  .  .  [Tohns.] 

.  .  1765 

E.  Capell . 

..  ..  [Cap.] 

(?)  1765 

27 


4 1 8 


APPENDIX 


Johnson  and  Steevens 
Johnson  and  Steevens 
Johnson  and  Steevens 
J.  Rann  .  . 

E.  Malone 
Geo.  Steevens  .  . 

Reed’s  Steevens 
Reed’s  Steevens 
Boswell’s  Malone 
C.  Knight 

J.  P.  Collier  (First  Edition) 

J.  O.  Halliwell  (Folio  Edition) 

S.  W.  Singer  (Second  Edition) 

A.  Dyce  (First  Edition).  .  .  . 

H,  Staunton  . 

J.  P.  Collier  (Second  Edition) 

R.  G.  White  (First  Edition)  .  . 

Cambridge  Edition  (W.  G.  Clark  and  W.  A. 

Wright) 

T.  Keightley  .  . 

Charles  and  Mary  Cowden-Clarke 
A.  Dyce  (Second  Edition) 

A.  Dyce  (Third  Edition) 

J.  P.  Collier  (Third  Edition)  .  . 

H.  N.  Hudson . 

Dr  W.  J.  Rolfe . 

R.  G.  White  (Second  Edition) .  . 

K.  Deighton . 

Cambridge  (Second  Edition,  W.  A.  Wright) 


W.  Harness  . 

Globe  Edition  (Clark  and  Wright) 

N.  Delius  (New  Edition) 

Rev.  John  Hunter  (Longman’s  Series) 
F.  A.  Marshall  {Henry  Irving  Edition ) 


[Var.  ’73] 

.  . 

•  •  1773 

[Var.  ’78] 

.  . 

•  •  1778 

[Var.  ’85] 

.  . 

• •  1785 

[RannJ 

.  . 

•  •  1787 

[Mai.] 

.  . 

.  .  1790 

[Steev.] 

.  . 

•  •  1793 

[Var.  ’03] 

.  . 

.  .  1803 

[Var.  ’13] 

.  .  .  . 

.  .  1813 

[Var.] 

.  .  .  . 

.  .  1821 

[Knt.] 

.  . 

(?)  1840 

[Coll,  i] 

.  . 

.  .  1842 

[Hal.] 

.  . 

.  .  1856 

[Sing,  ii] 

.  . 

.  .  1856 

[Dyce  i] 

•  • 

.  .  1857 

[Sta.] 

.  .  •  • 

•  •  1857 

[Coll,  ii] 

.  . 

..  1858 

[Wh.  i] 

.  . 

.  .  1858 

[Cam.] 

..  .. 

.  .  1863 

[Ktly] 

.  . 

.  .  1864 

[Cla.] 

•  • 

(?)  1864 

[Dyce  ii] 

•  •  .  . 

.  .  1866 

[Dyce  iii] 

•  •  •  . 

.  .  1875 

[Coll,  iii] 

.  •  .  . 

..  1877 

[Pluds.] 

•  •  •  • 

.  .  1880 

[Rife] 

•  •  •  • 

.  .  1880 

[Wh.  ii] 

•  •  •  • 

.  .  1883 

[Dtn] 

•  • 

.  .  1889 

[Cam.  ii] 

.  . 

.  .  1891 

[Glo.] 

.  . 

. .  1864 

[Del.] 

.  . 

.  .  1869 

.  . 

•  • 

.  .  1872 

.  .  1890 

The  last  five  editions  I  have  not  collated  beyond  referring  to  them  in  disputed 
passages.  The  text  of  Shakespeare  has  become,  within  the  last  twenty-five  years,  so 
settled  that  to  collate,  word  for  word,  editions  which  have  appeared  within  these 
years,  would  be  a  work  of  supererogation.  The  case  is  different  where  an  editor 
revises  his  text  and  notes  in  a  second  or  a  third  edition ;  it  is  then  interesting  to  mark 
the  effect  of  maturer  judgement. 

The  Text  is  that  of  the  First  Folio  of  1623.  Every  word,  I  might  say  almost 
every  letter,  has  been  collated  with  the  original. 

,  ,In  tbe  Textual  Notes  the  symbol  Ff  indicates  the  agreement  of  the  Second 
Third.  and  Fourth  Folios. 

I  have  not  called  attention  to  every  little  misprint  in  the  Folio.  The  Textual 
Notes  will  show,  if  need  be,  that  they  are  misprints  by  the  agreement  of  all  the 
Rditors  in  their  correction. 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK  419 

Nor  is  notice  taken  of  the  first  Editor  who  adopted  the  modern  spelling,  or  who 
substituted  commas  for  parentheses,  or  changed  ?  to  !. 

The  sign  +  indicates  the  agreement  of  Rowe,  Pope,  Theobald,  Hanmer,  War- 
burton,  and  Johnson. 

When  Warburton  precedes  Hanmer  in  the  Textual  Notes,  it  indicates  that 
Hanmer  has  followed  a  suggestion  of  Warburton’s. 

The  words  et  cet.  after  any  reading  indicate  that  it  is  the  reading  of  all  other 
editions. 

The  words  et  seq.  indicate  the  agreement  of  all  subsequent  editions. 

The  abbreviation  (subs.)  indicates  that  the  reading  is  substantially  given,  and  that 
immaterial  variations  in  spelling,  punctuation,  or  stage-directions  are  disregarded. 

An  Emendation  or  Conjecture  given  in  the  Commentary  is  not  repeated  in  the 
Textual  Notes,  unless  it  has  been  adopted  by  an  Editor  in  his  Text;  nor  is  conj. 
added  in  the  Textual  Notes  to  the  name  of  the  proposer  of  the  conjecture  unless  the 
conjecture  happens  to  be  that  of  an  Editor,  in  which  case  its  omission  would  lead  to 
the  inference  that  such  was  the  reading  of  his  text. 

Coll.  (MS)  refers  to  Collier’s  copy  of  the  Second  Folio  bearing  in  its  margin 
Manuscript  annotations  by  an  unknown  hand. 

In  citations  from  plays,  other  than  The  Winter’s  Tale,  the  Acts,  Scenes,  and  Lines 
of  The  Globe  Edition  are  followed,  unless  otherwise  stated. 


LIST  OF  BOOKS  FROM  WHICH  CITATIONS  HAVE  BEEN  MADE. 

To  economise  space  in  the  Commentary  I  have  frequently  cited,  with  the  name  of 
an  author,  an  abbreviated  title  of  his  work,  and  sometimes  not  even  as  much  as  that. 
In  the  following  List,  arranged  alphabetically,  enough  of  the  full  title  is  given  to 
serve  as  a  reference. 

Be  it  understood  that  this  List  gives  only  those  books  in  my  own  Library  where¬ 
from  Notes  have  been  taken  at  first  hand  ;  it  does  not  include  books  which  have  been 
consulted  or  have  been  used  in  verifying  quotations.  Were  these  included  the  List 
would  be  many  times  as  long. 


E.  A.  Abbott  :  Shakespearian  Grammar . 

C.  Badham:  ( Cambridge  Essays,  p.  261) . 

W.  Bagehot  :  Literary  Studies 

S.  Bailey  :  The  Received  Text  of  Shakespeare  .  . 

C.  Bathurst:  Remarks  on  the  Differences  of  Shakespeare's 
Versification,  etc. 

Batman  vppon  Bartholome,  his  Booke  De  Proprietatibus  Rerum 

T.  S.  Baynes  :  Shakespeare  Studies 

S.  Beisly  :  Shakspere's  Garden . 

Boaden  :  Life  of  J.  P.  Kemble . 

Brand:  Popular  Antiquities ,  etc.  (Bohn’s  ed.)  .  . 

Georg  Brandes  :  William  Shakespeare . 

J.  C.  Bucknill  :  The  Medical  Knowledge  of  Shakespeare 
J.  Bulloch  :  Studies  of  the  Text  of  Shakespeare 
H.  Bulthaupt  :  Dramaturgic  der  Classiker  (2te  Aufl.) 


London,  1870 
London,  1856 
London,  1895 
London,  1862 

London,  1857 
London,  1582 
London,  1896 
London,  1864 
London,  1825 
London,  1873 
Munchen,  1896 
London,  i860 
London,  1878 
Oldenburg,  1884 


420 


APPENDIX 


Burton  :  The  Anatomy  of  Melancholy  (sixt  edition)  .  . 

T.  Campbell  :  Dramatic  Works  of  Shakespeare  .  . 

“  Life  of  Mrs  Siddons 

Lord  Campbell  :  Shakespeare' s  Legal  Acquirements  .. 

E.  Capell  :  Notes,  etc . 

J.  Caro  ;  ( Engliscke  Studien,  Bd.  II.  hft.  i) 

R.  Cartwright  :  New  Readings  in  Shakspere  .  . 

G.  Chalmers  :  Supplemental  Apology  for  the  Believers  in  the 

Shakespeare  Papers ,  etc. 

R.  Chambers  :  Book  of  Days  . 

W.  Chappell:  Popular  Music  of  the  Olden  Time 

S.  T.  Coleridge:  Notes  and  Lectures 
Hartley  Coleridge  :  Essays  and  Marginalia  .  . 

J.  P.  Collier  :  New  Particulars,  etc. 

“  Reasons  for  a  New  Edition  of  Shakespeare  .  . 

“  Seven  Lectures  of  Coleridge,  etc. .  . 

H.  Corson  :  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Shakespeare 

CotgrAve  :  Dictionarie  of  the  French  and  English  Tongue  .  . 
The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  The  Shakespeare  Key . 

G.  L.  Craik  :  The  English  of  Shakespeare 

John  Croft  :  Annotations  on  the  Plays  of  Shakespear  .  . 

E.  S.  Dallas  :  The  Gay  Science  .  . 

P.  A.  Daniel:  Notes  and  Emendations  .  . 

C.  K.  Davis  :  The  Law  in  Shakespeare  .  . 

N.  Delius  :  Die  Prosa  in  Shakespeare' s  Dramen  (Jahrbuch,  v) 

F.  Douce  :  Illustrations  of  Shakespeare,  etc. 

N.  Drake:  Shakespeare  and  his  Times  .  . 

Drayton  :  Works . . 

A.  Dyce:  Remarks  on  Collier's  and  Knight's  editions  .  . 

A  Pew  Notes  on  Shakespeare  .  . 

“  .  Strictures  on  Mr.  Collier's  New  Edition 

T.  F.  T.  Dyer:  Folk-lore  of  Shakespeare  (Reprint) 

J.  Earle:  Philology  of  the  English  Tongue  . 

J.  Eastwood  and  W.  A.  Wright:  The  Bible  Word-Book  .  . 
T.  Edwards  :  Canons  of  Criticism 

H.  N.  Eli.Acombe  :  Plant  Lore  and  Garden  Craft  of  Shake¬ 

speare 

A.  J.  Ellis:  Early  English  Prommciation  (E.  E.  T.  Soc.)  .  . 
Sir  Thomas  Elyot:  The  Poke  named  The  Gouemour  (ed. 
H.  H.  S.  Croft  from  ed.  1531)  . 

K.  Elze  :  Essays  on  Shakespeare  (trans.  by  L.  Dora  Schmitz)  .  . 
R.  Farmer  :  Essay  on  the  Learning  of  Shakespeare  .  . 

F.  J.  Fleay  :  Life  and  Work  of  Shakespeare 

“  History  of  the  Stage,  1559-1642 . . 

Biographical  Chronicle  of  the  English  Drama  .  . 

John  Florio  :  A  Worlde  of  Wordes  . 

R.  Forby  :  Vocabulary  of  East  Anglia . 

F.  J.  Furnivall:  Introduction  to  the  Leopold  Shakspere 
David  Garrick  :  Dramatic  Works 


Oxford,  1651 
London,  1838 
London,  1834 
New  York,  1859 
London,  1779 
Heilbronn,  1878 
London,  1866 

London,  1799 
Edinburgh,  1863 
London,  n.  d. 
London,  1849 
London,  1831 
London,  1836 
London,  1842 
London,  1856 
Boston,  1889 
London,  1632 
London,  1879 
London,  1857 
York,  1810 
London,  1866 
London,  1870 
St.  Paul,  1884 
Berlin,  1870 
London,  1807 
London,  1817 
London,  1740 
London,  1844 
London,  1853 
London,  1859 
New  York,  1884 
Oxford,  1879 
London,  1866 
London,  1765 

London,  1878 
London,  1869 

London,  1SS3 
London,  1874 
London,  1767 
London,  1886 
London,  1890 
London,  1891 
London,  1398 
London,  1830 
London,  1877 
London,  1774 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK 


421 


David  Garrick  :  Private  Correspondence 
G.  G.  Gervinus:  Shakespeare  (3te  Afl.)  .  . 

O.  Gildemeister  :  Das  Wintermarchen  .  . 

Charles  Gildon  :  Remarks  on  Shakespear’s  Plays ,  etc. 
(Rowe’s  ed.  vol.  vii) 

Henry  Giles  :  Human  Life  in  Shakespeare 
Arthur  Golding:  The  XV.  Booke  of  P.  Ouidius  Naso 

G.  Gould  :  Corrigenda,  etc. .  . 

H.  Green  :  Shakespeare  and  the  Emblem  Writers 

Z.  Grey  :  Critical,  Historical,  and  Explanatory  Notes  .  . 

A.  B.  Grosart  :  Complete  Works  of  Robert  Greene 
M.  Guizot  :  CEuvres  Completes  de  Shakespeare  .  . 

J.  W.  Hales  :  Notes  and  Essays  on  Shakespeare 
H.  Hallam  :  Literature  of  Europe 

J.  O.  Halliwell:  Dictionary  of  Archaic  and  Provincial 
Words 

W.  Harness  :  Shakespeare' s  Dramatic  Works  .  . 

J.  E.  HARTING  :  Ornithology  of  Shakespeare 
W.  Hazlitt  :  Characters  of  Shakespeare' s  Plays 

B.  Heath  :  Revisal  of  Shakespeare' s  Text 
F.  F.  Heard  :  Shakespeare  as  a  Lawyer  .  . 

J.  N.  Hetherington  :  Shakjere' s  Fools  (Cornhill  Magazine, 
December)  . 

P.  Holland  :  Plinie's  Natural  History  .  . 

Francois- Victor  Hugo  :  CEuvres  Completes  de  Shakespeare  .  . 
Joseph  Hunter  :  New  Lllustrations  of  the  Life,  Studies  and 
Writings  of  Shakespeare 

R.  W.  Huntley  :  Glossary  of  the  Cotswold  Dialect 
J.  Hurdis:  Cursory  Remarks  upon  the  Arrangement  of  the 
Plays  of  Shakespear 

Mrs  Inchbald:  British  Theatre . 

C.  M.  Ingleby  :  Shakespeare  Hermeneutics 

Mrs  Jameson  :  Characteristics  of  Women,  etc.  .  . 

Swynfen  Jervis.:  Dictionary  of  the  Language  of  Shakespeare 
Charles  Kean  :  Winter’s  Tale,  Arranged  for  Representation 
at  the  Princess's  Theatre  sb  April  .  . 

T.  Keightley  :  The  Shakespeare  Expositor 
W.  Kenrick  :  Review  of  Johnson's  Shakespeare 

B.  G.  Kinnear  :  Cruces  Shakespearian a  .  . 

J.  L.  Klein  :  Geschichte  des  Dramas  (vol.  x) 

C.  F.  Koch  :  Historische  Grammatik  der  Englischen  Sprache .  . 

F.  Kreyssig:  Vorlesungen  ueber  Shakespeare  .  . 

Mrs  Lennox  :  Shakespear  Lllustrated 

G.  E.  Lessing:  Selected  Prose  Works  (Trans  by  E.  C.  Beasley 

and  Helen  Zimmern) . 

W.  N.  Lettsom  :  New  Readings  in  Shakespeare  (Blackwood’s 

Magazine,  August)  . 

Louis  Lewes  :  Shakespeare' s  Erauengestalten 

E.  V.  Lippmann  :  Die  Kuste  von  Bohmen  (Jahrbuch,  xxvii)  .  . 


London,  1831 
Leipsic,  1862 
Leipsic,  1870 

London,  1710 
Boston,  1868 
London,  1567 
London,  1884 
London,  1870 
London,  1754 
London,  1881-86 
Paris,  1868 
London,  1884 
London,  1839 

London,  1868 
London, 1830 
London,  1871 
London,  1817 
London,  1765 
Boston,  1883 

1879 
London,  1635 
Paris,  1868 

London,  1845 
London,  1868 

London,  1792 
London,  1822 
London,  1875 
London,  1833 
London, 1858 

London,  1856 
London,  1867 
London,  1765 
London,  1883 
Berlin,  1866 
Weimar,  1863 
Berlin,  1862 
London,  1753 

London,  1879 

1853 

Stuttgart,  1893 
Berlin,  1892 


422 


APPENDIX 


H.  Littledale  :  The  Two  Noble  Kinsmen  ( New  Sh.  Socl)  .  . 
W.  W.  Lloyd  :  ( Singer's  Second  Edition) 

F.  Lueders  :  Prolog  und  Epilog  bei  Shakespeare  (Jahrbuch,  v) 
H.  Lyte  :  A  Nievve  Herball 

G.  MacDonald:  Orts,  London,  1882  (Reprinted  as  The 

Imagination) 

C.  MackAY  :  Glossary  of  Obscure  Words  in  Shakespeare,  etc.  .  . 
Charles  Marsh  :  The  Winter's  Tale,  alter' d from  Shakespeare 
Lady  Martin  :  On  Some  of  Shakespeare' s  Female  Characters 
J.  MoNck  Mason  :  Comments  on  the  [Var.  1778.] 

Comments  on  Beaumont  and  Fletcher  .  . 

A.  Mezieres  :  Shakespeare,  ses  CEuvres  et  ses  Critiques  .  . 

E.  Montegut  :  CEuvres  Computes  de  Shakespeare 

Fynes  Moryson  :  An  Itinerary . 

Wares  :  Glossary  (ed.  Halliwell  and  Wright) 

Mme.  de  Navarro  :  A  Few  Memories 
J.  Nichols  :  Literary  Illustrations,  etc.  .  . 

B.  Nicholson:  (Shakespeariana,  Feb.)  .  . 

L..  Nottelle  :  Etude  Fantaisiste  sur  Shakespeare 

J.  G.  Orger  :  Critical  Notes  on  Shakespeare' s  Comedies  .  . 

Sir  Thomas  Overburye  :  A  Wife,  etc . 

F.  Peck  :  New  Memoirs  of  Milton  . 

T.  Percy  :  Reliques  of  Ancient  English  Poetry . 

Sir  Philip  Perring:  Hard  Knots  in  Shakespeare  (ed.  ii)  .  . 
J.  O.  Halliwell- Phillipps  :  Outlines  of  the  Life  of  Shake¬ 
speare 

R.  C.  A.  Prior  :  Popular  Names  of  British  Plants,  etc. 

E.  H.  Ranney  :  (Religio- Philosophical  Journal,  30  December) 
J.  Ritson  :  Cursory  Criticism 

“  Remarks,  Critical  and  Illustrative,  etc . 

Clement  Robinson  :  A  Handefull  of  Pleasant  Delites  (Arber’s 

Reprint) .  . 

A.  Roffe  :  A  Musical  Triad  from  Shakespeare  .  . 

W.  L.  Rushton  :  Shakespeare  a  Lawyer .  , 

J.  Ruskin  :  Munera  Pulveris  (Reprint)  .  . 

W.  B.  Rye  :  England  as  Seen  by  Foreigners,  etc. 

J.  Salisbury  :  Glossary  of  S.  E.  Worcestershire,  etc. 

George  Sand  :  Jean  Zyska 

G.  Sarrazin  :  Shakespeare  in  Mantua  ?  (Jahrbuch,  xxix)  .  . 
A.  W.  Schlegel  :  Lectures  (trans.  by  Black) 

Schlegel  and  Tieck  :  Shakspear's  dramatische  Werke 
A.  Schmidt:  Shakespeare- Lexicon  (ed.  ii) 

Das  Wintermarchen,  uebersetzt  von  L.  Tieck. 
Bearbeitet,  eingeleitet  und  erlautert . 

H.  W.  Seager  :  Natural  History  in  Shakespeare's  Time 
W.  W.  Skeat  :  Etymological  Dictionary  .  , 

(  The  Academy,  29  October) 

C.  Roach  Smith  :  The  Rural  Life  of  Shakespeare  .  . 

P.  Stapfer:  Shakespeare  and  Classical  Antiquity 


London,  1876 
London,  1856 
Berlin,  1870 
London,  1578 

Boston,  1883 
London,  1887 
London,  1756 
Edinburgh,  1891 
London,  1785 
London,  1798 
Paris,  1865 
Paris,  1867 
London,  1617 
London,  1867 
New  York,  1896 
London,  1817 
Philadelphia,  1884 
Paris,  1866 
London,  n.  d. 
London,  1627 
London,  1740 
London,  1765 
London,  1886 

London,  1885 
London,  1863 
Chicago,  1893 
London,  1792 
London,  1783 

London,  1584 
London,  1872 
London,  1858 
New  York,  1872 
London,  1865 
London,  1893 
Paris,  1884 
Berlin,  1894 
London,  1815 
Berlin,  1833 
Berlin,  1886 

Berlin,  1870 
London,  1896 
Oxford,  1882 
London,  1887 
London,  1870 
London,  1880 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK 


423 


H.  Staunton  :  ( Athenceum ,  June) 

C.  W.  Stearns  :  Shakespeare  Treasury  .  . 

H.  P.  Stokes  :  Chronological  Order  of  Shakespeare' s  Plays  . 
J.  Strutt  :  Sports  and  Pastimes  .  . 

H.  Sweet  :  First  Middle  English  Primer 

A.  C.  Swinburne  :  A  Study  of  Shakespeare 

Josvah  Sylvester  :  Du  Bartas  his  Weekes  and  Workes 

Alfred  Lord  Tennyson  :  A  Memoir  of . 

L.  Tieck  :  Shakespeare' s  Dram.  Werke.  Uebersetzt  von  A.  W 
von  Schlegel,  erganzt  und  erlautert 
Edward  Topsell:  Histone  of  Foure- Footed  Beastes  .  . 
Thomas  Tusser  :  Five  Hvndred  Points  of  Good  Husbandry  . 
T.  Tyrwhitt  :  Observations  and  Conjectures,  etc.  .  . 

H.  Ulrici:  Shakespeare' s  dramatische  Kunst  .  . 

J.  Upton  :  Critical  Observations  on  Shakespeare  .  . 

W.  S.  Walker  :  Shakespeare' s  Versification 

“  Critical  Examination  of  the  Text  of  Shake 

speare 

Horace  Walpole  :  Historic  Doubts  on  the  Life  of  Richard 
the  Third 

W.  Wagner  and  L.  Proescholdt  :  The  Works  of  Shakspere  . 
A.  W.  Ward  :  History  of  Dramatic  Poetry 
T.  Warton  :  History  of  English  Poetry  .  . 

A.  Way  :  ( Promptorium  Parvulorum )  .  .  .  .  .  .  , 

P.  Whalley  :  Enquiry  into  the  Learning  of  Shakespeare 
R.  G.  White:  Shakespeare' s  Scholar  .  .  .  . 

W.  Whiter:  Specimen  of  a  Commentary  on  Shakespeare 
J.  Wilson  :  Cheerfull  Ayres  .  .  .  .  .... 

J.  R.  Wise:  Shakespeare  :  His  Birthplace,  etc.  .  . 


London,  1874 
New  York,  1882 
London,  1878 
London,  1841 
Oxford,  1884 
London,  1880 
London,  1632 
London,  1897 

Berlin,  1833 
London,  1608 
London,  1614 
London,  1766 
Leipsic,  1847 
London,  1746 
London,  1854 

London,  1859 

London,  1768 
Hamburg,  1882 
London,  1875 
London,  1775 
London,  1865 
London,  1748 
New  York,  1854 
London,  1794 
London,  1660 
London,  1861 


INDEX 


PAGE 

PAGE 

Abide 

176 

At  friend 

272 

Absorption  .  .  .  .  181,  225,  234 

Attraction,  plural  by 

i59 

“  indicated  by  an 

apos- 

Aunts  .  . 

166 

trophe  .  .  71,  194,  242,  244 

253 

Autolycus,  origin  of  name  .  . 

2 

Accented  monosyllables 

96 

“  Criticisms  on  .  . 

369 

Acre,  a  measure  of  length  .  . 

20 

Av  oid  —  depart 

69 

Action  =  an  indictment  .  . 

80 

Adjective  used  as  noun 

42 

Bairn  .  . 

i47 

“  formed  with  -ly  .  . 

258 

Bathurst 

3J7 

Adverb  used  for  a  participle 

273 

Basilisque 

58 

Affection  of  nobleness  =  noble 

affec- 

Bawcock  . 

24 

tion 

280 

Baynes 

359 

Affection  ?  Thy  intention  .  . 

27 

Beard’s  grey . 

no 

Affront 

266 

Beat  and  bait 

i°5 

Aired  .  . 

158 

Becoming 

M3 

Alcestis  of  Euripides 

357 

Bed-rid 

230 

a’  life  .  . 

219 

Best,  in  picture 

247 

All  fashion . 

125 

Best,  the  . 

62 

Alliance,  as  a  plural 

99 

Best,  you  were 

288 

Allowing 

37 

Betwixt 

243 

Along  . 

287 

Bide  upon  it  =  abiding  opinion 

44 

Already,  methinks  .  . 

294 

Blackstone,  Sir  William 

3” 

Altering  rheums 

229 

Blackwood’s  Maga.  on  Hermione .  . 

362 

Amber 

214 

Blank,  in  Archery  .  . 

97 

Ancientry 

146 

Blemish,  contracted  in  pronuncia- 

Anderson,  Mary,  her  acting 

395 

tion.  . 

54 

Angle 

161 

Blench 

54 

Another 

207 

Block  .  . 

42 

Ape-bearer  .  . 

176 

Blood  look  out 

205 

Apostrophe,  indicating  Absorption 

7i 

Boaden,  on  Mrs  Siddons  .  . 

389 

Appoint  . 

53 

Boil’d  brains . 

146 

Appointed  him 

61 

Boors  .  . 

288 

Approbation  = proof  .  . 

89 

Bound  up  . 

>83 

Argument 

158 

Bourn  .  . 

26 

Arm,  or  aim  .  . 

97 

Bowget  . 

166 

As  =  as  if 

56,  293 

Brandes,  Criticism  .  . 

376 

“  = for  so  .  . 

297 

Brat  .  . 

105 

A  ‘  so  forth  ’  .  . 

4i 

Break-neck  .  . 

56 

As,  omitted  .  . 

105 

Brows  . 

24 

Aspect,  its  accent 

80 

Buc,  Sir  George 

3i4 

42s 


426 

INDEX 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Bug . 

.  . 

124 

Copy  out  of  mine  .  . 

. .  24 

Bulthaupt,  Criticism  .  . 

.  . 

375 

Costume  . 

•  •  414 

But  abide 

.  . 

176 

Couples,  go  in 

. .  81 

But,  with  the  finite  verb  .  . 

.  . 

88 

Creep .  . 

. .  100 

By  this  good  light  .  . 

.  . 

104 

Crickets 

•  •  73 

Crone . 

.  .  104 

Caddisses 

.  . 

211 

Cry  lost  . 

.  .  60 

Calf  =  term  of  endearment .  . 

25 

Cunningham  .  . 

•  •  3i9 

Callat .  . 

.  . 

105 

Curious 

•  •  239 

Campbell,  Criticism .  . 

355 

Curst . 

.  .  152 

“  on  Mrs  Siddons .  . 

.  . 

39i 

Cypress  . 

Cariere  . 

49 

Carnations 

.  . 

188 

Daffodils 

162,  196 

Caro,  indirect  Source  of  Plot 

.  . 

322 

Daniel,  Time-analysis  .  . 

••  385 

Cases  of  their  eyes  .  . 

.  . 

278 

Damnable,  an  adverb 

•  •  135 

Censure 

.  . 

74 

Dares  . 

•  •  95 

Ceremony,  its  pronunciation 

.  . 

”5 

Date  of  Composition  .  . 

•  •  3°9 

Certain  hazard 

.  . 

131 

Daughter,  rhyming  with  after 

•  •  157 

Chalmers 

•  . 

312 

Dead  —  dread 

•  •  233 

Chamber-councils  .  . 

.  . 

43 

Dear’st  for  dearest  .  . 

135.  185 

Changed  complexion 

57 

Desert  of  Bohemia  .  . 

•  •  139 

Changeling . 

151 

Dibble  . 

.  .  192 

Cheate 

.  . 

168 

Dis-case  . 

•  •  249 

Chetwood’s  Quarto  .  . 

.  . 

3°  7 

Discovery  =  disclosure 

65.  75 

Child  =girl  ,  . 

.  . 

147 

Dispute  =  reason 

•  •  230 

Clamor,  of  hounds  .  . 

.  . 

146 

Distribution  of  speeches, 

“  a  verb 

216 

3D  52,  109,  1 18,  204,  232, 

261,  267 

“  —wailing  .  . 

37 

Doctrine,  a  trisyllable 

•  •  17 

Clap  =  confirm  a  bargain  .  . 

.  . 

21 

Doing  thus . 

.  .  87 

Clipping 

.  . 

281 

Dole  .  . 

•  •  35 

Coleridge,  on  Leontes 

.  . 

366 

Dorastus  and  Fawnia 

•  •  324 

Coleridge,  Hartley  .  . 

.  . 

356 

Double  negatives  strengthening 

ne- 

Collier’s  added  line  .  . 

•  . 

294 

gation 

•  •  45 

Collop 

.  . 

27 

Double  superlatives 

•  •  133 

Comforting . 

.  . 

102 

Doxy  .  . 

. .  163 

Commandment,  pronunciation 

.  . 

75 

Doxy,  derivation 

•  •  223 

Commend 

.  • 

94 

Dryden,  Criticism  .  . 

•  •  379 

Commission  ,  . 

*  . 

30 

Duck . 

•  •  223 

Commit  . 

.  . 

IOI 

Duration  of  Action 

•  •  384 

Complexion,  changed 

.  . 

57 

Compters 

.  • 

169 

E,  suppressed  in  superlatives, 

Conceit  . 

.  . 

4i 

19.  43- 

195, 240 

Confusion  of  final  d  and  e  .  . 

•  . 

231 

Each  your  doing 

. .  201 

Conjure,  accent  of  .  . 

.  . 

60 

Eggs  for  money 

33 

Consideration  =  bribe 

.  . 

258 

Encounter  so  uncurrent  .  . 

. .  121 

Construction  changed  by  change  of 

Ethical  dative 

•  •  *57 

thought 

.  . 

283 

Euripides,  Alcestis  .  . 

•  ■  357 

Contract,  accent  .  .  ... 

231 

Even  =  due,  just 

.  .  118 

INDEX 

427 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Excrement  .  . 

253 

Gentle  =  gentle  one  .  . 

185 

Expedition  be  my  friend  .  . 

66 

Gentleman  born 

287 

External  Evidence  of  Date  : 

Reca- 

Gerundive  use  of  infinitive, 

79,  262 

pitulation  .  . 

320 

Gest  .  . 

13 

Extremes 

180 

Gildon,  on  Source  of  Plot  .  , 

321 

Eye-glass 

46 

Giles,  on  Autolycus  .  . 

360 

Eyes  over 

250 

Gillivors 

189,  191 

Give  us  the  lie 

254 

Fact  .  .  . 

124 

Glass  =  hour-glass  .  . 

50 

Fadings 

208 

Glib . 

87 

Fail  =  failure 

hi 

Gloves,  perfumed  .  . 

214 

Fancy 

237 

Go  in  couples 

8i 

Fann’d  snow 

227 

Good  deed 

14 

Far,  as  a  comparative  .  . 

233 

Good  expedition  be  my  friend 

66 

Far-off  guilty 

79 

Good  Master 

290 

Fashion,  women  of  all 

125 

Good  night  = farewell  for  ever 

60 

Faster 

232 

Good  now 

263 

Favour 

281 

Gossip 

100 

Fear  eyes  over 

250 

Go  to  —go  on 

252 

Federarie 

77 

Grace  to  boot 

18 

Feeding  . 

206 

Grange  . 

222 

Feel  doing  thus 

87 

Greek  names 

1 

Fellow  of  thy  hands  .  . 

289 

Green-sward  .  . 

204 

Fertile  bosom 

22 

Guilty  to  . 

241 

Fertile  the  Isle 

”5 

Gust . 

41 

Fish  .  . 

220 

Fixure 

296 

Hallam 

355 

Flap-dragon’d 

149 

Handed  =  handled  .  . 

226 

Fled,  participial  use  .  . 

90 

Hand-fast 

257 

Flower-de-luce 

198 

Harlot 

97 

Fool,  term  of  affection  .  . 

80 

Having  =  possession  .  . 

254 

Fool,  of  a . 

134 

Hazard,  certain 

131 

Foot-man  and  Footman  .  . 

174 

Hazlitt,  W.  C . 

323 

Forman,  Simon 

3*8 

Heaping  friendship 

159 

For  =  because 

189 

Heedlessness  in  style  .  . 

6 

For  to 

64 

Heft . 

74 

Fourscore,  the 

201 

Hent  .  . 

179 

Franklin 

289 

Herbert,  Sir  Henry  .  . 

3*3 

Free . 

95 

100 

Here,  a  disyllable  .  . 

274 

Function,  no  other  .  . 

201 

Here  with  me 

39 

Furnivall,  Criticism  .  . 

358 

Heretic 

107 

“  on  Autolycus  .  . 

37i 

Hermione 

360 

Future,  for  subjunctive 

109 

a  man’s  name  .  . 

1 

“  its  Greek  meaning 

2 

Gallimaufry  .  . 

224 

“  her  concealment 

268 

Gap . 

209 

Hetherington,  on  Autolycus 

372 

Garrick’s  Version 

399 

Him,  her  =  himself,  herself  etc. 

13 

“  Song  for  Perdita 

404 

Hinge  . 

108 

428 


INDEX 


His  highness .  . 

Honest :  Honourable 
Honour  with  trouble 
Horn-pipes 
How  \~ho  !  ,  . 

How  should  this  grow 
Hoxes 

Hudson,  on  Hermione 
“  on  Leontes 
“  on  Perdita 
Hugo,  Victor,  Cradle  Song 
Hugo,  Frangois-Victor,  Criticism 
Humane  .  .  .  .  119, 

Hurdis 


I  =  Ay 
I’  fecks 

If  you  may  please  .  . 

I’ld . 

I’ll  swear  for  ’em 
Importance 
Imposition  cleared  .  . 

In  =  as  regards 
Incense  =  incite  .  . 
Incertain  lookers-on 
Inchbald,  Mrs 
Incidency 
Indictment  .  . 

Infinitive,  as  gerundive 
Influences 

Ingram,  on  Verse-  Tests 
Inkle  .  . 

Insinuate  =  cajole 
Intelligencing 
Intention  =  intencion 
Internal  Evidence  of  Date 

pitulation . 

Interpolation  of  r  .  . 
Irremoveable,  adverb 
Is  a  ‘  so  forth  ’ 

I’th’  rear  ’our  birth  .  . 

It  own 

Its . 

Ivy 

Jameson,  Mrs,  on  Hermione 
“  on  Paulina  .  . 

Jape . 


•  •  237 

.  .  76 

.  .  291 

.  .  171 

•  •  31 

•  •  65 

•  •  44 

•  •  363 

•  •  367 

•  •  368 
.  .  200 

•  •  378 

131,  264 

•  •  312 

•  •  44 

.  .  24 

.  .  240 

•  •  55 

204,  359 
. .  280 
.  .  18 

. .  261 
.  .  266 

•  •  263 

•  •  354 

.  .  60 

.  .  ii9 
. .  79 

•  •  63 

•  •  3i7 
. .  211 
••  255 

•  •  103 

. .  27 

Reca- 

•  •  320 
8,  33.  104 

•  •  239 

.  .  41 

•  •  244 

.  .  1 1 2 

32,  125 

•  •  147 

•  •  360 

•  •  364 

.  .  209 


PAGE 

Jar  0’  th’  clock 

.  .  14 

Johnson,  Dr,  on  the  Unities 

•  •  380 

Jonson’s  Alchemist  .  . 

•  •  3i5 

“  Induction  to  Bartholomew 

Fair 

•  •  3i5 

Jordan’s  Ballad 

•  •  389 

Julio  Romano 

.  .  284 

July,  accent  .  . 

•  •  35 

Kean,  Charles,  Acting  Copy 

•  •  4i4 

Keep  my  stables 

.  .  81 

Kiln-hole . 

.  .  216 

Kite . 

.  .  166 

Klein . 

•  •  323 

Kreyssig,  Criticism  .  . 

•  •  373 

Lady  Martin,  on  Leontes  .  . 

..  366 

Lady  she  her  lord  .  . 

.  .  14 

Land-damne 

..  84 

Land-service 

•  •  149 

Lavender 

•  •  193 

La-you 

Lennox,  Mrs 

•  •  352 

Level  —  term  in  Archery  .  , 

97.  123 

Lewes,  Criticism 

•  •  376 

Life  to  come 

.  .  168 

Limit  .  . 

. .  126 

Line  added  by  Collier’s  MS 

•  •  294 

Lloyd,  on  the  Alcestis  .  . 

•  •  357 

“  on  Paulina  .  . 

•  •  365 

Lope,  El  Alarmol  de  Felisardo 

•  •  323 

Lording 

•  •  17 

Losing  =  being  lost  .  . 

.  .  282 

Loss . 

II3.  145 

Lost . 

Lovely  =  lonely  ? 

.  .  291 

Lozell 

.  .  107 

Liiders,  on  Alary  Anderson 

•  •  395 

Lunes 

•  •  93 

Maliciously  .  . 

•  •  5i 

Mankind 

•  •  103 

Manner  =  manour  .  . 

•  •  255 

Marigold 

•  •  194 

Marjoram . 

.  .  194 

Marmol  de  Felisardo 

•  •  323 

Marsh,  Charles,  Version  .  . 

•  •  413 

Marted 

.  .  226 

INDEX 


429 


PAGE 

PAGE 

Martin,  Lady,  on  Leontes  .  . 

366 

Oer-dyed 

25 

“  “  as  Hermione 

39i 

Of  a  fool 

*34 

Mean,  in  music 

170 

Offenders  now  appear 

265 

Medal 

5o 

Officed 

36 

Medicinal,  its  accent  .  . 

100 

Of,  used  after  verbs  of  depriving,  etc. 

271 

Medicine  =  physician 

>  • 

245 

Of,  where  on  now  used  .  . 

95 

Men  of  hair . 

223 

Old  man 

*5o 

Mere  —pure 

129 

Omission  of  a  line  in  F2 

99 

Messes 

42, 

180 

“  of  as 

105 

Methinks  already  .  . 

294 

“  of  do  before  not  207,  231,  237 

Methoughts  .  . 

32 

“  of  the  preposition 

235 

Metrical  Tests 

316 

“  of  the  relative 

227 

239 

M6zi6res,  Criticism  .  . 

377 

On  :  those  that  think 

298 

Midwife 

1 10 

Opportune,  accent  .  . 

238 

Mints  .  . 

*93 

Or  ...  or . 

185 

Misprint,  its  vitality 

266 

0,  these  =  o'  these  .  . 

199 

Missingly 

160 

Over  that  art . 

190 

Moe,  with  the  plural  .  .  10 

220, 

K 

CO 

Owe  =  own  .  . 

120 

Monosyllables,  unemphatic  in 

em- 

Oxlips  . 

198 

phatic  places 

62 

“  accented  .  . 

96 

Paddling  . 

22 

Montegut,  Criticism  .  . 

378 

Pantler  . 

186 

Mort’  o’  th’  Deer 

23 

Parasite  . 

35 

Most  marble  .  . 

283 

Partake  —participate 

302 

Motion 

177 

Participle,  used  conditionally 

277 

Music,  of  ‘  Jog  on  ’  .  . 

387 

Participles  without  nouns  .  . 

*3* 

“  of  ‘  Lawn  as  white  ’ 

388 

Partitive  genitive 

212 

Partlet 

103 

Name,  in  the 

*55 

Parts  =  duties 

60 

Name  of  me  .  . 

*73 

Pash  .  . 

25 

Narrative  prose 

278 

Pattern  ...  cut  out  .  . 

228 

de  Navarro,  Mme . 

398 

Paulina 

364 

Neat . 

24 

Peer . 

163 

Neb . 

36 

Perdita  . 

368 

Negatives,  double  .  . 

45 

Perfect 

*39 

New  ship 

257 

Petition 

*37 

Next  =  nearest 

*5* 

Phantom  of  the  living 

142 

Nimble  hand 

25* 

Pheasant  =  present  .  . 

256 

No  more  but  abide  .  . 

176 

Picking  on’s  teeth  .  . 

257 

No  other  function  .  . 

201 

Picture,  best  in 

247 

Note  .  . 

9 

Pin  and  web 

49 

Note  (the  Clown’s)  .  . 

172 

Pinched  thing 

75 

Nothing  =  noting 

248 

Places  =  honours 

66 

“  variable  accent  .  . 

93.  208 

Placket 

216 

Noun  and  infinitive,  a  subject 

or 

Please  ’your  .  . 

**3 

an  object  .  . 

•  . 

136 

Plural  by  attraction  .  . 

'59 

Plural  termination  .  . 

229 

Odds  .  .  .  alike 

.  . 

276 

Points 

21 1 

430 

INDEX 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Poking-sticks  .  . 

.  . 

215 

Sad  —  earnest 

.  .  222 

Pomander 

.  . 

246 

Saffron 

. .  171 

Post  .  . 

125 

Saltiers 

. .  224 

Practise 

.  . 

131 

Savory 

•  •  194 

Prank’d  up  .  . 

... 

180 

Savour  =  smell  1  .  . 

.  .  62 

Prefixes,  dropped 

125 

Schlegel,  Criticism  .  . 

•  •  373 

Pregnant  by  circumstance 

.  . 

280 

Second  .  .  .  five 

.  .  86 

Prerogative  .  . 

.  . 

88 

Seize,  a  legal  term  .  . 

.  .  108 

Present  deeds 

.  . 

202 

Serve  .  . 

•  •  99 

Presently  =  instantly 

95 

Seven  years,  used  indefinitely 

•  •  244 

Pretence 

.  . 

119 

Sh&Ws^  shall  us 

•  •  36 

Primroses 

.  . 

197 

Sheridan’s  Song  for  Perdita 

.  •  405 

Prognostication  .  . 

.  . 

258 

Short  —  shorten 

.  .  232 

Prolepsis 

.  . 

59 

Should  =  must 

•  •  17 

Prose,  why  used  .  . 

•  • 

278 

“  this  grow 

..  6S 

Proserpina 

.  . 

195 

Shovels  in 

•  •  236 

Proverb 

.  . 

105 

’Shrew 

..  48 

Proximity,  and  the  number  of  the 

Sid  dons,  Mrs 

389,  39° 

verb 

.  . 

99 

Sidney,  Sir  Philip  .  . 

•  •  380 

Pugging  tooth 

.  . 

164 

s  interpolated 

8,  33,  133 

Purblind 

.  . 

42 

s  instead  of  St 

•  •  231 

Push  .  . 

301 

s,  third pers.  plu.  in  .  . 

•  •  238 

Putter  on 

.  . 

84 

Silence  ! 

.  .  118 

Put  us  to  it  .  . 

.  . 

11 

Since  =  when 

. .  276 

Singular  by  attraction 

9.  179 

Quarto,  Chetwood’s .  . 

.  . 

307 

“  with  plural  termination  229,  281 

Question 

.  . 

161 

“  verb,  preceding  plural  sub- 

Quit  =  quitted 

.  . 

131 

ject 

257,  2S8 

Sir  (Collier’s  sure)  .  . 

•  •  51 

Race  =  root  .  . 

.  . 

172 

Skill  —purpose 

.  .  88 

Raisins  of  th’  Sun  .  . 

.  .  .  . 

172 

Skill  to  fear  .  . 

•  •  203 

Read  .  .  .  eyes 

.  . 

207 

Sleeve-hand  .  . 

.  .  212 

Rear  ’our  Birth 

244 

Slippery  . 

..  48 

Reason  my  son 

.  . 

230 

Smutched . 

•  •  2s 

Recreation 

•  • 

138 

Sneaping 

11 

Remembrance,  its  pronunciation  .  . 

18S 

Snider,  on  Auiolycus 

•  •  372 

Respective  construction 

130, 

168 

Soaking 

41 

Revels  Account  Books 

.  . 

319 

So  forth 

. .  41 

Rhyming  couplet 

.  . 

256 

Something,  adverbial  use  .  . 

•  •  230 

Rift . 

267 

“  variable  accent 

93 

Roderick 

.  . 

316 

Source  of  the  Plot  .  . 

•  •  321 

Roffe,  on  Auiolycus .  . 

.  . 

370 

Speed 

. .  129 

Rosemary 

187 

Spice  .  .  . 

•  •  *33 

Rounding  =  whispering 

.  . 

40 

Spider 

74 

Rover 

36 

Squash  . 

•  •  33 

Rowe,  on  Source  of  Plot 

321 

Squier 

•  •  225 

Royalty 

11 

Stables,  I’ll  keep  my  .  . 

.  .  81 

Rue  .  . 

187 

Stage-directions,  hints  to  actors 

•  •  139 

INDEX 

431 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Stain  .  . 

.  . 

92 

Trunk 

.  . 

65 

Stay  =  put  off,  delay 

39 

Turn  back  =  turn  luck  ?  .  . 

.  . 

260 

Strained 

121 

Turtle 

204,  302 

Straited 

226 

Two  negatives  strengthen  negation 

45 

Strange 

112 

Strike,  of  planets  .  . 

38 

Unbraided . 

.  . 

210 

Stuffed  sufficiency  .  . 

89 

Unemphatic  monosyllables  in 

em- 

Subject,  plural  in  sense 

8 

phatic  places 

62 

Subjunctive,  in  subordinate  clauses 

27 

Unknown  friends  to  us 

186 

Substitution  of  words 

236,  238 

Unrolled  . 

178 

Success  =  succession  .  . 

59 

Unsphere 

l6 

Such  .  .  .  that 

46 

Unstained  shepherd .  . 

202 

Swear  his  thought  over 

63 

Upon,  used  adverbially  like  on 

after 

Sweet’st  for  sweetest 

>3> 

look  . 

299 

Sword,  swearing  by  the 

III 

Sworn  or  swoon  .  . 

181 

Vast ,  peculiar  use  of 

8 

Verbs  formed  from  nouns  .  . 

238,  274 

Table-book  .  . 

246 

Verely 

16 

Take  =  bewitch 

196 

Vertue  MSS  .  . 

3>4 

Tall . 

289 

Vice,  a  verb . 

6l 

Tawdry-lace  .  . 

218 

Violets  dim . 

196 

Tell  —  count  .  . 

207 

Virginalling  .  . 

24 

Tender  o’er  .  . 

108 

Vitality  of  misprint  .  . 

266 

Tennyson 

359 

Vulgars  . 

78 

Text,  opinions  on  the 

307 

That,  conjunctional  affix 

19 

Walk  =  withdraw  .  . 

36 

“  —oh,  that 

10 

Walpole,  Criticism  .  . 

31° 

“  —  to  whom 

78 

Wanted  less  impudence  ,  . 

122 

Thee  —  thou  .  . 

145 

Warp  .  . 

56 

The  which 

81, 

243 

Watry  star . 

9 

The  whom  .  . 

81, 

240 

Weather-bitten 

281 

They’re  here  with  me 

39 

Weep,  Collier's  emendation 

144 

Thick  my  blood  .  . 

35 

Welkin  =  blue 

27 

Think  [it]  in  F2 

47 

Well  to  live . 

>5> 

Third  pers.  plu.  in  s 

238 

What  —  any  .  . 

14 

This  =  this  is  .  . 

270, 

303 

What  case  =  what  a  case  .  . 

55 

Th’  one,  pronunciation 

242 

Where  we  offenders  now  appear  .  . 

265 

Thou  wert,  as  one  syllable  . 

17 

Which  =  as  regards  which  .  . 

88 

Three-man  song  men 

170 

“  =  which  thing 

59 

Three-pile . 

166 

Whiles  .  .  .  . 

38 

Thrush 

165 

Whisper,  used  transitively  .  . 

65,  259 

Toaze  .  . 

255 

Whither  printed  whether  .  . 

222  < 

Tod . 

169 

Whitson-Pastorals  .  . 

200 

To  pass  = for  passing 

96 

Who  for  whom 

91,  248 

To  say  =  by  saying  .  . 

79 

Whoo-bub 

,  , 

248 

Toys . 

>45 

Who,  referring  to  irrational  ante- 

Trick  .  . 

.  . 

106 

cedents 

#  # 

243 

Troll-my-dames  .  , 

•  • 

>75 

Wilde  printed  for  wide 

89, 

120 

432 


INDEX 


PAGE 

Wind  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  24 

Wink . 51 

W.  Winter,  on  Mary  Anderson  .  .  396 

Winter’s  Tale,  origin  of  title  .  .  6 

Wit  =  keenness,  tact .  .  .  .  .  .  96 

With’  sun  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  I94 

“  used  for  by  .  .  271,  282,  297 

Witness  to  =  witnessed  to  ..  ..  156 


PAGE 


Woman-tyred  .  .  .  .  .  .  103 

Worth  . 276 

Yellow  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  106 

Yet  =  now . 229 

You  feel,  doing  thus  .  .  .  .  87 

You  were  best  . 288 

You  were,  as  one  syllable  .  .  .  .  17 


DATE  DUE 









I 





